MARTINSVILLE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through Ord. No. 2019-1812, passed 11-18-2019
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-1.   How code designated and cited
   
1-2.   Definitions and rules of construction
   
1-3.   Catchlines of sections; history notes; references
   
1-4.   Effect of repeal of ordinances
   
1-5.   Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
   
1-6.   Supplementation of code
   
1-7.   General penalty; continuing violations
   
1-8.   Severability
   
1-9.   Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances
   
1-10.   Codes does not affect prior offenses or rights
   
1-11.   Certain ordinances not affected by code
Statutory reference:
   Codification of ordinances required, see I.C. 36-1-5-3
§ 1-1  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute
and be designated the “Martinsville, Indiana, Code” and may be so cited.
§ 1-2  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over
the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of
the Common Council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical
words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and
appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. This
code shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare.
      (1)   Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of
the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to
run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be
included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the
city office in which the act is to be done is closed during regular business
hours. In any event, the period runs until the end of the next day that is
neither a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the city office in
which the act is to be done is closed. When the period of time prescribed or
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, legal
holidays and days on which the city office is closed shall be excluded from the
computation.
      (2)   Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items,
conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events
are connected by the conjunction “and”, “or” or “either ... or”, the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows.
         (a)   “And” indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events apply.
         (b)   “Or” indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions
or events apply singly or in any combination.
         (c)   “Either ... or” indicates that the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events apply singly, but not in combination.
      (3)   Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a
city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes
such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates.
      (4)   Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders.
      (5)   Includes. Does not limit a term to a specified example.
      (6)   Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons give such authority to a majority of such persons.
      (7)   Number. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the
plural include the singular.
      (8)   Officers, departments and the like. References to officers,
departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city
departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees.
      (9)   Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The
future tense includes the present tense.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Martinsville, Indiana.
      CODE. The Martinsville, Indiana, Code, as designated in §
1-1 of this chapter.
      COMMON COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The Common Council of the City of
Martinsville, Indiana.
      COUNTY. Morgan County, Indiana.
      I.C. The Indiana Code, as amended.
      MAY. Construed as being permissive and not mandatory.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath, and a person
shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation.
      OWNER. As applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole or part of such property.
      PERSON. Any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or
public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm,
association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or
other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any property other than real property.
      PREMISES. As applied to real property, includes land and structures.
      PROPERTY. Includes real property, personal property and mixed property.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, schoolyard, body of
water or watercourse, public conveyance or any place for the sale of
merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes land, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. Construed as being mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. A mark when the signer or subscriber
cannot write. In such situations, such person’s name shall be written near the
mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near such person’s name.
      STATE. The State of Indiana.
      STREET. Any alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, road, highway, viaduct or
other public thoroughfare.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, include any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
      WEEK. A period of seven consecutive days.
      WRITING. Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means.
      YEAR. A calendar year.
Statutory reference:
   Similar rules of statutory construction, see I.C. 1-1-4-1 et seq.
§ 1-3  CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS; HISTORY NOTES; REFERENCES.
   (A)   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in
boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section;
nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such
section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted.
   (B)   A history note appearing in parentheses after a section in this code
indicates the legislative history and is a declaration by the Common Council
that the section to which the history note applies is a restatement or
reenactment of an original ordinance or amendment. Cross-references and state
law references that appear in this code after sections or subsections or that
otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user
of the code and have no legal effect.
   (C)   Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are
to chapters or sections of this code.
Statutory reference:
   Effect of declaration of restatement or reenactment, see I.C. 35-1-5-6
§ 1-4  EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance
does not revive any previously repealed ordinance.
   (B)   The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment
or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or
amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
amendment or repeal.
§ 1-5  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   All ordinances adopted subsequent to this code that amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of the code and printed for inclusion in the code. Portions of this code
repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this code by omission
from reprinted pages affected.
   (B)   Amendments to provisions of this code may be made with the following
language: “Section (chapter, article, division, section or subsection, as
appropriate) of the Martinsville, Indiana, Code is hereby amended to read as
follows: ...”.
   (C)   If a new subsection, section, division, article or chapter is to be
added to the code, the following language may be used: “Section (chapter,
article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Martinsville, Indiana,
Code is hereby created to read as follows: ...”.
   (D)   All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by
subsection, section, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by
setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.
§ 1-6  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   (1)   Supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city.
      (2)   A supplement to this code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the code.
      (3)   The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit
properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have
become obsolete or partially obsolete.
      (4)   The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code that
have been repealed shall be included from the code by their omission from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the person authorized to
prepare the supplement may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances
and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do
so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may:
      (1)   Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units;
      (2)   Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters,
articles, divisions, sections and subsections to be included in the code and
make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such
catchlines, headings and titles already in the code;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions,
sections and subsections to be added to the code;
      (4)   Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing
numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, sections or subsections;
      (5)   Change the words “this ordinance” or similar words to “this
chapter”, “this article”, “this division”, “this section” or “sections        
   to            ” (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the
code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the
code); and/or
      (6)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the code.
§ 1-7  GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In this section, VIOLATION OF THIS CODE means any of the following:
      (1)   Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an
offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation
authorized by ordinance;
      (2)   Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; and/or
      (3)   Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made
or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or
by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
   (B)   In this section, VIOLATION OF THIS CODE does not include the failure
of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is
specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person
convicted of a violation of this code shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $2,500.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to
violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that
the violation continues is a separate offense.
   (D)   The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation
of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions.
   (E)   Violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time are a
public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The
imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief.
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see I.C. 36-1-6-1 et seq.
   Limitations on penalties, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(9), 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
§ 1-8  SEVERABILITY.
   The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this code and all provisions adopted by reference in this code are severable;
so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of
this code or of any provision adopted by reference in this code is declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other section,
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this code or of any
provision adopted by reference in this code, for the Council declares that it
is its intent that it would have enacted this code and all provisions adopted
by reference in this code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions.
§ 1-9  PROVISIONS DEEMED CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter,
shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.
§ 1-10  CODE DOES NOT AFFECT PRIOR OFFENSES OR RIGHTS.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code affects any
offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any
contract or right established before the effective date of this code.
   (B)   The adoption of this code does not authorize any use or the
continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city
ordinance on the effective date of this code.
§ 1-11  CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code affects the
validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance:
      (1)   Annexing property into the city;
      (2)   Deannexing property or excluding property from the city;
      (3)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness;
      (4)   Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement;
      (5)   Making or approving any appropriation or budget;
      (6)   Granting any right or franchise;
      (7)   Providing for salaries or other officer or employee benefits not
codified in this code;
      (8)   Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan;
      (9)   Levying or imposing any special assessment;
      (10)   Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision;
      (11)   Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street;
      (12)   Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk;
      (13)   Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in
this code;
      (14)   Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations;
      (15)   Not codified in this code, amending the zoning map or zoning
atlas, rezoning specific property, establishing zoning or subdivision
regulations, establishing building regulations, storm water and erosion control
measures or floodplain regulations;
      (16)   That is temporary, although general in effect;
      (17)   That is special, although permanent in effect; and
      (18)   The purpose of which has been accomplished.
   (B)   The ordinances designated in subsection (A) above shall continue in
full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this
code.
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   COMMON COUNCIL
         
III.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
         
IV.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
         
V.   FINANCE
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
2-1.   Executive departments established
   
2-2.   Fee for annexation, vacation of property
   
2-3.   Uniform internal control standards
   2-4. — 2-35.   Reserved
§ 2-1  EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED.
   The following executive departments are established:
   (A)   Department of Law;
   (B)   Police Department;
   (C)   Fire Department;
   (D)   Street Department;
   (E)   Sanitation Department;
   (F)   Department of Parks and Recreation; and
   (G)   Department of Water/Wastewater Utility.
Statutory reference:
   Departments authorized, see I.C. 36-4-9-4
§ 2-2  FEE FOR ANNEXATION, VACATION OF PROPERTY.
   Any person requesting the annexation or vacation of property shall pay to
the city a sum as prescribed in § 34-31 of this code of ordinances for each
annexation or vacation of property, to be used for recording and processing of
the ordinance relative to the annexation or vacation of the property so that
the property annexed or vacated is properly put on the tax assessment roles in
the Auditor’s office of the county.
(Ord. 1256, passed 11-6-1989)
§ 2-3  UNIFORM INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   The Common Council, pursuant to state statute, hereby adopts the Uniform
Internal Control Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions pursuant to
Indiana Code.
(Res. 2016-1721, passed 6-20-2016)
§§ 2-4 — 2-35  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: COMMON COUNCIL
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
2-36.   Councilmanic districts
   
2-37.   Meetings
   2-38. — 2-60.   Reserved
Division 2. Rules of Order
   
2-61.   Scope of division
   
2-62.   Adoption of Robert’s Rules
   
2-63.   Roll call votes required
   
2-64.   Commitment of ordinances, reports, resolutions to committee
   
2-65.   Order of consideration of questions
   
2-66.   Council members; being seated before being recognized
   
2-67.   Who is to speak when two request recognition at once
   
2-68.   Council members; speeches; avoiding personalities
   
2-69.   Council members; confining speeches to question at issue
   
2-70.   Motions while question is under debate
   
2-71.   Non-debatable motions
   2-72. — 2-100.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Common Council generally, see I.C. 36-4-6-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 2-36  COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.
   The established Councilmanic districts are described and designated as
follows:
   (A)   District I. All of the land, within the city limits, lying west of the
centerline of South Ohio Street extended north to the centerline of East
Garfield Avenue extended west to the centerline of South Main Street south to
the centerline of Morton Avenue and extending on Morton Avenue southwest within
the city limits. Also, all the land lying west and north of the centerline of
South Ohio Street extended south to Sartor Ditch and extended southwest within
the city limits;
   (B)   District II. All of the land, within the city limits, lying west of
the centerline of Morton Avenue extended northeast to the centerline of South
Main Street extended north to the centerline of East Garfield Avenue extended
east to the centerline of South Ohio Street extended north to the centerline of
East Jackson Street extended west to the centerline of South West Street
extended north to the centerline of West Washington Street and extending west
on Washington Street within the city limits. Also, all of the land lying north
of the centerline of Morton Avenue extended south to the centerline of Hacker
Lane extended west to the west boundary of Morton Acres subdivision extended
north to the north boundary of Morton Acres subdivision extended north to the
south boundary of the Spring Lake Condominiums extended west to the west
boundary of the Spring Lake Condominiums and extended north within the city
limits;
   (C)   District III. All of the land, within the city limits, lying north of
the centerline of West Jackson Street extended east to South Ohio Street and
extended north on Ohio Street to the centerline of East Cunningham Street and
extended east to the centerline of North St. Claire Street and extended north
to the north boundary of the Kivett Parkside subdivision and extending west to
the centerline of North Lincoln Street and extended north to the north boundary
of the Lincoln Heights subdivision and extended west within the city limits;
   (D)   District IV. All of the land, within the city limits, lying north of
the centerline of East Jackson Street extended west to the centerline of South
Ohio Street and extending north on Ohio Street to the centerline of East
Cunningham Street and extending east to the centerline of North St. Clair
Street and extending north to the north boundary of the Kivett Parkside
subdivision and extending west to the centerline of North Lincoln Street and
extending north to north boundary of the Lincoln Heights and extending east
within the city limits. Also, all of the land lying north of the centerline of
East Jackson Street extended east to the centerline of South Second Street and
extended north to the centerline of East Morgan Street and extended east to the
centerline of Grassyfork Lane and extended north to the south boundary of
Shireman Estates and extended east to the east boundary of Shireman Estates and
extended north within the city limits; and
   (E)   District V. All of the land, within the city limits, lying south of
the centerline of East Jackson Street extended west to the centerline of South
Ohio Street extended south to the centerline of Mahalasville Road extended east
to the east boundary of the Artesians Acres subdivision and extended north
within the city. Also, all the land lying south of the centerline of East
Jackson Street extended east to the centerline of South Second Street extended
north to the centerline of East Morgan Street extended east to the centerline
of Hospital Drive extended southeast within the city limits.
(Ord. 2002-1496, passed 10-7-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Common Council election districts, see I.C. 36-4-6-4
§ 2-37  MEETINGS.
   The Common Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Monday
of each month at City Hall at 7:30 p.m., unless otherwise provided by rules of
the Common Council.
Statutory reference:
   Council meetings, see I.C. 36-4-6-7
§§ 2-38 — 2-60  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. RULES OF ORDER
§ 2-61  SCOPE OF DIVISION.
   The provisions of this division shall govern all proceedings of the Common
Council.
§ 2-62  ADOPTION OF ROBERT’S RULES.
   (A)   To the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this division,
there is adopted and incorporated by reference for the purpose of governing the
procedures to be followed by the Common Council and its several committees,
that certain publication known as Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised, 1970
edition.
   (B)   Two copies of this publication are on file in the office of the Clerk-
Treasurer for public inspection.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt by reference, see I.C. 36-1-5-4
§ 2-63  ROLL CALL VOTES REQUIRED.
   The vote on all motions, ordinances and resolutions shall be by a roll call
vote.
§ 2-64  COMMITMENT OF ORDINANCES, REPORTS, RESOLUTIONS TO COMMITTEE.
   All ordinances, reports and resolutions may be committed or recommitted to
committees at the pleasure of the Common Council.
§ 2-65  ORDER OF CONSIDERATION OF QUESTIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, all questions before the Common Council shall
be disposed of in the order in which they are moved.
§ 2-66  COUNCIL MEMBERS; BEING SEATED BEFORE BEING RECOGNIZED.
   No Council member shall be recognized to speak unless he or she is in his or
her proper seat.
§ 2-67  WHO IS TO SPEAK WHEN TWO REQUEST RECOGNITION AT ONCE.
   Whenever two or more members of the Common Council request recognition at
once, the presiding officer shall decide which member shall speak first.
§ 2-68  COUNCIL MEMBERS; SPEECHES; AVOIDING PERSONALITIES.
   All Council members in addressing the Common Council shall avoid
personalities insofar as possible.
§ 2-69  COUNCIL MEMBERS; CONFINING SPEECHES TO QUESTION AT ISSUE.
   All Council members while addressing the Common Council shall confine
themselves to the question under debate.
§ 2-70  MOTIONS WHILE QUESTION IS UNDER DEBATE.
   Whenever any question before the Common Council is under debate, no motion
shall be received, except motions to amend, to table, to call for the previous
question, to postpone indefinitely, to postpone to a day certain or to commit.
Such motions shall have preference in the order in which arranged in this
section.
§ 2-71  NON-DEBATABLE MOTIONS.
   Motions to table or to adjourn made to the Common Council shall not be
debatable.
§§ 2-72 — 2-100  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
2-101.   City Superintendent
   
2-102.   Surrender of effects of office
   
2-103.   Clerk-Treasurer’s office hours
   
2-104.   City Engineer
   
2-105.   Retirement age for firefighters and police officers
   
2-106.   Reimbursement for travel and business expenses
   
2-107.   Sick leave and personal day benefits for non-union employees
   2-108. — 2-135.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   City deputies and employees, see I.C. 36-4-11-1 et seq.
   Mandatory appointments in third-class cities, see I.C. 36-4-9-8
§ 2-101  CITY SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Mayor shall appoint a City Superintendent, who shall have general
supervision of the various departments of the city, including, but not limited
to, the Street Department, Sanitation Department and Department of Water/
Wastewater Utility. The City Superintendent shall serve as a liaison between
the various departments of the city and the Mayor and the members of the Common
Council and shall devote his or her best effort and time toward the performance
of the duties assigned to him or her.
§ 2-102  SURRENDER OF EFFECTS OF OFFICE.
   Upon leaving office or terminating their employment, all city employees and
city officials shall surrender the effects of their offices or positions to the
city.
§ 2-103  CLERK-TREASURER’S OFFICE HOURS.
   The office hours of the office of the Clerk-Treasurer shall be from 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. each day, except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 2-104  CITY ENGINEER.
   There is established the position of City Engineer. The City Engineer shall
be appointed by the Mayor. The City Engineer shall not be required to give a
bond. The City Engineer shall have the powers and duties assigned to him or her
by law or the Mayor.
§ 2-105  RETIREMENT AGE FOR FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   Every member of the Fire Department or the Police Department, who are
members of either the Firefighters’ Pension Fund or the Police Pension Fund
shall retire from the department on December 31 of the year in which he or she
reaches his or her seventieth birthday.
§ 2-106  REIMBURSEMENT FOR TRAVEL AND BUSINESS EXPENSES.
   (A)   Travel-related expenses.
      (1)   Authorization required. The employee must complete a travel
authorization form, and all anticipated expenses must have prior written
authorization by the appropriate elected or appointed official or department
director or his or her designee. Also included with the authorization form
shall be a copy of the registration form or other written material regarding
the travel prior to the anticipated travel. The city reserves the right to
withhold reimbursement for travel-related expenses incurred without prior
authorization.
      (2)   Expenses which may be reimbursed. The following expenses shall be
reimbursed to the employee who complies with the procedure set forth in this
policy:
         (a)   Air, rail or bus tickets at the lowest possible fare available;
         (b)   Rental car, bus, taxi and airport limousine expenses, if such
ground transportation is reasonable and necessary for the purpose of the trip;
         (c)   Normal travel gratuities;
         (d)   Use of privately-owned vehicles at the mileage rate established
by the federally allowed rate at the time of incurrence;
         (e)   Necessary parking and storage fees;
         (f)   Lodging at actual cost of the room. An employee should request a
single room where available;
         (g)   Meal expense at actual cost of meal. An itemized receipt must
accompany the city claim voucher before any reimbursement will be permitted for
same. Meal allowance shall be limited to $50 per day;
         (h)   All other expenses necessarily incurred directly related to the
purpose of travel, such as taxi fare, tolls, parking, registration, business
phone calls and the like, at actual cost; and
         (i)   Telephone calls:
            1.   Business-related telephone calls will be reimbursed; and
            2.   One five-minute personal call home per day will be reimbursed.
      (3)   Expenses not reimbursed. Expenses which shall not be reimbursed are
as follows:
         (a)   Personal entertainment;
         (b)   Fines for parking, speeding and the like;
         (c)   Alcoholic beverages;
         (d)   Travel related to personal entertainment;
         (e)   Groceries; and
         (f)   Items disallowed as stated under previous headings.
      (4)   Extended stay. If an employee elects to stay longer than was
previously approved and such extension is not business related, the employee
will be required to pay all additional expenses arising from the extended stay.
      (5)   City-owned vehicles. Employees operating a city-owned vehicle shall
fuel such vehicle at the city-owned gas pump before leaving the city for any
out-of-city business. If out-of-city and fuel is needed, purchase on the road
shall be permitted. Every effort shall be made to fill up the vehicle at the
city-owned pump whenever possible.
   (B)   Reimbursement procedures.
      (1)   Travel authorization. A travel authorization form, which must
include an estimated cost, must be completed and approved by the appropriate
elected or appointed official, or department director, or his or her designee.
The city reserves the right to withhold reimbursement for travel-related
expenses incurred without prior authorization. Expenses for department
directors shall be approved by the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee.
      (2)   Required documentation. Upon return, the employee must complete any
mileage forms to be reimbursed for such, as well as submit all itemized
receipts for any eligible reimbursable expenses. The aforementioned material
shall be immediately submitted to the department director. These items shall be
submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer together with the following items:
         (a)   A completed and signed city claim form identifying the person to
receive payment;
         (b)   A purchase order completed by the department director or
appropriate person or persons;
         (c)   Original credit card receipts and cash receipts certifying all
purchases or expenses (original credit card receipts must be accompanied by
another receipt for the same purchase). The city reserves the right to withhold
reimbursement for expenses for which the employee does not have appropriate
receipts; and
         (d)   If an employee has stayed overnight and wishes reimbursement for
such lodging, he or she must have an itemized list of room charges for such
room, which must also show a zero balance when checking out of room.
(Ord. 2004-1527, passed 8-16-2004)
§ 2-107  SICK LEAVE AND PERSONAL DAY BENEFITS FOR NON-UNION EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Sick leave and personal days shall be a benefit provided to non-union
employees of the city. Police and fire personnel shall be excluded from the
definition of non-union employees for purposes of this section.
   (B)   The non-union employees of the city shall be entitled to nine sick
days during the calendar year from January 1 through December 31.
   (C)   The non-union employees of the city shall also be entitled to six
personal days during the calendar year from January 1 through December 31.
These days are in addition to the above referenced sick days.
(Ord. 2004-1541, passed 11-4-2004)
§§ 2-108 — 2-135  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
   
2-136.   Department of Redevelopment
   
2-137.   Unsafe Building and Hearing Authority
   
2-138.   Economic Development Department
   
2-139.   Personnel Department
   
2-140.   Internal Audit Committee
   2-141. — 2-165.   Reserved
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see
Chapter 38, Article II
§ 2-136  DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT.
   The city’s Department of Redevelopment shall be and hereby is established
pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-7-14-3 and said Department shall be
controlled by a board of five voting members and one adviser known as the
city’s Redevelopment Commission as provided under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-
14-6.1. The city’s Department of Redevelopment shall operate in compliance with
the provisions of I.C. 36-7-14.
(Ord. 2010-1644, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 2-137  UNSAFE BUILDING AND HEARING AUTHORITY.
   The rate of pay for the city’s Unsafe Building and Hearing Authority shall
be $75 per meeting for the three members of the Authority and $75 per meeting
for the secretary of the Authority.
(Ord. 2016-1722, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 2-138  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Common Council hereby establishes a Department of Economic
Development to be controlled by a commission known as the Economic Development
Commission.
   (B)   Any officer of the city is hereby authorized and directed, for and on
behalf of the city, to execute and deliver any instrument or take any other
action as such officer determines to be necessary or desirable to accomplish
the purposes of this section, such determination to be conclusively evidenced
by such officer’s having executed such instrument or having taken such action,
and any such officer’s having executed and delivered any such instrument or
having taken any such action is hereby ratified and approved.
(Ord. 2018-1769, passed 3-5-2018)
§ 2-139  PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT.
   The office of the Clerk-Treasurer shall be designated as the Personnel
Department for the city.
(Res. 2019-560, passed 6-3-2019)
§ 2-140  INTERNAL AUDIT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-11-1-28, the Common Council hereby establishes an
Internal Audit Committee to provide independent review and oversight of the
city’s internal controls, and compliance with laws, regulations, and ethics.
   (B)   The Audit Committee will consist of three members, to be comprised of
one member of the Common Council and two members of the Clerk-Treasurer’s
office. While Committee members need not be accountants, they should possess
sufficient knowledge and experience in finance, business and accounting to
discharge the committee’s duties.
   (C)   The Committee shall have access to the services of a financial expert,
either through a Committee member or an outside party engaged by the Committee
for this purpose. Such financial expert should, through both education and
experience, and in a manner specifically relevant to the city government
sector, possess an understanding of generally accepted accounting principles
and financial statements; experience in preparing or auditing financial
statements of comparable entities; experience in applying such principles in
connection with the accounting for estimates, accruals, and reserves;
experience with internal accounting controls; and an understanding of Audit
Committee functions.
   (D)   The duties and responsibilities of the Audit Committee are:
      (1)   To consider the effectiveness of the internal control system,
including information technology security and control, review the effectiveness
of the system for monitoring compliance with laws and regulations, and review
the process for communicating the city’s ethics policies to city personnel and
monitoring compliance therewith;
      (2)   To establish a process by which employees, taxpayers, or other
citizens may confidentially report suspected illegal, improper, wasteful or
fraudulent activity under provisions of I.C. 5-11-1-27; and
      (3)   To present a written committee report detailing how it discharged
its duties and any committee recommendations to the full Common Council.
   (E)   The Internal Audit Committee will be adequately funded to carry out
the duties and responsibilities as set out in this section and under applicable
law.
(Res. 2019-565, passed 6-3-2019)
§§ 2-141 — 2-165  RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: FINANCE
Section
   
2-166.   Statement of financial condition
   
2-167.   Fixed asset ledger
   
2-168.   Participation in associations
   
2-169.   Cash Change Fund
   
2-170.   Petty Cash Fund
   
2-171.   General Improvement Fund
   
2-172.   Police Department Drug Fund
   
2-173.   Building or Remodeling, Firefighting and Police Radio Equipment Fund
   
2-174.   Purchasing agency; purchasing rules and policies
   
2-175.   Riverboat Wagering Tax Revenue Sharing Fund
   
2-176.   Economic Development Income Tax Fund
   
2-177.   Unsafe Building and Premises Fund
   
2-178.   Cumulative Capital Development Fund
   
2-179.   Rainy Day Fund
   
2-180.   General Fund depository
   
2-181.   Cash fund for rental costs of shelter houses
   
2-182.   Fund 257
   
2-183.   Crime Control-Fund 224
Statutory reference:
   City budgets, see I.C. 36-4-7-1 et seq.
   Financial administration generally, see I.C. 36-4-8-1 et seq.
§ 2-166  STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL CONDITION.
   The Mayor shall provide a statement of the finances and general condition of
the city to the Common Council at least once each calendar year.
§ 2-167  FIXED ASSET LEDGER.
   The fixed asset ledger shall contain all fixed assets purchased with a value
of $5,000 or greater and all such purchases and assets shall be entered on the
fixed asset ledger of the city.
(Ord. 98-1412, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 2006-1583, passed 8-11-2006)
§ 2-168  PARTICIPATION IN ASSOCIATIONS.
   (A)   The city is authorized to participate through duly designated
representatives in the meetings and activities of the associations referred to
in subsection (B) below, and the Common Council is authorized to appropriate
necessary funds to defray the expenses of such representatives in connection
with such meetings and activities.
   (B)   The Common Council shall be authorized to appropriate necessary funds
to provide membership for the city in state and national associations of a
civic, educational or governmental nature which have as their purpose the
betterment and improvement of municipal operations.
§ 2-169  CASH CHANGE FUND.
   (A)   Any officer, official, department head or employee of the city having
a duty to collect cash revenues may establish a Cash Change Fund.
   (B)   The Common Council shall require the entire Cash Change Fund to be
returned to the appropriate fund whenever there is a change in the custodian of
the fund or if the fund is no longer needed.
Statutory reference:
   Change cash funds, see I.C. 36-1-8-2
§ 2-170  PETTY CASH FUND.
   Any officer, official, department head or employee may establish a petty
cash fund for any of its offices in the manner similar to that prescribed by
I.C. 36-1-8-2.
Statutory reference:
   Petty cash funds, see I.C. 36-1-8-2
§ 2-171  GENERAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   A fund known as the General Improvement Fund is established, which shall be
used to construct, repair or improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters
and sewers.
Statutory reference:
   General improvement fund, see I.C. 36-9-17-1 et seq.
§ 2-172  POLICE DEPARTMENT DRUG FUND.
   (A)   There is created a Police Department Drug Fund. The Fund shall consist
of deposits in the form of proceeds recovered by the Police Department, in part
or as a whole, in forfeiture actions filed pursuant to I.C. 34-4-30.1 and 34-4-
30.5, forfeiture actions which are adopted by federal agencies, liquidations of
personal or real property obtained from criminal defendants in those actions,
and voluntary surrenders of funds and assets from criminal defendants.
   (B)   The Police Department Drug Fund shall be appropriated for funding law
enforcement activities conducted by the Police Department and reimbursement of
expenses incurred in pursuing forfeiture and RICO actions.
   (C)   All moneys collected under this section shall be transferred to the
city’s Clerk-Treasurer, who shall deposit the funds and disburse them as the
Chief of Police directs, subject to the appropriation requirement of subsection
(D) below. Moneys remaining in the Fund at the end of the year shall not revert
to any other fund, but shall continue in the Police Department Drug Fund.
   (D)   Moneys from this Fund shall be subject to appropriation by the Common
Council in accordance with law.
   (E)   Such funds, after appropriation by the Common Council, may be used to:
      (1)   Fund law enforcement activities in enforcement of drug-related
crimes conducted by the Police Department, in whole or part; and
      (2)   Purchase drugs, controlled substances, stolen property, the lease
and purchase of equipment, training and to pay confidential informants.
   (F)   The Police Chief is authorized to place funds appropriated from the
drug fund in a NOW account or similar account that may bear interest; the
Police Chief shall account to the city’s Clerk-Treasurer for all interest
earned on that account; the interest earned shall be kept and retained in that
checking account and used for the purposes set forth for the principal sums. In
establishing the checking account, the signatures of the Chief of Police or his
or her Assistant Chief and one of the police detectives using the funds must
both be given in order to withdraw funds from the checking account.
(Ord. 96-1369, passed 1-16-1996)
§ 2-173  BUILDING OR REMODELING, FIREFIGHTING AND POLICE RADIO EQUIPMENT FUND.
   A fund known as the Building or Remodeling, Firefighting and Police Radio
Equipment Fund is established. The Fund shall be used only for the purchase,
construction, renovation or addition to buildings used by the Fire Department,
and for the purchase of firefighting equipment and police radio equipment.
Statutory reference:
   Fund authorized, see I.C. 36-8-14-1 et seq.
§ 2-174  PURCHASING AGENCY; PURCHASING RULES AND POLICIES.
   (A)   (1)   The purchasing agency for the city shall be and is hereby
established as the city’s Board of Public Works and Safety with all of the
powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22. The purchasing agency shall
designate in writing the purchasing agent.
      (2)   The purchasing agency may also designate in writing additional
purchasing agents as necessary.
   (B)   The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized
under I.C. 5-22, as may be supplemented from time to time by ordinances adopted
by the Council and policies adopted by the purchasing agency.
   (C)   The purchasing agency shall act as the purchasing agency for every
agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department or other
establishment of the city.
   (D)   The purchasing agency may designate in writing any employee of the
city as a purchasing agent.
   (E)   The purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of
less that $25,000 on the open market without inviting or receiving quotes or
bids, and it is hereby determined that each agency and/or department may
purchase services in whatever manner the purchaser determines to be reasonable.
   (F)   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all
purchases and shall be purchased unless the city determines that:
      (1)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;
      (2)   The price of the supplies manufacturer in the United States exceeds
by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable supplies
manufactured elsewhere;
      (3)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
      (4)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not
in the public interest.
(Ord. 98-1427, passed 7-6-1998)
§ 2-175  RIVERBOAT WAGERING TAX REVENUE SHARING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established the Riverboat Wagering Tax Revenue Sharing
Fund.
   (B)   According to I.C. 4-33-13-5(f), riverboat wagering tax revenue sharing
may be used for the following purposes:
      (1)   To reduce the property levy of the city;
      (2)   To fund additional property tax replacement credits;
      (3)   To fund sewer and water projects, including storm water management
projects;
      (4)   For police and fire pension; and
      (5)   To carry out any governmental purpose for which the fiscal body of
the city appropriates the riverboat wagering tax revenue sharing.
(Ord. 2003-1510, passed 8-18-2003)
§ 2-176  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCOME TAX FUND.
   (A)   A fund shall be established known as the city’s “Economic Development
Tax Fund”, and the revenue received by the city from the county economic
development income tax shall be deposited into that Fund as required under
applicable state law.
   (B)   The revenue deposited into the city’s Economic Development Income Tax
Fund which results from the county’s increase in the county economic
development income tax shall be used, once it is appropriated to the city, in
accordance with state law and specifically in accordance with I.C. 6-3.5-7-
13.1.
(Ord. 2004-1520, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 2-177  UNSAFE BUILDING AND PREMISES FUND.
   (A)   A fund shall be established known as the “City of Martinsville Unsafe
Buildings and Premises Fund”.
   (B)   The money for the Unsafe Building and Premises Fund may be received
from any source, including appropriations by local, state or federal government
and donations.
   (C)   Any balance remaining in the Fund at the end of a fiscal year shall be
carried over in the Fund for the following year and shall not revert to the
city’s General Fund.
   (D)   The following money shall be deposited into the Fund:
      (1)   Money received as payment for settlement of obligations where
judgment is established under I.C. 36-7-9-13 and 36-7-9-17-22;
      (2)   Money received from bonds posted under I.C. 36-7-9-7;
      (3)   Money received in satisfaction of receivers’ notes or certificates
that were issued and were purchased with money from the Unsafe Building Fund;
      (4)   Money received for payment of settlement of civil penalties or
fines imposed; and
      (5)   Money received from the collection of special assessments.
   (E)   Money in the Unsafe Building and Premises Fund may be used for the
expenses incurred in carrying out the purposes of the I.C. 36-7-9 and the
city’s Ord. 14-176 through 14-178, including:
      (1)   The cost of obtaining reliable information about the identity and
location of each person who owns a substantial property interest in unsafe
premises;
      (2)   The cost of an examination of an unsafe building by a registered
architect or registered engineer not employed by the Department;
      (3)   The cost of surveys necessary to determine the location and
dimension of real property upon which the unsafe building is located;
      (4)   The cost of giving notice of orders, notice of statements of
recession, notice of continued hearing and notice of statement that public bids
are let;
      (5)   The bid price of work by a contractor;
      (6)   The cost of emergency action as set out in the Indiana Code and
city ordinance; and
      (7)   The cost of notes or receivers’ certificates issued.
   (F)   Payment of money from the Unsafe Building and Premises Fund must be
made in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 2006-1592, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 2-178  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (A)   A need now exists for the re-establishment of the Cumulative Capital
Development Fund for the following purposes: for all uses as set out in I.C.
36-9-15.5.
   (B)   The Council will adhere to the provisions of I.C. 36-9-15.5. The
proposed fund will not exceed $.0500 on each $100 of assessed valuation. Said
tax rate will be levied beginning with taxes for 2010 payable 2011.
(Ord. 2010-1647, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 2-179  RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   A fund is established pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8-5.1 to be known as the
city’s “Rainy Day Fund” and for the purpose of receiving transfers of unused
and unencumbered funds under I.C. 36-1-8-5.
   (B)   The Rainy Day Fund is established with the intent that it may be
appropriated and utilized to alleviate a fiscal crisis, brought about by
unforeseen circumstances, which is reasonably likely to result in the city
being unable to meet budgeted expenses and which crisis cannot be reasonably
remedied through emergency appropriations or other means provided by statute.
   (C)   In any fiscal year, not more than 10% of the city’s total budget for
that fiscal year may be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund.
   (D)   The Rainy Day Fund is subject to appropriation by the fiscal body of
the city. Before making any such appropriation, the fiscal body shall make a
finding that the proposed use of the appropriation from the Rainy Day Fund is
consistent with the intent of the Fund.
(Ord. 2008-1610, passed - -2008)
§ 2-180  GENERAL FUND DEPOSITORY.
   Home Bank SB shall now be the depository of the city’s General Fund.
(Ord. 2015-1705, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 2-181  CASH FUND FOR RENTAL COSTS OF SHELTER HOUSES.
   A cash fund be established for the start-up costs and the operation of the
rental of shelter houses at the Martinsville Jimmy Nash City Park, and that
amount to be $300.
(Ord. 2016-1720, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 2-182  FUND 257.
   Designated Fund 257, entitled “LOIT Special Distribution”, is created, and
the amount of $654,333.07 is hereby distributed into that Fund representing 75%
of the one-time distribution received by the city from the county, and that
25%, being the total amount of $218,111.02, be deposited into the city’s Rainy
Day Fund as has been prior established, thus representing the 25% of the moneys
received by the city by the county.
(Ord. 2016-1717, passed 5-16-2016)
§ 2-183  CRIME CONTROL-FUND 224.
   (A)   A fund is established to be known as the Crime Control-Fund 224, for
the purpose of receiving monies from the Metropolitan School District of the
city to fund the educational and crime prevention program.
   (B)   The Metropolitan School District of the city has agreed to pay $ 1,200
per month during the 2017-2018 school year, beginning September, 2017, and
continuing through June 1, 2018. This funding will be used by the Police
Department in teaching a law enforcement educational program, and such program
will be approximately 120 minutes per day during the school year.
   (C)   The Crime Control-Fund 224 is established with the intent to utilize
funds from the Metropolitan School District of the city to aid in crime
prevention through the Police Department, in utilizing the above educational
program as well as a DARE program, and other expenses related to crime
prevention.
   (D)   This Fund shall be established and shall remain in existence as long
as the partnership between the city and the Metropolitan School District of the
city for the educational crime prevention program is in existence.
   (E)   The Police Department is authorized to expend the funds from Crime
Control-Fund 224 in association with the crime prevention education program
operated through the Metropolitan School District of the city, including
supplies, materials, and any other monies associated with that particular
program, subject to the expenditure not exceeding $12,000 per school year.
(Ord. 2017-1760, passed 10-2-2017; Ord. 2017-1761, passed 10-2-2017)
CHAPTER 6: AMUSEMENTS
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   POOL TABLES
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   6-1. — 6-30.   Reserved
§§ 6-1 — 6-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: POOL TABLES
Section
Division 1. Generally
   6-31. — 6-50.   Reserved
Division 2. License
   
6-51.   Required
   
6-52.   Application
   
6-53.   Fee
   
6-54.   Term
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§§ 6-31 — 6-50  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
§ 6-51  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or operate a pool table for gain
without a license.
§ 6-52  APPLICATION.
   All those desiring a license for a pool table shall apply to the Clerk-
Treasurer on a form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. On the application, the
applicant shall state all information necessary to determine whether the
license shall be issued.
§ 6-53  FEE.
   All those desiring a license for a pool table shall pay an annual license
fee per table as specified in §
34-61 of this code of ordinances when applying for the license or for its
renewal.
§ 6-54  TERM.
   The term of a pool table license shall be one year.
CHAPTER 10: ANIMALS
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   DOMESTIC ANIMALS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
10-1.   Permitting violations of chapter
   
10-2.   Animal Control Officer
   
10-3.   Running at large
   10-4. — 10-35.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   General authority relative to animals, see I.C. 36-8-2-6
   Municipal home rule, see I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq.
§ 10-1  PERMITTING VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal or fowl which is
under his or her care, custody or control, or which he or she owns to violate
any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 10-2  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   (1)   There is established the position of Animal Control Officer.
      (2)   The Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor.
      (3)   The Animal Control Officer shall patrol the city in search of dogs
that are in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and shall
apprehend and impound them in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   In addition, the Animal Control Officer shall perform such other
functions as the Mayor may direct.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer shall keep an accurate record of all dogs
impounded showing the date of impoundment and a brief description of each dog.
Such records shall be open to the public for inspection at all times.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall be allowed such compensation as may
be provided by law.
§ 10-3  RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any animal or fowl to run at large.
§§ 10-4 — 10-35  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
10-36.   Definitions
   
10-37.   Destruction of abandoned and suffering animals
   
10-38.   Harboring or maintaining certain domestic animals prohibited
   
10-39.   Impoundment of domestic animals
   10-40. —` 10-60.   Reserved
Division 2. Dogs and Domestic Animals
   
10-61.   Impoundment of dogs
   
10-62.   Rabies immunization required
   
10-63.   Quarantining and vaccination of biting dog
   
10-64.   Dog kennels
   
10-65.   Noise disturbance
   
10-66.   Dog waste
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 10-36  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Any dog found off the premises of his or her owner and not under
the control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, housed in
a veterinary hospital or kennel, on a leash or at heal beside a competent
person and obedient to that person’s command.
   DOG. Both male and female animals of the canine species whether altered or
not.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Cattle, calves, horses, mules, swine, sheep, goats, dogs,
cats, poultry or other bird, and any animals of the bovine, equine, ovine,
caprine, porcine, canine, feline or avian species.
   FREE-ROAMING. A domestic feline/cat that has an owner, but is allowed to
roam to other property or streets not owned by the animal owner.
   OWNER. Every person having a right of property to an animal and every person
who keeps or harbors an animal, has it in his or her care or permits it to
remain on or about the premises owned or occupied by him or her.
   STRAY OR ABANDONED FELINES/CATS. Having no owner and are living in the wild
or abandoned houses.
(Ord. 2006-1590, passed 10-2-2006)
§ 10-37  DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED AND SUFFERING ANIMALS.
   Any police officer or the Animal Control Officer may destroy or kill or
cause to be destroyed or killed any animal found abandoned and suffering and
not properly cared for, or appearing to be injured, diseased or suffering past
recovery for any useful purpose.
Statutory reference:
   Abandoning domestic animals, see I.C. 35-46-3-7
§ 10-38  HARBORING OR MAINTAINING CERTAIN DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, maintain, harbor or stable domestic animals consisting
of cattle, calves, horses, mules, swine, sheep, goats or poultry on any
property within the corporate boundaries of the city.
§ 10-39  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   As used in this section, the term DOMESTIC ANIMALS includes feline/
cats.
   (B)   (1)   Any free-roaming, stray or abandoned cats shall be captured in a
humane live trap as provided by the city’s Animal Control Officer.
      (2)   Said officer is the only person authorized to pick-up trap and
transport animals.
   (C)   Said trap will be placed only on the property of the complaining
homeowner.
   (D)   The captured animal will be taken to the humane society and held for
disposal unless the animal owner or an adoptive person claims the animal. If
the animal is not claimed in seven days, it will become the property of the
county’s humane society.
   (E)   It is ordered that any animal claimed be spayed/neutered and a
microchip implanted at the expense of the owner or adoptive person before the
animal is released.
   (F)   If the trapped animal is tagged and already spayed/neutered, then the
officer will make one attempt to find the owner and release it to the owner’s
custody. If the owner is not found, the animal will be transported to the
humane society.
   (G)   The humane society will provide the name and address of the animal
owner who claims the impounded animal and that name will be entered in a
database for future reference if the animal is trapped a second time or more.
   (H)   (1)   Additional times of capture will require the owner to be cited
into City Court on a charge of allowing felines/cats to free-roam.
      (2)   Fines shall be as follows.
         (a)   Fines will be no less that $25 and no more than $500, plus court
fees.
         (b)   If said owner has repeated violations, the judge may order the
animal remanded to the humane society for disposal.
   (I)   Raccoons and opossums captured will be released to a nature location
as determined by the Animal Control Officer.
(Ord. 2006-1590, passed 10-2-2006)
§§ 10-40 — 10-60  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. DOGS AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS
§ 10-61  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   Any dog discovered running at large may be apprehended and confined by
a police officer, the Animal Control Officer or other employee of the city and
impounded at the dog pound or other suitable place. The apprehending officer or
official shall make a good and complete record of each dog apprehended,
including the breed, color and sex of each dog.
   (B)   The owner of any dog impounded under the provisions of this article
may reclaim the dog from the city upon payment to the proper authority of the
following fees:
      (1)   A fee for apprehending and impounding the dog as specified in § 34-
91 of this code of ordinances; and
      (2)   A storage and maintenance fee per day as specified in § 34-91 of
this code of ordinances during the period the dog is impounded.
   (C)   All dogs impounded shall be kept and maintained for a period of seven
days, excluding the date of impoundment. Any dog not reclaimed within such
period of time shall be destroyed in a humane manner or delivered to a duly
licensed humane society.
(Ord. 2006-1590, passed 10-2-2006)
§ 10-62  RABIES IMMUNIZATION REQUIRED.
   A tag showing evidence of vaccination as required by law shall be worn by
every dog.
Statutory reference:
   Harboring unvaccinated dogs, see I.C. 35-46-3-1
§ 10-63  QUARANTINING AND VACCINATION OF BITING DOG.
   Any dog which bites a person shall be held in quarantine by the owner for at
least ten days, and the dog shall be given a rabies shot before being released
if a rabies shot has not been given within the past year.
§ 10-64  DOG KENNELS.
   (A)   As used in this section, the term KENNEL shall refer to a place where
three or more dogs are kept for another person, with the operator charging a
fee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel without a license. All
applications for a kennel license shall be made to the Clerk-Treasurer and
shall contain all information necessary to determine whether the license should
be issued. The annual fee for a kennel license shall be as prescribed in § 34-
92 of this code of ordinances, payable to the Clerk-Treasurer when the
application for a license is made.
§ 10-65  NOISE DISTURBANCE.
   No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the city which, by frequent
and habitual barking, howling or yelping, creates unreasonably loud and
disturbing noises of such a character, intensity and duration as to disturb
other persons and interrupt the peace, quiet and good order of the city.
§ 10-66  DOG WASTE.
   (A)   Purpose. Due to the fact that the Common Council believes that dog
waste is a public safety concern in that it can carry disease and, further, it
can be unhealthy, the city is passing this section to protect the public health
and welfare and to restrict the deposit of animal waste on property within the
city.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly allow a dog, which is kept by that
person, to defecate on a public street, byway, municipally-owned or public land
or building, or upon private property, in the city without the prior permission
of the owner of such property; however, if the dog defecates on property
described in this subsection (B), and the animal’s owner or keeper promptly
removes the feces to a proper waste container, or otherwise dispose of such
material in a manner that is inoffensive and reasonable to the public
sensitivities, then it is not a violation of this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B)(1) above, the
owner of a dog serving a vision-impaired person in an auxiliary ocular capacity
or in any capacity to assist such person with a physical impairment may permit
such dog to deposit waste on ground situated outside of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic ways, and is relieved of the requirement to remove any feces to the
extent such requirement is impractical for a person of such impairment.
   (C)   Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the city, including the
city’s Police Department, as well as the city’s Code Enforcement, Director of
Public Works and Board of Public Works and Safety, and their authorized
assignees to enforce this section.
   (D)   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   A person who violates any provisions of this section shall be
punishable by fine imposed for such violation and such fine shall be $50.
      (2)   In addition to the fine established by this section, violation of
this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by
the city’s Board of Works, by restraining order, preliminary and permanent
injunctions or by other means provided for by law, and the city may take action
to recover costs of the nuisance abatement.
      (3)   Each event or occurrence shall be a separate and distinct
violation.
      (4)   The City Court and/or other court of competent jurisdiction shall
have jurisdiction over such violations and penalties.
(Ord. 2017-1739, passed 2-21-2017)
CHAPTER 14: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
         
III.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
         
IV.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND PREMISES
         
V.   BUILDING NUMBERING
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
14-1.   Designated fire limits
   
14-2.   Building restrictions within fire limits
   
14-3.   Key lock box emergency access system
   14-4. — 14-95.   Reserved
§ 14-1  DESIGNATED FIRE LIMITS.
   The area designated as restricted fire limits within the corporate
boundaries of the city is as follows:
commencing at the intersection of East Washington Street and South Jefferson
Street and running north along Jefferson Street to East Morgan Street, then
west on Morgan Street to North Main Street, then south on Main Street to
Washington Street, then east on Washington Street to the point of beginning.
§ 14-2  BUILDING RESTRICTIONS WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.
   Any and all exterior walls constructed or erected on any building or
structure or any addition to any building or structure within the area
designated as restricted fire limits described in § 14-1 of this chapter shall
be of masonry (i.e., brick or block) type construction or steel. Any and all
roof covering shall be composed of tile, slate, metal or asphalt.
§ 14-3  KEY LOCK BOX EMERGENCY ACCESS SYSTEM.
   (A)   The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock emergency
access system (key lock box) at or near the main entrance, or such other
location required by the Fire Department:
      (1)   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm
system or automatic suppression system, if such structures are secured in a
manner that restricts access during an emergency; or
      (2)   Government structures and nursing care facilities.
   (B)   The cost of purchasing and installing a key lock box, along with any
costs associated with implementation of the program at a specific property,
shall be born by the property owner.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to owner-occupied one or two-family
dwellings or businesses that are open and staffed 24 hours a day and seven days
a week, 365 days a year. This section shall not apply to structures where an
on-site police force is present 24 hours a day and seven days a week, provided
that members of that police force respond to all Fire Department responses with
the correct means of accessing the effected structures.
   (D)   All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have a
key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy by the Code Enforcement Officer. All structures in existence on
the effective date of this law and subject to this law shall have six months
from the effective date of this section to have a key lock box installed and
operational.
   (E)   The Fire Department shall designate the type of key lock box system to
be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require all
structures subject to this section to use the designated system.
   (F)   (1)   The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock
box shall, at all times, keep the following in the lock box:
         (a)   Labeled keys to locked access points of egress, whether interior
or exterior of such building;
         (b)   Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
         (c)   Labeled keys to the locked elevator rooms and controls; and
         (d)   Labeled keys to any fenced or secured areas on the property.
      (2)   Floor plans of the rooms within the building may also be required
to be submitted to the Fire Department. An operator of a building shall
immediately notify the Fire Department and provide new keys when a lock is
changed or rekeyed. The new key shall be secured in the key lock box.
   (G)   An operator of a building shall keep the immediate area of the key
lock box free and clear of any and all obstructions.
   (H)   The Fire Department shall be authorized to implement rules and
regulations for the use of the key lock box system.
   (I)   The Fire Department shall store all key lock box access keys securely
in a Knox Box Key Secure system installed in the fire apparatus.
   (J)   Non-compliance with this section will subject the responsible party to
a citation and mandatory appearance in city court, minimum fine $200.
(Ord. 2018-1778, passed 8-20-2018)
§§ 14-4 — 14-95  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
Section
   
14-96.   Definition
   
14-97.   Application for permit
   
14-98.   Temporary service permits
   
14-99.   Notice of non-compliance
   
14-100.   Approval of connections
   
14-101.   Disconnection of equipment not approved for service
   
14-102.   Inspection of existing wiring
   
14-103.   Repairs and existing electrical devices
   
14-104.   Disconnection of unsafe or non-complying equipment
   
14-105.   Certificate of final inspection
   
14-106.   Removal of notices prohibited
   
14-107.   Inspections
   14-108. — 14-140.   Reserved
§ 14-96  DEFINITION.
   ELECTRICAL DEVICE includes all manner of electrical wiring and power
installations of every sort and character.
§ 14-97  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   An application for an electrical permit shall state the names of the owners
and the location and extent of work to be done under the permit. Applications
for electrical permits must be signed by the supervising electrician unless
otherwise provided for by law. The fees to be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer prior
to the issuance of an electrical permit shall be based on the nature of the
premises in which the work is to be done. Any electrical permit shall be valid
only for the location stated in the application.
§ 14-98  TEMPORARY SERVICE PERMITS.
   Whenever an urgent necessity for the use of electrical current in any
installation is shown to exist, the City Superintendent or city consulting
engineer or their authorized delegate may grant permission for such temporary
current to any wiring or apparatus or fixtures for a period not exceeding 90
days if such wiring or apparatus or fixtures are in such condition that the
electrical current may safely be used without danger to life or property.
Permission may also be obtained for temporary use of electrical current during
the construction or alteration of any building.
§ 14-99  NOTICE OF NON-COMPLIANCE.
   The City Superintendent, city consulting engineer or their authorized
delegate shall condemn any electrical wiring to be covered or concealed if it
is not in compliance with the Electrical Code by giving written notice of such
non-compliance to the person engaged in the installation of the work. Within 15
days after notification by the City Superintendent, consulting engineer or
their authorized delegate of the fact that electrical work or equipment to be
covered or concealed does not comply with the Electrical Code, or within such
further reasonable time as may, upon request, be prescribed, the person engaged
in the installation of such work or equipment shall alter or remove the same as
appropriate and make the necessary changes so that such work complies with the
Electrical Code.
§ 14-100  APPROVAL OF CONNECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any electrical connection to any
electrical equipment, except small plug-in appliances, until approval has been
given by the City Superintendent, consulting engineer, City Building Inspector
or their authorized delegate.
§ 14-101  DISCONNECTION OF EQUIPMENT NOT APPROVED FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   The City Superintendent, consulting engineer, City Building Inspector
or their authorized delegate is authorized to disconnect or order disconnected
the electrical service to any equipment or installation, except a small plug-in
appliance, which has been connected before approval for service has been given;
upon such disconnection, he or she shall attach a notice of such fact.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect the wiring of any
such apparatus before it has been approved by the City Superintendent,
consulting engineer, Building Inspector or their authorized delegate.
§ 14-102  INSPECTION OF EXISTING WIRING.
   The City Superintendent, consulting engineer or Building Inspector or their
authorized delegate is empowered to reinspect all existing wiring, appliances,
devices and equipment coming within the scope of the Electrical Code.
§ 14-103  REPAIRS AND EXISTING ELECTRICAL DEVICES.
   Whenever the installation of any existing electrical wiring, appliance or
device or equipment covered by the Electrical Code is found by the City
Superintendent, consulting engineer, Building Inspector or their authorized
delegate to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person owning, using or
operating the apparatus shall be notified in writing and shall make the
necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, appliances, devices
and equipment in a safe condition and have such work completed within 15 days
after notification or within such reasonable time as may, upon request, be
prescribed.
§ 14-104  DISCONNECTION OF UNSAFE OR NON-COMPLYING EQUIPMENT.
   The City Superintendent, consulting engineer or Building Inspector or their
authorized delegate is empowered to disconnect or order the discontinuance of
electrical service to such electrical conductors or apparatus as are found to
be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, or to have been installed without a
permit, or not in accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code. He or
she shall, thereupon, attach a notice that states that such conductors or
apparatus have been disconnected because of having been found unsafe to life or
property; and it shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect such defective
conductors or apparatus until they have been placed in a safe and secure
condition and have been approved by the City Superintendent, consulting
engineer or Building Inspector or their authorized delegate.
§ 14-105  CERTIFICATE OF FINAL INSPECTION.
   (A)   The City Superintendent, consulting engineer or Building Inspector or
their authorized delegate shall, upon request, issue a certificate of final
inspection when the electrical installation is completed and found to comply
with the Electrical Code.
   (B)   No such certificate shall be issued in the case of a prefabricated
building in which the wiring may have been covered in manufacturing until a
schematic tour wiring diagram for the building is submitted to him or her.
   (C)   No certificate of final inspection shall be issued on any incomplete
work, nor until the Inspector finds that the electrical installation is found
to comply with the Electrical Code.
§ 14-106  REMOVAL OF NOTICES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any notice lawfully placed by
the City Superintendent, consulting engineer or Building Inspector or their
authorized delegate upon any electrical work or equipment.
§ 14-107  INSPECTIONS.
   The City Superintendent, consulting engineer or Building Inspector or their
authorized delegate shall be notified in writing by any person installing any
new electrical work, first when the roughing-in work is completed, and second
when the entire work is completed. The City Superintendent, consulting engineer
or Building Inspector or their authorized delegate, upon the receipt of such
notice, shall inspect the work; and, if the work conforms in all respects with
the provisions of the Electrical Code, he or she shall post a notice of
approval at or near the work. The supervising electrician shall sign requests
for all inspections.
§§ 14-108 — 14-140  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
14-141.   Applicability
   
14-142.   Maintenance of exterior of premises
   
14-143.   Appearance of exterior of premises and structures
   
14-144.   Storage of commercial and industrial material
   
14-145.   General maintenance
   14-146. — 14-175.   Reserved
§ 14-141  APPLICABILITY.
   Every residential, non-residential or mixed occupancy building and the land
upon which it is situated, used or intended to be used for dwelling,
commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions
of this article, whether or not such building shall have been constructed,
altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this article, and
irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the
use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair of
the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities
prior to the effective date of this article. Furthermore, this article shall
apply to mobile homes and mobile home parks.
§ 14-142  MAINTENANCE OF EXTERIOR OF PREMISES.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of any building in the city shall maintain the
exterior of the premises and all structures on the premises free of all hazards
to the safety of the occupant and pedestrians and other persons utilizing the
premises, and free of unsanitary conditions; and any hazards shall be promptly
removed, cured or corrected and abated by the owner or occupant.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to keep the premises
free of hazards, which include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris;
      (2)   Dead or dying trees, limbs of trees or other natural growth which,
by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitute a
hazard to persons in their vicinity;
      (3)   Loose and overhanging objects, which by reason of their location
above ground will constitute a danger of falling on persons in their vicinity;
and
      (4)   Holes, excavations, breaks and projections that are hazardous.
§ 14-143  APPEARANCE OF EXTERIOR OF PREMISES AND STRUCTURES.
   The owner or occupant of any building in the city shall maintain the
exterior of the premises so that the appearance of the premises and structures
shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property.
§ 14-144  STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL MATERIAL.
   No person shall store commercial equipment or materials relating to
commercial or industrial use at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or
other public area unless permitted to do so under Ch. 94 of this code of
ordinances.
§ 14-145  GENERAL MAINTENANCE.
   The owner or occupant of any building in the city shall maintain such
building or structure in good repair, free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint, or other condition
reflective of deterioration of inadequate maintenance to the end that the
property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated, and
adjoining properties protected from blighting influences.
§§ 14-146 — 14-175  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND PREMISES
Section
   
14-176.   Adoption of state law by reference
   
14-177.   Administration and enforcement
   
14-178.   Hearing Authority
   14-179. — 14-210.   Reserved
§ 14-176  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of I.C. 36-7-9 (I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq.) is adopted by
reference, as if fully set out in this section. Two copies are on file in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.
Statutory reference:
   Adoption by reference, see I.C. 36-1-5-4
§ 14-177  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Building Commissioner and the Department of Law are responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this article and I.C. 36-7-9 (I.C. 36-7-9-
1 et seq.).
§ 14-178  HEARING AUTHORITY.
   The Hearing Authority shall be designated by the Mayor in accordance with
the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-2.
§§ 14-179 — 14-210  RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: BUILDING NUMBERING
Section
   
14-211.   Display of correct number required
   
14-212.   House numbering on streets running north and south
   
14-213.   House numbering on streets running east and west
   
14-214.   Numbers assigned to blocks
§ 14-211  DISPLAY OF CORRECT NUMBER REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to fail to place on
the building, either adjoining its side, or immediately over its door or
entrance, neat, plain figures of not less than two square inches in size, which
show the number assigned to the building.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to display an incorrect house number.
§ 14-212  HOUSE NUMBERING ON STREETS RUNNING NORTH AND SOUTH.
   (A)   The house numbers on all streets running north and south in the city
shall commence at the Washington Street crossing of every such street and run
thence north and south from Washington Street as follows.
      (1)   All the even numbers shall be on the west side.
      (2)   All the odd numbers shall be on the east side of every north and
south street.
   (B)   All that part of every street running north from Washington Street
shall be called the north part of such street, and all that part of every
street running south of Washington Street shall be called the south part of
such street.
§ 14-213  HOUSE NUMBERING ON STREETS RUNNING EAST AND WEST.
   (A)   The house numbers on all streets running east and west shall commence
on each side of the Main Street crossing of each respective street, and run
thence east and west from Main Street as follows.
      (1)   All even numbers shall be on the north side.
      (2)   All odd numbers shall be on the south side.
   (B)   The part of every such street, running east from Main Street shall be
called the east part of such street, and all such streets running west from
Main Street shall be called the west part of such street.
§ 14-214  NUMBERS ASSIGNED TO BLOCKS.
   The space or distance of one block along or upon any street shall be allowed
and assigned 100 numbers, with 50 numbers being for each side of such street as
provided in §§
14-212 and
14-213 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 15: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
15-1.   Policy statement
   
15-2.   Definitions
   
15-3.   Unlawful practice
   
15-4.   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
15-5.   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
15-6.   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
15-7.   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
15-8.   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
15-9.   Equal access to housing in HUD programs
   
15-10.   Exemptions
   
15-11.   Administrative enforcement
§ 15-1  POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., as
amended, the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq., as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-2  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9-1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§ 15-4, 15-
5, 15-6, 15-7 or 15-8 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILIAL STATUS.
      (1)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years
being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of such
individual or the written permission of such parent or other person.
      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
FAMILIAL STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined in the definition of FAMILIAL STATUS.
   HANDICAP.
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., ; or
         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C. 22-9.5-2-10.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802 (I.C. 22-
9.5-2-10(b)); nor does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because
that individual is a transvestite (I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(c)).
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under U.S.C. Title 11, receivers and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-3  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   (A)   Subject to the provision of subsection (B) below, § 15-9 of this
chapter and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale
or rental of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 15-4 of this chapter
shall apply to:
      (1)   All dwellings, except as exempted by subsection (A)(2) below and
I.C. 22-9.5-3; and
      (2)   Other than the provisions of subsection (B) below, nothing in § 15-
4 of this chapter shall apply to:
         (a)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided that, in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within a 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on this behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
            1.   Without the use in any manner of the sale or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent or salesperson, or person; and
            2.   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of § 15-4(C) of this chapter, but
nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
         (b)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied
or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently
of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (B)   For the purposes of subsection (A)(2) above, a person shall be deemed
to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings, if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-4  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   (A)   As made applicable by § 15-3 of this chapter, and except as exempted
by §§ 15-3(A)(2) and 15-9 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (3)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rent of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination
based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination;
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   The buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (7)   (a)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions
or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
            1.   The person;
            2.   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
            3.   Any person associated with that person.
         (b)   For purposes of this subsection (A)(7), DISCRIMINATION includes:
            1.   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications or existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
            2.   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
            3.   In connection with the design and construction of covered
multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months
after 9-13-1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
               a.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings
are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
               b.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
               c.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
                  i.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
                  ii.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
other environmental controls in accessible locations; and
                  iii.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in
a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (B)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard of Buildings and
Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as “ANSI A117.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements
hereof.
   (C)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-5  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-6  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple- listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-7  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§ 15-3, 15-4, 15-5 or 15-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-8  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiation for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
subsection (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according
to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined
not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and, if
death results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or life.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-9  EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. Part 5.403 and 24 C.F.R. Part 574.3 the definition of
FAMILY is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived
sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
(Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-10  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under subsections (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or any non- profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial
purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race,
color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private
club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary
purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than
a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to
its members or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, HOUSING FOR
OLDER PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state’s Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 15-11  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioners as set forth
in subsection (B) below shall be vested in the chief elected official of the
city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the city, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the articles of this
chapter by complainants to the state’s Civil Rights Commission for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the chief
elected official of the city shall refer all said complaints to the Commission
as provided for under subsection (A) above to said Commission for purposes of
investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-
9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the city shall administer
their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in an manner affirmatively to further the purpose of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the Commission to
further such purposes.
   (D)   The chief elected official of the city, or the chief elected
official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.
(Ord. 2012-1673, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2017-1748, passed 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 18: BUSINESSES
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   LICENSING
         
III.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENTS
         
IV.   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
         
V.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
18-1.   Fences around junkyards or wrecking yards
   18-2. — 18-30.   Reserved
§ 18-1  FENCES AROUND JUNKYARDS OR WRECKING YARDS.
   All commercial junkyards or wrecking yards shall be required to enclose the
premises occupied by them with a solid fence erected of conventional materials
at least eight feet in height.
§§ 18-2 — 18-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: LICENSING
Section
   
18-31.   Purpose
   
18-32.   Licenses required to engage in certain trades or businesses
   
18-33.   Separate license required for each place of business
   
18-34.   Contents of license
   
18-35.   Date and duration of license
   
18-36.   License not transferable
   
18-37.   License certificate to be displayed
   
18-38.   Complaints
   18-39. — 18-70.   Reserved
§ 18-31  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to ensure that, in the conduct of certain
businesses and occupations designated in this article, the public health,
safety and welfare is maintained. The provisions of this article shall be
applicable to all business licenses issued by the city unless otherwise stated.
§ 18-32  LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN TRADES OR BUSINESSES.
   No person shall engage in any trade or business for which a city license is
required without first applying for and obtaining a license from the Clerk-
Treasurer or other duly authorized issuing authority.
§ 18-33  SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Every person engaging in an activity required to be licensed shall obtain a
license for each separate office or place of business conducted by such person.
§ 18-34  CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Every license shall state:
   (A)   By name the person to whom it is issued;
   (B)   The trade or business licensed;
   (C)   The address of the place where the trade or business shall be
conducted; and
   (D)   The date of issuance and date of expiration of the license.
§ 18-35  DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date specified in the
license and, unless otherwise provided, shall not extend beyond December 31 of
the year issued. However, at any time after December 1, licenses may be issued
for the ensuing calendar year. Unless otherwise specified, the full annual fee
will be required of licensees irrespective of the date of issuance of the
license.
§ 18-36  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the trade or
business; and, unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
§ 18-37  LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on a trade or business at a fixed location shall
keep the license certificate posted in a prominent place upon the licensed
premises. Other licensees shall carry their license on their person while
conducting their trade or business.
§ 18-38  COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   On reasonable notice of at least three days to the person complained
of, the Mayor shall hear any complaint against a person to whom the city has
issued a license, and may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses, administer oaths to those witnesses and require them to testily. To
the extent they can be applied, the state rules of procedure, including the
right to appear by counsel and to compel the attendance of witnesses for or
against persons complained of, apply to proceedings under this section.
   (B)   If the Mayor finds that the person complained of has willfully
violated a term or condition of his or her license, or has willfully done or
permitted to be done an act in violation of a statute or city ordinance
relating to the business licensed, the Mayor shall revoke or suspend the
license. He or she shall file a copy of his or her findings and determination
with the city’s Clerk-Treasurer within 24 hours after it is made.
   (C)   An order of revocation shall become effective upon written notice
served upon the licensee or posted upon the premises affected.
   (D)   An order of suspension shall become effective upon written notice
served upon the licensee or posted upon the premises affected. A notice of
suspension may specify the reason for suspension and provide conditions under
which reinstatement of the license may be obtained. Upon compliance with these
conditions within the period of time specified, the license may be reinstated.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-4-5-5
§§ 18-39 — 18-70  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: ADULT ENTERTAINMENTS
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
18-71.   Definitions
   
18-72.   Purpose
   
18-73.   Restrictions, requirements and conditions
   18-74. — 18-95.   Reserved
Division 2. License
   
18-96.   Required
   
18-97.   Application procedure
   
18-98.   Standards for issuance of license
   18-99. — 18-130.   Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 18-71  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES. One or more of the following activities:
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade for sale, rent or display, pictures,
books, periodicals, magazines, motion pictures or cartoons, appliances and
similar material distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities as hereinafter described
or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
      (2)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment with a capacity
for less than 50 persons having, as a substantial or significant portion of its
use, the presentation of materials having as a dominant theme or characterized
or distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
sexual activities for observation by persons in the theater.
      (3)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment with a capacity of
50 or more persons having, as a substantial or significant portion of its use,
the presentation of material having as a dominant theme or characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
sexual activities for observation by persons in the theater.
      (4)   ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. An establishment used for presenting live
performances of humans and/or animals having as a dominant theme or
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating
to sexual activities for observation by persons in the theater.
      (5)   BATHHOUSE. An establishment for providing bathing, sauna, steam
room and/or lavatory facilities for male and/or female persons, which promotes
its services by using and/or advertising the use of homosexual attendants.
      (6)   CABARET. An establishment that features as entertainers and/or
waiters and/or bartenders, male or female impersonators and/or persons, either
male or female, who expose to public view of the patrons of the establishment
at any time the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola, human genitals, pubic region and/or buttocks and/or human or
simulated male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
      (7)   MASSAGE PARLOR. An establishment for treating the human body by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or similar treatment with the hand, which
promotes its services by using and/or advertising the use of female attendants
and/or masseuses for male patrons.
      (8)   TAXI DANCE HALL. An establishment operated as a public dance hall
where dance partners, either male or female, are available for hire for a
monetary consideration payable either by the dance or as part of an entrance
fee or membership fee.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity who
establishes and/or maintains a business as its owner or manager.
   OWNER. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity who has
legal title to real estate, with or without accompanying actual possession, or
shall have all or part of the beneficial ownership of any real estate and a
right to its present use and enjoyment, including a mortgagee in possession.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals, pubic regions;
         (b)   Buttock; and
         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
§ 18-72  PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this article is to enhance, preserve and stabilize the
city’s business district and residential neighborhood and decrease the
incidence of crime and juvenile delinquency through control and licensing of
adult entertainment activities.
   (B)   It is not the purpose of this article to establish community standards
on obscenity nor to allow the establishment of adult entertainment activities
that are in violation of state laws on pornography.
§ 18-73  RESTRICTIONS, REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   An establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities, except as
otherwise provided by laws that may be more restrictive, may not have more than
one outside, flush to the wall, facia style sign, not to exceed in size six
feet in length (horizontal to the ground) with no flashing lights and with no
lettering, wording or pictorial or representational matter distinguished or
characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
sexual activities.
   (B)   An establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities may not
display its stock in trade or activities in such a manner as to be subject to
public view from outside the establishment, including, but not limited to, view
from public sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passageways.
   (C)   An operator engaging in adult entertainment activities may not permit
a person under 18 years of age to enter his or her establishment.
   (D)   An operator engaging in adult entertainment activities shall, at all
times, cause the entrance of his or her establishment to be so attended as to
ensure compliance with the requirements contained in subsection (C) above.
   (E)   An adult amusement arcade, except as otherwise provided by laws that
may be more restrictive, shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Any wall or partition situated so as to create a room, enclosure or
booth in which any amusement device is located shall be constructed of not less
than one-hour fire-resistive material.
      (2)   The width of the aisles in any room where an amusement device is
located shall be more than 42 inches.
      (3)   There shall be no fewer than two doorways of a width no less than
36 inches, which provide ingress or egress from any room in which an amusement
device is located; however, one doorway shall be sufficient if the Fire Chief
should so determine. Doorways shall be unlocked during business hours.
      (4)   Over every doorway which provides egress from any room in which an
amusement device is located, there shall be maintained an internally
illuminated exit sign with letters at least five inches in height.
      (5)   Each amusement device located in such establishment shall be
situated so as to permit the person using the device to have a constantly
unobstructed view of the doorways that provide ingress or egress from the
establishment.
      (6)   A light level of no less than ten footcandles at floor level shall
be maintained in every portion of the establishment to which the public is
admitted.
      (7)   (a)   The numbers of persons in any room or partitioned portion of
a room where amusement devices are located shall not exceed one person per 30
square feet.
         (b)   The maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned
portion of a room in which amusement devices are located shall be conspicuously
posted by the operator and shall remain posted, at the entrance of the room.
      (8)   (a)   The number of amusement devices shall not exceed the maximum
occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which
an amusement device is located.
         (b)   The maximum number of amusement devices permitted in any room or
partitioned portion of a room shall be conspicuously posted by the operator,
and shall remain posted, at the entrance of the room.
§§ 18-74 — 18-95  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
§ 18-96  REQUIRED.
   (A)   No operator shall maintain, operate or conduct an establishment
engaging in adult entertainment activities without a license.
   (B)   No owner of property shall permit adult entertainment activities to
operate on his or her property without a license.
   (C)   No person shall work or permit himself or herself to be employed at an
adult entertainment activity that has not been licensed.
   (D)   The license fee for the license required by this division shall be as
prescribed in §
34-161 of this code of ordinances; and all licenses shall be for the calendar
year January 1 through December 31, or the remaining portion of such calendar
year. The license fee may be redetermined by the Common Council.
   (E)   Annual license fees may be prorated at the rate of $50 per month for
the remaining full month of the current calendar year, but not to exceed the
amount specified in §
34-161 of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   The license fee shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer upon the filing
of an application for a license.
   (G)   If the license is denied, the license fee, less $250 for the cost of
the license investigation and inspection procedure, shall be returned to the
applicant.
§ 18-97  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this division shall file a
written, sworn application with the Clerk-Treasurer. This application shall be
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership,
or by the president if a corporation. Applications shall be made on forms
available in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   The application shall contain information, photographs and
certificates set forth and described as follows.
      (1)   Required information.
         (a)   The name and location of the establishment;
         (b)   The names and addresses of the applicants, owners of the
establishment; and, if a corporation, the names and addresses of the directors
and the names and addresses of shareholders owning capital stock in the
corporation; and, if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners;
         (c)   The names and addresses of the owners of the property on which
the establishment is located;
         (d)   The names and addresses of any rental agent of the property on
which the establishment is located;
         (e)   The nature of the activity or activities to be engaged in at
such location;
         (f)   All criminal convictions of the applicant, owners, directors,
partners, shareholders or employees other than misdemeanor traffic violations.
This information shall be at all times current. It shall be the responsibility
of the operator to notify the Clerk-Treasurer of any changes in this
information; and
         (g)   The name and address of any person the applicant wants mail
notice to be given in case of violation or other matters affecting the license.
      (2)   Photographs and certificates.
         (a)   Such application shall include a photograph or drawing of any
signs displayed or proposed to be displayed on the exterior of the
establishment and a statement of the dimensions of such signs.
         (b)   Such application shall be accompanied by a certificate of
occupancy issued by the Plan Commission certifying that the business is in
compliance with applicable zoning laws or has non- conforming use rights.
         (c)   Such application shall include a certificate from the Fire Chief
that all applicable fire regulations have been met and, in the case of an adult
amusement arcade, that all requirements of this article have been met.
§ 18-98  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application form for a license required by
this division, the Clerk- Treasurer shall forward such application to the Chief
of Police or his or her assistant, who shall perform a criminal record check on
any person named in the application and review for accuracy all information
contained in the application within 20 days of receipt of such application.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall approve the application if all restrictions,
requirements and conditions and all applicable requirements of law have been
met and unless investigation discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of
the applicant’s business would pose a substantial threat to the public health,
safety, morals or general welfare of the city; except, no license will be
issued if the applicant or any owner, director, partner, shareholder or
employee has been convicted of any felony within five years of the date of
application.
   (C)   It is further provided that granting of a license under the provisions
of this section does not certify compliance with all applicable laws, nor does
it prevent the city from enforcement of all applicable laws.
§§ 18-99 — 18-130  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
Section
Division 1. Generally
   18-131. — 18-150.   Reserved
Division 2. License
   
18-151.   Required
   
18-152.   Application
   
18-153.   Fee
   
18-154.   Bond
   
18-155.   Expiration date
   
18-156.   Renewal
   
18-157.   Records
   18-158. — 18-190.   Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§§ 18-131 — 18-150  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
§ 18-151  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of being an
electrical contractor without a license issued by the Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 18-152  APPLICATION.
   All applications for a license for an electrical contractor shall be made to
the Clerk-Treasurer and shall contain sufficient information to determine
whether the license shall be issued.
§ 18-153  FEE.
   The annual fee to be paid for a license for an electrical contractor shall
be as prescribed in §
34-162 of this code of ordinances.
§ 18-154  BOND.
   Every person who is granted an electrical contractor’s license as required
by this division shall make, execute and deliver to the Clerk-Treasurer a bond
in the penal sum of $1,000, payable to the city and made for the use and
benefit of the owner of, or any party in interest in, the property where the
electrical licensee furnished any material or performed any service and shall
indemnify such person against loss or damage that may arise by reason of the
work done or material furnished, being in violation of the requirements of any
law governing such work. Such bond shall be executed by each applicant with any
recognized and responsible surety company authorized to do business in the
state as a surety.
§ 18-155  EXPIRATION DATE.
   An electrical contractor’s license shall expire on December 31 of each year.
§ 18-156  RENEWAL.
   All applications for the renewal of a license for an electrical contractor
shall be filed on or before January 10 of each year.
§ 18-157  RECORDS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of all electrical contractor’s
licenses issued, their date of issuance and their date of expiration.
§§ 18-158 — 18-190  RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
18-191.   Definitions
   
18-192.   Hours
   
18-193.   Obstruction of public places prohibited
   
18-194.   No-peddling signs
   18-195. — 18-215.   Reserved
Division 2. License
   
18-216.   Required
   
18-217.   Application procedure
   
18-218.   Standards for issuance
   
18-219.   Exemptions
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate peddlers, solicitors and the like, see I.C. 36-8-2-11
   Transient Merchant Law of Indiana, see I.C. 25-37-1-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 18-191  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business earned on by any person who is a transient merchant,
peddler or solicitor.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   PEDDLER.
      (1)   Any person who:
         (a)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for
sale, or making sales, or making deliveries; or
         (b)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the city.
      (2)   The term PEDDLER does not mean any person engaged in making
wholesale deliveries or wholesale sales.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the city and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle or any
place within the city.
§ 18-192  HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit before the hour of
8:00 a.m. of any day, or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. of any day, without the
specific prior consent of the prospective purchaser.
§ 18-193  OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person, either selling, or offering for sale, any
article or service by peddling or soliciting in any place, to obstruct or cause
to be obstructed the passage of any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or any
other public place, by causing people to congregate at or near the place where
any article or service is being sold or offered for sale.
§ 18-194  NO PEDDLING SIGNS.
   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to ring the bell, or knock on
the door or otherwise attempt to gain admittance for the purpose of peddling or
soliciting at any residence, dwelling or apartment at which a sign bearing the
words “No Peddlers or Solicitors” or words of similar import indicating that
peddlers or solicitors are not wanted on the premises is painted, affixed or
otherwise exposed to public view. This section shall not apply to any peddler
or solicitor who rings the bell, knocks on the door or otherwise attempts to
gain admittance to such residence, dwelling or apartment at the invitation or
with the consent of the occupant.
§§ 18-195 — 18-215  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
§ 18-216  REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person who carries on business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant shall obtain a license before engaging in such activity
within the city.
   (B)   The license fee for the license required by this section shall be as
prescribed in §
34-163 of this code of ordinances and may be redetermined from time to time by
the Common Council.
   (C)   The license fee shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer upon the filing
of an application for a license.
   (D)   If the license is denied, the license fee, less $5 for the cost of the
license investigation and inspection procedure, shall be returned to the
applicant.
   (E)   All licenses issued under this section shall expire 180 days after the
date of issuance.
§ 18-217  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this division shall file a
written, sworn application with the Clerk-Treasurer. This application shall be
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership,
or by the president if a corporation. Applications should be made on forms
available in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. The application shall state:
      (1)   The name and address and Social Security number of the applicant;
      (2)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time it is proposed to be
carried on in the city, and the local address of such individual, the permanent
address of such individual and the capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person if any for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the officers and directors
of the corporation and the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period during which the applicant desires to carry on
business;
      (5)   The nature, character and quality of the goods or services to be
offered for sale or delivered, and, if goods, their invoice value and whether
they are to be sold by sample as well as from stock, and where and by whom such
goods are manufactured or grown, and where such goods are at the time of
application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime and,
if so, the nature of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   All applications for peddler or solicitor licenses shall state, in
addition to statements required by subsection (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its license plate number and registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this division shall attach to
their application the following:
      (1)   If required by the Clerk-Treasurer, copies of all printed
advertising proposed to be used in connection with the applicant’s business;
and
      (2)   Credentials from the person, if any, for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.
§ 18-218  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this
division, the Clerk-Treasurer shall cause an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character to be made.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall approve the application unless such
investigation discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s
business would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals
or general welfare. In particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has:
      (1)   Been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to transient
merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Committed prior fraudulent acts;
      (5)   A record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; or
      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character.
§ 18-219  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Any veteran of the United States armed forces described in I.C. 10-5-
12-1 or I.C. 10-5-13-1 shall be entitled to a license to vend, hawk and peddle
goods, wares, fruits and merchandise in the city without the payment of any
license fee upon the presentation to the Clerk-Treasurer, of a certificate of
discharge proving his or her identity. However, such veteran shall be subject
to all other regulatory provisions of this article.
   (B)   Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants engaged in interstate
commerce shall be exempt from any license fee required by this division. Any
person claiming such exemption shall file a verified statement disclosing the:
      (1)   Interstate nature of the business;
      (2)   Name and location of the company or firm for which orders are to be
solicited or secured;
      (3)   Name and address of the nearest local or state manager;
      (4)   Kind of goods or merchandise to be delivered; and
      (5)   Place of shipment and method of delivery.
CHAPTER 22: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   EMERGENCY ORDERS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   22-1. — 22-30.   Reserved
§§ 22-1 — 22-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: EMERGENCY ORDERS
Section
   
22-31.   Definitions
   
22-32.   Proclamation
   
22-33.   Powers of Mayor
   
22-34.   Power of Chief of Police
§ 22-31  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force of violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate
power to execute such force by three or more persons acting together without
authority of law, or any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, within the
corporate limits resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction
of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person’s walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant
premises within the corporate limits during the hours in which it has been
imposed, except those persons officially designated to duty with reference to
the civil emergency.
§ 22-32  PROCLAMATION.
   If, in the judgment of the Mayor, a civil emergency exists, he or she shall
forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of the emergency.
§ 22-33  POWERS OF MAYOR.
   (A)   After proclamation of a civil emergency by him or her, the Mayor may,
also in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the
following orders:
      (1)   A general curfew applicable to such geographical areas as he or she
deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he or
she deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare;
      (2)   The closing of all retail liquor stores;
      (3)   The closing of all taverns;
      (4)   The closing of all private clubs or portions wherein the
consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted;
      (5)   The discontinuance of the sale of beer;
      (6)   The discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline
or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a
gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
      (7)   The closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products;
      (8)   The discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of firearms and/or ammunition; and
      (9)   Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of
life and property.
   (B)   During a declared state of emergency, the Mayor shall have the power
to order that no person shall:
      (1)   Consume any alcoholic beverages in a public street or place that is
publicly owned, or in any motor vehicle driven or parked that is within a duly
designated restricted area;
      (2)   Carry or possess any rock, bottle, club, brick or weapon and use or
intend to use the same unlawfully against the person or property of another;
      (3)   Make, carry, possess or use any type of Molotov cocktail, gasoline
or petroleum-based fire bomb or other incendiary missile;
      (4)   Enter any area designated by the Mayor as a restricted area unless
in the performance of official duties or with written permission from the Mayor
or his or her duly designated representative or unless such person can prove
residence in such area; and/or
      (5)   Otherwise disobey any of the provisions of the proclamation of the
Mayor promulgated pursuant to this article.
   (C)   It is unlawful to violate any order or proclamation entered pursuant
to the provisions of this article.
§ 22-34  POWER OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   In the absence of the Mayor, the Chief of Police shall have the power to do
all acts authorized by this article to be performed by the Mayor.
CHAPTER 26:  COURTS
Section
   
26-1.   City Court established
Statutory reference:
   City courts generally, see I.C. 33-35-1-1 et seq.
§ 26-1  CITY COURT ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a City Court.
CHAPTER 30: ENVIRONMENT
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   STAGNANT WATER
         
III.   JUNK AND JUNK CARS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   30-1. — 30-30.   Reserved
§§ 30-1 — 30-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: STAGNANT WATER
Section
   
30-31.   Prohibited
   
30-32.   Service of notice to remove
   
30-33.   Correction by city
   
30-34.   Lien for removal costs
   30-35. — 30-65.   Reserved
§ 30-31  PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow any stagnant
water to remain on it.
§ 30-32  SERVICE OF NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, upon direction of the Common
Council, to notify the owner of any land that contains any stagnant water of
the order of the Common Council to fill or drain the land. This notice shall be
in writing and shall be served by delivering a copy of it to the owner or his
or her agent if either is within the city, but if neither resides within the
city, then by posting a copy of the notice at some conspicuous place on the
premises required to be filled or drained. The notice shall be served at least
ten days before the period in which the work is required by the notice to be
completed.
§ 30-33  CORRECTION BY CITY.
   If the owner of any property should fail to remove or drain any stagnant
water from his or her property after service of the notice required by § 30-32
of this chapter, the city may enter onto the property and bring such land into
compliance with the provisions of this article.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enter upon property and correct ordinance violations, see I.C.
36-1-6-2
§ 30-34  LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS.
   In the event of the removal of any waters by the city as provided in this
article, the reasonable charges for their removal shall be levied and are
declared to be a lien against the property from which they were removed. The
amount of such charges shall be certified by the Clerk-Treasurer to the
county’s Auditor, and the amount of such charges shall become a lien and attach
to the property from the time of such filing.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to obtain lien for correction of ordinance violations on private
property, see I.C. 36-1-6-2
§§ 30-35 — 30-65  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III:  JUNK AND JUNK CARS
Section
   
30-66.   Definition of “junk” and “junk car”
   
30-67.   Declaration of nuisance; storage prohibited; enforcement
   
30-68.   Removal by city
   
30-69.   Lien for removal costs
§ 30-66  DEFINITION OF “JUNK” AND “JUNK CAR”.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Any articles in any form composed of or consisting of any of the
following enumerated secondhand, discarded, abandoned or cast off metals or
materials, namely: iron, brass, bronze, copper, tin, zinc, lead or any other
metals or compounds thereof; broken glass, rags, clothing, rubber, plastics and
synthetic substances and fabrics; bottles, papers, feathers or any other waste
material or any compound or by-product of the foregoing enumerated materials;
refrigerators, washing machines, televisions, computer monitors, mattresses,
sofas, furniture and doors. JUNK shall also include and mean wrecked, abandoned
or dismantled automobile or parts thereof.
   JUNK CAR. Any motor vehicle, as defined by I.C. 9-13-2-196, which does not
bear a currently valid license plate and is not kept in a garage or building.
(Ord. 2016-1709, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1744, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 30-67  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; STORAGE PROHIBITED; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Nuisance. Because of the danger of health by vermin and insects and
because of the danger of the safety of children attracted by junk and junk
cars, these items are declared to be nuisances, except in lawfully operated
junk yards or in enclosed buildings.
   (B)   Storage prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or to
allow to remain in the open upon public or private property within the city,
any disassembled and/or non-operative and unlicensed or junked, wrecked or
abandoned motor vehicle for a period of five days or more on public property or
a period of 15 days or more on private property unless it is in connection with
an automobile sale or repair business or junk yard that is in zoning
compliance. Further, it shall be unlawful for junk to be stored or allowed to
remain in the open upon public or private property within the city.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   If such junk or junk vehicle is not removed within five days from
public property or 15 days from private property after such notice, the Police
Department, Board of Public Works and Safety, Code Enforcer, or any of their
designees, shall issue a written order of violation of this section and the
violating party shall be subject to civil penalties and enforcement shall be by
the Department of Law and appropriate action by the City Court. The form of all
notices shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 9-22-1-11. Any
person who is judged to have violated the provisions of this article is subject
to a fine of up to $150 in addition to towing, hauling, removal and storage
charges. All provisions and respective civil penalties are designed for
enforcement through the City Court. Each day that the violation occurs shall be
considered an additional violation.
      (2)   Any violation notice issued pursuant to this section may be
appealed to the City Court if written notice of appeal is served by the
landowner to the City Clerk-Treasurer. The timely appeal of a violation notice
shall toll the abatement period pending the issuance of a decision thereon by
the City Court.
(Ord. 2016-1709, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1744, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 30-68  REMOVAL BY CITY.
   If any person who owns, controls, maintains or occupies any property that is
in violation of this article fails to correct such violation by removing and
disposing of the offending materials, within five days after proper notice
cited above if it is public property, or after 15 days after notice cited above
if it is private property, the Police Department, Code Enforcer, or any of
their designees may then enter onto the property and remove the materials.
(Ord. 2016-1709, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1744, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 30-69  LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS.
   In the event of the removal by the city of items that are in violation of
this article, the reasonable charges for such removal shall be levied upon and
is a lien against such property from which the items were removed, and shall be
certified by the Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor and shall then become a
lien and attach to the real estate from the time of such filing.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to obtain lien for correcting ordinance violations on private
property, see I.C. 36-1-6-2
CHAPTER 34: FEES
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   ADMINISTRATION
         
III.   AMUSEMENTS
         
IV.   ANIMALS
         
V.   BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
VI.   BUSINESSES
         
VII.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
         
VIII.   COURTS
         
IX.   ENVIRONMENT
         
X.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
         
XI.   LAW ENFORCEMENT
         
XII.   OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
         
XIII.   PARKS AND RECREATION
         
XIV.   PLANNING
         
XV.   SECONDHAND GOODS
         
XVI.   SOLID WASTE
         
XVII.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
         
XVIII.   TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
         
XIX.   UTILITIES
         
XX.   VEGETATION
         
XXI.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   34-1. — 34-30.   Reserved
§§ 34-1 — 34-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
34-31.   Fee for annexation, vacation of property
   34-32. — 34-60.   Reserved
§ 34-31  FEE FOR ANNEXATION, VACATION OF PROPERTY.
   The fee required by §
2-2 of this code of ordinances is $25.
(Ord. 1256, passed 11-6-1989)
§§ 34-32 — 34-60  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
34-61.   Pool table license fee
   34-62. — 34-90.   Reserved
§ 34-61  POOL TABLE LICENSE FEE.
   The fee required by §
6-53 of this code of ordinances is $5 per table.
§§ 34-62 — 34-90  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: ANIMALS
Section
   
34-91.   Dog impoundment fees
   
34-92.   Kennel license
   34-93. — 34-125.   Reserved
§ 34-91  DOG IMPOUNDMENT FEES.
   The fee required by §
10-61(B)(1) of this code of ordinances is $25 and the fee required by §
10-61(B)(2) of this code of ordinances is $5 per day.
§ 34-92  KENNEL LICENSE.
   The fee required by § 10-64(B) of this code of ordinances is $10.
§§ 34-93 — 34-125  RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   34-126. — 34-160.   Reserved
§§ 34-126 — 34-160  RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: BUSINESSES
Section
   
34-161.   Adult entertainment establishment license fee
   
34-162.   Electrical contractor license fee
   
34-163.   Peddler, solicitor, transient merchant license fee
   34-164. — 34-195.   Reserved
§ 34-161  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE FEE.
   The fee required by §
18-96(D) of this code of ordinances is $500.
§ 34-162  ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE FEE.
   The fee required by §
18-153 of this code of ordinances is $10 per year.
§ 34-163  PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, TRANSIENT MERCHANT LICENSE FEE.
   The fee required by §
18-216(B) of this code of ordinances is $10.
§§ 34-164 — 34-195  RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   34-196. — 34-220.   Reserved
§§ 34-196 — 34-220  RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: COURTS
Section
   34-221. — 34-250.   Reserved
§§ 34-221 — 34-250  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: ENVIRONMENT
Section
   34-251. — 34-285.   Reserved
§§ 34-251 — 34-285  RESERVED.
ARTICLE X: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   34-286. — 34-345.   Reserved
§§ 34-286 — 34-345  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
   34-346. — 34-375.   Reserved
§§ 34-346 — 34-375  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XII: OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
   34-376. — 34-405.   Reserved
§§ 34-376 — 34-405  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIII: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   34-406. — 34-435.   Reserved
§§ 34-406 — 34-435  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIV: PLANNING
Section
   34-436. — 34-465.   Reserved
§§ 34-436 — 34-465  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XV: SECONDHAND GOODS
Section
   
34-466.   Precious metal dealer license fee
   34-467. — 34-500.   Reserved
§ 34-466  PRECIOUS METAL DEALER LICENSE FEE.
   The fee required by §
62-56(B) of this code of ordinances is $50.
§§ 34-467 — 34-500  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVI: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
34-501.   Solid waste disposal unit fees
   34-502. — 34-530.   Reserved
§ 34-501  SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL UNIT FEES.
   (A)   The fees required by §
66-1 of this code of ordinances are as follows:
      (1)   Yard waste disposal (tipping) fee of $30 per ton, with a minimum
charge of $30 for each load;
      (2)   Solid waste and clean masonry and aggregate materials disposal
(tipping) fee of $48 per ton, with a minimum charge of $48 for each load,
except as stated in subsection (A)(3) below; and
      (3)   Bagged non-commercial (residential only) solid waste disposal
(tipping) fee of $20 for five or fewer bags.
   (B)   Users of the facility shall pay all fees at the time of disposal or as
agreed by the city.
(Ord. 2002-1482, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 2007-1605, passed - -2007)
§§ 34-502 — 34-530  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVII: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Section
   
34-531.   Excavation permit fee
   34-532. — 34-590.   Reserved
§ 34-531  EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.
   The fee required by §
70-41(B) of this code of ordinances is $25.
§§ 34-532 — 34-590  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVIII: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section
   
34-591.   Towing of abandoned vehicle fees
   
34-592.   Golf cart inspection fee
   34-593. — 34-620.   Reserved
§ 34-591  TOWING OF ABANDONED VEHICLE FEES.
   The fees required by §
78-74 of this code of ordinances are as follows:
   (A)   Daily towing from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday: $35;
   (B)   Towing from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. daily, and on Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays: $45; and
   (C)   Storage of vehicles: $7.50 per day.
§ 34-592  GOLF CART INSPECTION FEE.
   An administration/inspection fee of $30 shall be paid through the office of
the city’s Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§§ 34-593 — 34-620  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIX: UTILITIES
Section
   
34-621.   Filling swimming pools fee
   
34-622.   Water rates and charges
   
34-623.   Building sewer permit fees
   
34-624.   Private sewage disposal system permit and inspection fee
   
34-625.   Sewage rates and charges
   
34-626.   Application fee for commercial sanitarian to deposit waste in city
system
   
34-627.   Availability costs
   
34-628.   Connection costs
   34-629. — 34-660.   Reserved
§ 34-621  FILLING SWIMMING POOLS FEE.
   The fee required by § 82-1 of this code of ordinances is $35 for pools
holding 10,000 gallons or less and $50 for pools holding over 10,000 gallons,
plus water.
§ 34-622  WATER RATES AND CHARGES.
   The rates and charges required by §
82-39 of this code of ordinances are as follows.
   (A)   Monthly consumption.
 
Monthly Consumption        Rate per 1,000 Gallons
First 20,000 gallons       $1.14
Next 280,000 gallons       $0.99
Next 700,000 gallons       $0.81
All over 1,000,000 gallons $0.74
 
   (B)   Monthly service charge.
      (1)   For all users, except those located in the Morgan-Monroe Forestry
Area, each user shall pay a monthly service charge in accordance with the
following applicable size of meter installed:
 
Meter Size (inches) Per Month
5/8   $2.80
3/4   $2.90
1     $3.25
2-1/2 $3.80
2     $5.25
3     $15.90
4     $19.85
6     $29.05
8     $39.60
 
      (2)   For users in the Morgan-Monroe Forestry Area, each user shall pay a
monthly service charge in accordance with the following applicable size of
meter installed:
 
Meter Size (inches) Per Month
5/8   $10.80
3/4   $11.80
1     $14.55
1-1/2 $18.30
2     $28.55
3     $104.25
4     $132.35
6     $197.75
8     $272.60
 
      (3)   The Morgan-Monroe Forest surcharge shall be discontinued and the
existing rates and charges for the use of service rendered by the water utility
of the city shall be increased across-the-board, but not to exceed 49%.
   (C)   Fire protection.
 
Fire Hydrants          Per Annum
Public hydrants, each  $345
Private hydrants, each $345
 
 
Automatic Sprinkler Charge Per Annum
1-inch connection     $9.60
1-1/2-inch connection $21.55
2-inch connection     $38.35
2-1/2-inch connection $59.90
3-inch connection     $86.25
4-inch connection     $153.35
6-inch connection     $345
8-inch connection     $613.35
10-inch connection    $958.30
12-inch connection    $1,379.95
 
   (D)   Tap charge. Each user shall pay a connection fee based upon the size
of the meter installed upon tapping onto the water system as follows:
 
Meter Size           Tap Charge
5/8-inch or 3/4-inch $1,100
Larger meters        *
NOTES TO TABLE:
*All connections requiring a meter size greater than 5/8-inch or 3/4-inch
shall be charged the actual cost of making the connection, including labor,
materials, equipment and overhead, but in no event less than $250 for inside
the city’s corporate boundaries and $525 for outside the city’s corporate
boundaries per connection
 
   (E)   Collection and deferred payment charge. All bills for water service
not paid within 17 days from the due date thereof, as stated in such bills,
shall be subject to the collection or deferred payment charge of 10% on the
first $3 and 3% on the excess over $3.
   (F)   Turn-on fee. After any water service is discontinued to any property
serviced by the water utility for any reason, whether at the request of the
consumer or because of failure to pay sewer or water bills, there shall be
imposed a fee of $40 for turning on the water service.
   (G)   Return check fee. Any users of the city’s water utility who, upon
payment of their account, submit a check that is subsequently dishonored by the
bank shall be assessed a $30 charge.
   (H)   Meter deposit charge.
      (1)   Residential renters/buying on contract: $60; and
      (2)   Commercial renters/buying on contract: $100.
   (I)   Tampering fee. The tampering fee is $75.
   (J)   Temporary users. Water furnished to temporary users such as
contractors and the like shall be charged on the basis of the metered gallon
rates hereinbefore set forth as estimated and established by the Waterworks
Superintendent.
   (K)   Refunds.
      (1)   Refunds with a remaining balance of $3 or less, payable to a water
meter deposit customer, will not be refunded. In the event a water meter refund
is less than $3, the funds should be removed from the Water Meter Deposit Fund
and moved to the Water Utility Operating Fund. Likewise, overpayment on a final
water/sewer account resulting in a credit balance of $3 or less will not be
refunded. The credit balance of $3 or less on a water/sewer account will be
adjusted accordingly.
      (2)   If a customer contests that they are entitled to a refund amount
less than $3, they must be placed on the agenda and in attendance at the next
Common Council meeting to request the remaining balance of the water meter
deposit or the water/sewer account credit balance. The Common Council would
then decide on the issue of refunding the balance to the water utility
customer.
(Ord. 97-1404, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 2004-1536, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 2006-
1573, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 2010-1648, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 2012-1668,
passed 5- -2012)
§ 34-623  BUILDING SEWER PERMIT FEES.
   The fees required by §
82-133 of this code of ordinances are $5 for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit and $15 for an industrial building sewer permit.
§ 34-624  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE.
   The fee required by §
82-178 of this code of ordinances is $5.
§ 34-625  SEWAGE RATES AND CHARGES.
   The fees required by §§
82-266 and
82-277(B) of this code of ordinances are as follows.
   (A)   Monthly metered consumption.
      (1)   Monthly metered consumption. All meter sizes (per 1,000 gallons):
$11.26; and
      (2)   Monthly base charge. All meter sizes: $7.37, in addition to monthly
metered usage charge.
   (B)   Flat rate, unmetered users.
 
No. in Family Gallons Allowed Charge
3             3,750 gallons   $49.60
4             4,687 gallons   $60.15
5             5,769 gallons   $72.32
6 or more     7,308 gallons   $89.66
Commercial    225,633 gallons $828
 
   (C)   Multi-dwelling additional charge. The multi-dwelling additional charge
is $2.76 per dwelling unit.
   (D)   Excessive strength surcharge.
 
                     Per Pound
BOD in excess of 200 $0.10 mg/l
COD in excess of 400 $0.10 mg/l
SS in excess of 250  $0.10 mg/l
 
   (E)   Availability fees. The availability shall be $1,750 per EDU.
   (F)   Connection charge. The connection charge shall be $1,125 per EDU.
   (G)   Sewer bill. The sewer bill based on 4,000 gallons shall be $52.41.
(Ord. 1330, passed 10-3-1994; Ord. 2004-1546, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 2006-1569,
passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 2006-1570, passed 3- -2006; Ord. 2019-1801, passed 8-19-
2019)
§ 34-626  APPLICATION FEE FOR COMMERCIAL SANITARIAN TO DEPOSIT WASTE IN CITY
SYSTEM.
   The fee required by §
82-329(B) of this code of ordinances is $750.
§ 34-627  AVAILABILITY COSTS.
   The fee required by §
82-352 of this code of ordinances is $750.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 34-628  CONNECTION COSTS.
   The fee required by §
82-353 of this code of ordinances is $450.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§§ 34-629 — 34-660  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XX: VEGETATION
Section
   34-661. — 34-690.   Reserved
§§ 34-661 — 34-690  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XXI: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
   
34-691.   Taxicab license fee
   
34-692.   Charge for taxicab drivers’ list
§ 34-691  TAXICAB LICENSE FEE.
   The fees required by § 90-58 of this code of ordinances are as follows:
   (A)   For the first vehicle in service by any licensee: the sum of $15 per
year;
   (B)   For each additional vehicle: the sum of $10 per year; and
   (C)   If the license is granted to any applicant after January 1 of any
year, he or she shall pay as a license fee $1.50 per month for the first
vehicle and $1 per month for each additional vehicle, with the time to be
computed to the next January 1.
§ 34-692  CHARGE FOR TAXICAB DRIVERS’ LIST.
   The fee required by § 90-88 of this code of ordinances is $1 per year.
CHAPTER 38: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
38-1.   Explosives
   
38-2.   Blasting permit
   
38-3.   Installation of fire hydrants
   
38-4.   Obstruction of fire hydrants
   
38-5.   Painting of fire hydrants limited
   38-6. — 38-40.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish, maintain and operate a firefighting and fire
prevention system, see I.C. 36-8-2-3
   Fire safety generally, see I.C. 22-11-14-1 et seq.
   Fireworks generally, see I.C. 22-11-14-1 et seq.
   Municipal home rule, see I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq.
§ 38-1  EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended
for the purpose of producing an explosion, that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units, or other ingredients, in such proportions, quantities or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden
generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are
capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb.
   (B)   Storage. It shall be unlawful to store at any time within the city a
quantity of gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing in excess of 100
pounds without the express authorization of the Board of Public Works and
Safety.
Statutory reference:
   Storage of explosives, see I.C. 22-14-4-3 et seq.
§ 38-2  BLASTING PERMIT.
   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the Board of Public
Works and Safety. The Board of Public Works and Safety may require the
applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other persons against
injury or damages that might result from the proposed blasting.
§ 38-3  INSTALLATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Before the installation of any fire hydrant that will use water from the
city water system, the plans and specifications of such installation shall be
approved by the consulting engineer for the city. All such installations shall
be of a type of hydrant designated by the Fire Chief as suitable.
§ 38-4  OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, park, plant, build, erect or
maintain any object or material that will obstruct or hinder in any manner the
operation or use of any fire hydrant within the city.
Statutory reference:
   Obstructing firefighters, see I.C. 35-44-3-8
§ 38-5  PAINTING OF FIRE HYDRANTS LIMITED.
   No fire hydrant shall be painted, except by authorized personnel of the
city.
Statutory reference:
   Malicious mischief, see I.C. 35-43-1-2
§§ 38-6 — 38-40  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
38-41.   Salary
   
38-42.   Pension Fund and Board of Trustees established
   
38-43.   Police power of firefighters
   
38-44.   Duty of firefighters to obey orders
   
38-45.   Conduct of firefighters
   
38-46.   Operation and management of fire training facility
   
38-47.   Fee established
   38-48. — 38.60.   Reserved
Division 2.  Fire Merit Commission
   
38-61.   Fire Merit Commission established
   
38-62.   Approval or rejection of merit system by members
   
38-63.   Effect of merit system upon rank
   
38-64.   Fire Merit Commission members
   
38-65.   Merit Commission’s authority
   
38-66.   Merit Commission rules
Statutory reference:
   Employment standards for firefighters, see I.C. 36-8-3.2-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY
§ 38-41  SALARY.
   The members of the Fire Department shall receive and be paid such salary as
the Common Council may fix and allow.
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of fire department, see I.C. 36-8-3-3
§ 38-42  PENSION FUND AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES ESTABLISHED.
   The city elects to establish a Firefighter’s Pension Fund and a Board of
Trustees to manage and administer it under the terms and provisions of I.C. 36-
8-7 (I.C. 36-8-7-1 et seq.).
§ 38-43  POLICE POWER OF FIREFIGHTERS.
   The members of the Fire Department shall have the powers of a police officer
during the continuance of a fire, in order to suppress disturbances, tumults or
disorderly conduct upon the part of anyone going to, working or being at or
returning from any fire and to arrest any such person.
§ 38-44  DUTY OF FIREFIGHTERS TO OBEY ORDERS.
   It is the duty of each member of the Fire Department to obey the orders of
his or her superior officers.
§ 38-45  CONDUCT OF FIREFIGHTERS.
   All members of the Fire Department while on duty shall conduct themselves in
an orderly manner.
§ 38-46  OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT OF FIRE TRAINING FACILITY.
   The operation and management of the fire training facility shall be the
responsibility of the city’s Fire Department. The city’s Fire Department shall
maintain and repair the facility and shall control the use of the facility by
other fire protection agencies. The city’s Fire Department shall establish
operating procedures and shall have final approval of any and all fire
protection agencies that apply to use the facility.
(Ord. 2014-1686, passed 6-16-2014)
§ 38-47  FEES ESTABLISHED.
   The city’s Fire Department shall have full responsibility for establishing
all fees required to be paid by fire protection agencies for the use of the
fire training facility and shall establish and maintain a separate bank account
for the deposit of all fees collected for the use of this facility.
(Ord. 2014-1686, passed 6-16-2014)
§§ 38-48 — 38.60  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2.  FIRE MERIT COMMISSION
§ 38-61  FIRE MERIT COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3.5 et seq., the Fire Merit Commission is hereby
established to administer the Fire Department merit system pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5 et seq. and this division.
(Ord. 2019-1812, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 38-62  APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF MERIT SYSTEM BY MEMBERS.
   (A)   Within 60 days after this division’s adoption, the Board of Public
Works shall give at least three weeks notice to all active members of the Fire
Department that a meeting of the members will be held to approve or reject this
merit system. The notice shall be given by posting it in prominent places in
all stations of the Fire Department. The notice must designate the time, place
and purpose of the meeting.
   (B)   A copy of this division shall be distributed to each active member of
the Fire Department at least one week before the date of the meeting.
   (C)   Only active members of the Fire Department may attend the meeting. At
the meeting, one of the active members shall be selected as chairman of the
meeting. All voting must be conducted by secret written ballot. Any other
procedures of the meeting may be determined by the Board of Public Works and
posted in accordance with subsection (a) of this section.
   (D)   If a majority of the active members of the Fire Department vote to
approve the merit system, the merit system takes effect on January 1, 2020. If
a majority of the active members vote to reject the merit system, another
proposal may not be put to a vote within one year after the day the meeting is
held.
(Ord. 2019-1812, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 38-63  EFFECT OF MERIT SYSTEM UPON RANK.
   After approval of the merit system, all members of the Fire Department are
entitled to the same ranks and pay grades the members held under the prior
system. Notwithstanding this section, the Fire Chief and upper level
policymaking positions will remain subject to appointment and removal by the
Mayor pursuant to § 38-65(A) of this section and I.C. 36-8-3.5-11.
(Ord. 2019-1812, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 38-64  FIRE MERIT COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   (A)   If a majority of the active members of the Fire Department vote to
approve the merit system, the merit system and the Fire Merit Commission are
both established. Appointments to the Fire Merit Commission shall be made by
March 1, 2020.
   (B)   (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3.5-6, the Commission shall consist of
five Commissioners appointed in the following manner:
         (a)   Two members shall be appointed by the Mayor. The members
appointed by the Mayor shall be members of different political parties;
         (b)   One member shall be appointed by the City Council; and
         (c)   Two members shall be elected by the active members of the Fire
Department. The members elected by the active members of the Fire Department
shall be members of different political parties.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, membership in a political party shall
be determined in accordance with the political affiliation restrictions of I.C.
36-8-3.5-6(a).
   (C)   To qualify as a Commissioner, the appointee must be at least 21 years
of age, must be of good moral character and must be a legal resident of the
city for three consecutive years immediately preceding the Commissioner’s term.
A Commissioner may not be an active member of the Fire Department or of another
police or fire department. Not more than two of the Commissioners may be past
members of a police or fire department. A person may not serve on the
Commission if the person receives any remuneration as salary from the city.
   (D)   A Commissioner serves at the pleasure of the appointing or electing
authority and may be removed at any time. The term of a Commissioner is four
years. However, one of the Mayor’s initial selections and one of the active
members’ initial selections are for terms of two years. Election and recall of
a Commissioner elected by the active members of the Fire Department shall be
conducted pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3.5-7 and 36-8-3.5-8.
   (E)   A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled within 30 days by the
appointing or electing authority. The selection is for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (F)   Before entering upon his or her duties, each Commissioner shall take
and subscribe an oath to conscientiously discharge the Commissioner’s duties.
The oath and affirmation shall be recorded and placed among the records of the
City Clerk.
(Ord. 2019-1812, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 38-65  MERIT COMMISSION’S AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Commission shall have authority, upon the advice and
recommendation of the Fire Department, to select and appoint persons to be
employed as members of the Fire Department (subject to applicable state
statutes), to promote members, and to issue disciplinary action to members,
including unpaid suspensions for periods greater than 40 hours, demotion, and
termination. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission shall not have
authority over the appointment or removal of members to the rank of Fire Chief
or other upper-level policy making positions.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall retain the authority to administer discipline to
Fire Department members up to and including 40 hours of unpaid suspension,
which authority may be exercised at the Chief’s discretion and without approval
of or review by the Commission.
   (C)   The Commission’s rules shall be adopted pursuant to and in accordance
with I.C. 36-8-3.5-10. Proceedings related to selection and appointment,
promotion, discipline, suspension, demotion, or dismissal of any member of the
Fire Department shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by I.C. 36-8-3.5 et
seq., and other applicable state statutes.
(Ord. 2019-1812, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 38-66  MERIT COMMISSION RULES.
   (A)   Within 30 days of the appointment of all Commissioners, the Commission
shall adopt rules to govern the Commission, including the time and place of
regular monthly meetings and special meetings that are necessary to transact
the business of the Commission.
   (B)   A majority of the Commissioners constitutes a quorum and a majority
vote of all the Commissioners is necessary to transact the business of the
Commission. Each year, the Commissioners shall select from among their number a
president, vice president, and secretary. The Commission shall keep a permanent
record of its proceedings.
   (C)   The Commission shall submit a proposed annual budget to city as other
budgets of the city are submitted. The City Council shall include in its budget
an amount sufficient for the necessary expenses of the Commission.
   (D)   The Commission shall act in accordance with this subchapter, I.C. 36-
8-3.5 et seq. and other state statutes governing merit commissions, as amended.
(Ord. 2019-1812, passed 11-18-2019)
CHAPTER 42: FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   ADMINISTRATION
         
III.   PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
         
IV.   VARIANCE PROCEDURES
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
42-1.   Statutory authorization
   
42-2.   Findings of fact
   
42-3.   Statement of purpose
   
42-4.   Objectives
   
42-5.   Definitions
   
42-6.   Lands to which chapter applies
   
42-7.   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
   
42-8.   Establishment of improvement location permit for floodplain development
   
42-9.   Compliance
   
42-10.   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
42-11.   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
   
42-12.   Interpretation
   
42-13.   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
42-14.   Penalties for violation
   
42-15.   Severability
   
42-16.   Effective date
   42-17. — 42-24.   Reserved
§ 42-1  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The state legislature has, in I.C. 36-7-4, granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the
City Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-2  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately flood-proofed or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-3  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
   (F)   Make federal flood insurance available for structures and their
contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-4  OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains; and
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood- prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-5  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both. In A ZONES, flood
waters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30,
Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are presented
below.
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown.
      (2)   ZONE AE and A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection.
      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-
construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood
hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection
system, such as dikes, dams and levees, to consider it complete for insurance
rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has
reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor area
400 square feet or less, permanently attached to the ground, and is located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation,
and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between
Kentucky and Indiana.
   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great.
   CRITICAL FACILITIES. Include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing
homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations,
installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous
waste.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements and the like;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as: the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings or
columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure’s
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in
flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to
as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention
ordinance and floodplain management requirements.
   FLOOD-PROOFING (DRY FLOOD-PROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is water-tight to the flood-proofed design elevation with walls
that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for non-
residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a Registered Professional Engineer or
Architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   HARDSHIP. As related to variances of this chapter, means the exceptional
hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The
Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual and
peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial HARDSHIP alone is
not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional HARDSHIP. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business
flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after 6-1-1997, will
include ICC COVERAGE.
   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new
flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month
adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management
regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR) and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are
presented below.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the
currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in
a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations and elevations.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision
by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement entryway
immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest elevation described among the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;
      (2)   The top of the basement floor;
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure;
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars; and
      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area,
each shall have openings on exterior walls;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value) or adjusted
assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929 AS CORRECTED IN 1929. A
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other than
a boundary river.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88) AS ADOPTED IN 1993. A
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR).
      (1)   An official republication of a community’s FEMA map to effect
changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain boundary
delineations, regulatory floodways and planimetric features.
      (2)   These changes typically occur as a result of structural works or
improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas or
correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the state’s Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in § 42-7 of this chapter. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the
term BASE FLOOD, ONE PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided
for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly
constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to
be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances that intended
to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-
prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the
city subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the city are
generally identified as such on the Morgan County, Indiana, and Incorporated
Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated 10-2-2014 as well as any future updates,
amendments or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-
A30, AH, AR, A99 or AO.)
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued; provided, the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual START means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage
of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “repetitive loss”
or “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements or any
alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a “historic structure”.
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification or other evidence of compliance required in this
chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FSRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). UNSHADED X ZONES (C Zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.
   ZONE B, C AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or
minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in
participating communities, but is not required by regulation in these zones.
(ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of ZONES B AND C.)
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-6  LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood-prone areas within the
planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city, including the extraterritorial
area commonly referred to as the “buffer zone”; provided, the extraterritorial
limits have been approved by the County Commissioners and further that the
county has granted Floodplain Administration in the extraterritorial area to
the city by interlocal agreement.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-7  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood.
   (B)   The best available regulatory flood data is listed below.
      (1)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city shall be as delineated on the
1% annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Morgan County,
Indiana, and Incorporated Areas and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map
dated 10-2-2014 as well as any future updates, amendments or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.
      (2)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for each
of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city, delineated as an “A Zone” on
the Morgan County, Indiana, and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map
dated 10-2-2014 as well as any future updates, amendments or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date,
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the state’s
Department of Natural Resources; provided, the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with
the best available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better
data that meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must
be submitted to the state’s Department of Natural Resources for review and
subsequently approved.
      (3)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community’s known flood-prone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the state’s
Department of Natural Resources; provided, the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile.
      (4)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-8  ESTABLISHMENT OF IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT FOR FLOODPLAIN
DEVELOPMENT.
   An improvement location permit, containing the information required by § 42-
26(A) of this chapter, shall be required in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas
of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-9  COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall
hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-11  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be
considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.
The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-12  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-13  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the city, the state’s Department of Natural Resources
or the state for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-14  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   Failure to obtain an improvement location permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a improvement location permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
      (2)   All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated
as such in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the city.
      (3)   All violations shall be punishable by a fine as given in §
94-241 of this code of ordinances and said fine shall be the same as said item
(f) in any amendments to §
94-241 of this code of ordinances (on the date of adoption of this item (f) is
given as not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, per day).
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation
continues to exist.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
   (D)   (1)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action, including injunctive relief, to prevent or remedy any
violations.
      (2)   All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons
responsible.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-15  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-16  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect on 10-2-2014 and replaces in
total prior Flood Hazard Ord. 96-1381 which is void as of the effective date of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§§ 42-17 — 42-24  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
42-25.   Designation of Administrator
   
42-26.   Permit procedures
   
42-27.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   42-28. — 42-39.   Reserved
§ 42-25  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Council hereby appoints the City Superintendent to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the
“Floodplain Administrator”. In the absence of the City Superintendent, the City
Engineer shall act as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-26  PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for an improvement location permit for floodplain
development shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by
him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be
limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment,
drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   A description of the proposed development;
         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams;
         (c)   A legal description of the property site;
         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;
         (e)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 83 or NGVD;
         (f)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential
structure will be flood-proofed; and
         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. If the watercourse
has a contributing drainage area of one square mile or greater, upstream from
the project, a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any
watercourse changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter
of Map Revision. (See § 42-27(F) of this chapter.) If the watercourse has a
contributing area of less than one square mile, a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering study is required and shall be submitted for review and approval to
the City Engineer or engineering consultant working for the city. When the City
Engineer has determined that the hydrologic and hydraulic study meets the
requirements of this chapter the study shall be approved and then shall be
submitted to FEMA as a Letter of Map Revision. The applicant submitting the
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study shall reimburse the city for the
cost of the engineering review. This cost is in addition to any other permit,
application or review fees charged by the city. In addition to these
requirements, a 401/404 permit may be required from the state’s Department of
Environmental Management and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated structure
or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD
elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. (The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the lowest floor elevation survey data submitted.) The applicant
shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said
corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the
project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation certification
shall be at the applicant’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
lowest floor elevation survey data submitted. The applicant shall correct any
deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the elevation
certification or failure to make correction required shall be cause to issue a
stop work order for the project.
         (b)   Upon establishment of the flood-proofed elevation of a flood-
proofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a flood-proofing certificate. Certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of an Indiana registered
professional engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator
shall, with the assistance of the City Engineer, review the flood-proofing
certification submitted.) The applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected
by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit
the flood- proofing certification or failure to make correction required shall
be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
      (3)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, an
elevation certification which depicts the “as-built” lowest floor elevation is
required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project
includes a flood-proofing measure, flood-proofing certification is required to
be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-27  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter,
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Review all improvement location permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations;
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
state’s Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§§
42-44 and
42-46(A) of this chapter, and maintain a record of such authorization (either
copy of actual permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment);
      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local improvement location permit. Copies of
such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the improvement
location permit;
      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway;
      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the state’s Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA;
      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change (LOMC),
copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization and floodplain analysis and
regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents
and “as-built” elevation and flood-proofing data for all buildings constructed
subject to this chapter;
      (8)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or Physical
Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community;
      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with §
42-26 of this chapter;
      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed in accordance with §
42-26 of this chapter;
      (13)   Stop work orders:
         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease; and
         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (14)   Revocation of permits:
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based; and
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§§ 42-28 — 42-39  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Section
   
42-40.   General standards
   
42-41.   Specific standards
   
42-42.   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
42-43.   Critical facility
   
42-44.   Standards for identified floodways
   
42-45.   Standards for identified fringe
   
42-46.   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways/fringes
   
42-47.   Standards for flood-prone areas
   42-48. — 42-59.   Reserved
§ 42-40  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs and known flood-prone areas, the following provisions are
required.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters and other service facilities shall be located at/
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps and other water-proofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   General. In addition to the requirements of §
42-40 of this chapter, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be
protected from flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement
applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area
greater than 400 square feet;
      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing structure (excluding the value of the land);
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred;
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days;
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning the existing
manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed
to avoid flood damage;
      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure; and
      (7)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a
previous addition or improvement constructed since the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.
   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of
any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor;
including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood
waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection (D)
below.
   (C)   Non-residential structures.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or non-residential structure (or manufactured home) shall either
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two
feet above the base flood elevation) or be flood-proofed to or above the FPG.
Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure,
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall
be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection (D) below.
      (2)   Structures located in all A Zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of
being elevated if done in accordance with the following.
         (a)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in §
42-27(B)(12) of this chapter.
         (b)   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
   (D)   Elevated structures.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures
shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.
      (2)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two
exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area);
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above
the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher;
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, they permit the automatic flow of flood waters
in both directions;
         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);
         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and
         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with the standard or
92% of the maximum density obtainable using the Modified Proctor Test. The
results of the test showing compliance shall be retained in permit file.
      (2)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the
structure before sloping below the BFE.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or
above the FPG.
   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements.
      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a
flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in subsection (D) above.
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (2)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in subsection (D) above.
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions);
or
         (c)   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated earlier
in this section.
   (G)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry flood-proofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet
the following standards:
      (1)   Shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   Shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
      (3)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or flood-proofed to or above the FPG; and
      (6)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as
required for elevated structures in subsection (D) above.
   (H)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-42  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-43  CRITICAL FACILITY.
   (A)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical
facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site
is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
   (B)   Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-44  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 42-7 of this chapter, are areas
designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of flood waters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and has
erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the state’s Department of
Natural Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway. Under
the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for construction in a floodway from the
state’s Department of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance of a
local building permit for any excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction
activity located in the floodway. This includes land preparation activities
such as filling, grading, clearing and paving and the like undertaken before
the actual start of construction of the structure. However, it does exclude
non-substantial additions/ improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a
non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of a non-
substantial addition/ improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river
floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the
state’s Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is
required from the state’s Department of Natural Resources.)
   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
state’s Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in
the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the state’s Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local improvement location permit,
provided the provisions contained in this article have been met. The
improvement location permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit for
construction in a floodway issued by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources. However, a community’s more restrictive regulations (if any) shall
take precedence.
   (C)   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination
with existing or future development, that will adversely affect the efficiency
of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse affect is
defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least
fifteen-hundredths of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood
elevation under the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway
condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees), the city shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping standard
regulations found at 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-45  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
   (A)   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local improvement location permit; provided, the
provisions contained in this article have been met.
   (B)   The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-46  STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile.
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the state’s Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment.
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the state’s Department of Natural Resources.
      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit
for construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development,
an improvement location permit may be issued; provided, the conditions of the
improvement location permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the state’s Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in this article have been met.
   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile.
      (1)   If the Floodplain Administrator, in consultation with the City
Engineer, determines that the improvements proposed on a site may be subject to
flooding by the 1% annual chance flood and/or the site is in an identified
floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been
determined, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide
an engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and 1% annual
chance flood elevation for the site. The engineering analysis shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval prior to issuance of an
improvement location permit.
         (a)   The applicant submitting an engineering analysis shall reimburse
the city for the cost of the engineering review.
         (b)   This cost is in addition to any other permit, application or
review fees charged by the city.
      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
improvement location permit; provided, the provisions contained in this article
have been met.
   (C)   Cumulative effect. The total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
shall not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and shall
not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-47  STANDARDS FOR FLOOD-PRONE AREAS.
   All development in known flood-prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or
where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as
required per this article.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§§ 42-48 — 42-59  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: VARIANCE PROCEDURES
Section
   
42-60.   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board
   
42-61.   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board
   
42-62.   Variance procedures
   
42-63.   Conditions for variances
   
42-64.   Variance notification
   
42-65.   Historic structures
   
42-66.   Special conditions
§ 42-60  DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-61  DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any
requirement, decision or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator
in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the County Circuit Court.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-62  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of
this chapter, and:
   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment of
transport of the flood waters at the site; and
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-63  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §§ 42-
44 and 42-46(A) of this chapter may be granted.
   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§ 42-44 and 42-46(A) of
this chapter will require a permit from the state’s Department of Natural
Resources.
   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
42-41 of this chapter may be granted only when a new structure is to be located
on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any
structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the state’s Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See §
42-64 of this chapter.)
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the state’s Department of Natural Resources upon request. (See §
42-64 of this chapter.)
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-64  VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood
protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the flood protection grade increases risks
to life and property.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-65  HISTORIC STRUCTURES.
   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 42-66  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in this article and the
purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-1688, passed 9-15-2014)
CHAPTER 46: LAW ENFORCEMENT
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   POLICE
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
46-1.   Accident report fee
   46-2. — 46-30.   Reserved
§ 46-1  ACCIDENT REPORT FEE.
   The Common Council, under the provisions of I.C. 9-29-11-1, does hereby give
the city’s Police Department the authority to charge the amount of $10 for each
accident report submitted to the Police Department. Said fee collected under
this section shall be deposited in a separate account to be known as the Law
Enforcement Training Fund (LETF), established by I.C. 5-2-8-2.
(Ord. 2002-1480, passed 3-4-2002)
§§ 46-2 — 46-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II:  POLICE
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
46-31.   Compensation
   
46-32.   Special police
   
46-33.   Pension Fund
   46-34. — 46-50.    Reserved
Division 2. Police Merit Commission
   
46-51.   Police Merit Commission established
   
46-52.   Approval or rejection of merit system by members
   
46-53.   Effect of merit system upon rank
   
46-54.   Police Merit Commission members
   
46-55.   Merit Commission’s authority
   
46-56.   Merit Commission rules
Statutory reference:
   Police department authorized, see I.C. 36-8-2-2
   Police generally, see I.C. 36-8-3-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 46-31  COMPENSATION.
   All police officers shall receive the compensation provided by law.
§ 46-32  SPECIAL POLICE.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to appoint special police. The members of the
special police shall serve as such for such time as may be designated by the
Mayor.
   (B)   Special police officers shall not be considered to be police for
pension and retirement purposes and they need not have the same qualifications
as regular police officers.
   (C)   The special police shall receive such compensation as may be provided
by law.
   (D)   All special police officers, while acting as such, shall have the same
powers and duties as regular police officers.
§ 46-33  PENSION FUND.
   There is established a Police Officers’ Pension Fund, to be administered by
a Board of Trustees in accordance with law.
Statutory reference:
   Police pensions, see I.C. 36-8-6-1 et seq., I.C. 36-8-8-1 et seq.
§§ 46-34 — 46-50  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. POLICE MERIT COMMISSION
§ 46-51  POLICE MERIT COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3.5 et seq., a Police Merit Commission is hereby
established to administer the Police Department merit system pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5 et seq. and this subchapter.
(Ord. 2019-1811, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 46-52  APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF MERIT SYSTEM BY MEMBERS.
   (A)   Within 60 days after this division’s adoption, the Board of Public
Works shall give at least three weeks notice to all active members of the
Police Department that a meeting of the members will be held to approve or
reject this merit system. The notice shall be given by posting it in prominent
places in all stations of the Police Department. The notice must designate the
time, place and purpose of the meeting.
   (B)   A copy of this division shall be distributed to each active member of
the Police Department at least one week before the date of the meeting.
   (C)   Only active members of the Police Department may attend the meeting.
At the meeting, one of the active members shall be selected as chairperson of
the meeting. All voting must be conducted by secret written ballot. Any other
procedures of the meeting may be determined by the Board of Public Works and
posted in accordance with § 46-52(A) of this division.
   (D)   If a majority of the active members of the Police Department vote to
approve the merit system, the merit system takes effect on January 1, 2020. If
a majority of the active members vote to reject the merit system, another
proposal may not be put to a vote within one year after the day the meeting is
held.
(Ord. 2019-1811, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 46-53  EFFECT OF MERIT SYSTEM UPON RANK.
   After approval of the merit system, all members of the Police Department are
entitled to the same ranks and pay grades the members held under the prior
system. Notwithstanding this section, the Chief of Police and upper level
policymaking positions will remain subject to appointment and removal by the
Mayor pursuant to § 46-55(A) of this division and I.C. 36-8-3.5-11.
(Ord. 2019-1811, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 46-54  POLICE MERIT COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   (A)   If a majority of the active members of the Police Department vote to
approve the merit system, the merit system and the Police Merit Commission are
both established. Appointments to the Police Merit Commission shall be made by
March 1,2020.
   (B)   (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3.5-6, the Commission shall consist of
five Commissioners appointed in the following manner:
         (a)   Two members shall be appointed by the Mayor. The members
appointed by the Mayor shall be members of different political parties;
         (b)   One member shall be appointed by the City Council; and
         (c)   Two members shall be elected by the active members of the Police
Department. The members elected by the active members of the Police Department
shall be members of different political parties.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, membership in a political party shall
be determined in accordance with the political affiliation restrictions of I.C.
36-8-3.5-6(a).
   (C)   To qualify as a Commissioner, the appointee must be at least  21 years
of age, must be of good moral character and must be a legal resident of the
city for three consecutive years immediately preceding the Commissioner’s term.
A Commissioner may not be an active member of the Police Department or of
another police or fire department. Not more than two of the Commissioners may
be past members of a police or fire department. A person may not serve on the
Commission if the person receives any remuneration as salary from the city.
   (D)   A Commissioner serves at the pleasure of the appointing or electing
authority and may be removed at any time. The term of a Commissioner is four
years. However, one of the Mayor’s initial selections and one of the active
members’ initial selections are for terms of two years. Election and recall of
a Commissioner elected by the active members of the Police Department shall be
conducted pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3.5-7 and 36-8-3.5-8.
   (E)   A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled within 30 days by the
appointing or electing authority. The selection is for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (F)   Before entering upon his or her duties, each Commissioner shall take
and subscribe an oath to conscientiously discharge the Commissioner’s duties.
The oath and affirmation shall be recorded and placed among the records of the
City Clerk.
(Ord. 2019-1811, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 46-55  MERIT COMMISSION’S AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Commission shall have authority, upon the advice and
recommendation of the Chief of Police, to select and appoint persons to be
employed as members of the Police Department (subject to applicable state
statutes), to promote members, and to issue disciplinary action to members,
including unpaid suspensions for periods greater than 40 hours, demotion, and
termination. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission shall not have
authority over the appointment or removal of members to the rank of Chief of
Police or other upper-level policy making positions.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall retain the authority to administer
discipline to Police Department members up to and including 40 hours of unpaid
suspension, which authority may be exercised at the Chief’s discretion and
without approval of or review by the Commission.
   (C)   The Commission’s rules shall be adopted pursuant to and in accordance
with I.C. 36-8-3.5-10. Proceedings related to selection and appointment,
promotion, discipline, suspension, demotion, or dismissal of any member of the
Police Department shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by I.C. 36-8-3.5
et seq., and other applicable state statutes.
(Ord. 2019-1811, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 46-56  MERIT COMMISSION RULES.
   (A)   Within 30 days of the appointment of all Commissioners, the Commission
shall adopt rules to govern the Commission, including the time and place of
regular monthly meetings and special meetings that are necessary to transact
the business of the Commission.
   (B)   A majority of the Commissioners constitutes a quorum and a majority
vote of all the Commissioners is necessary to transact the business of the
Commission. Each year, the Commissioners shall select from among their number a
president, vice president and secretary. The Commission shall keep a permanent
record of its proceedings.
   (C)   The Commission shall submit a proposed annual budget to city as other
budgets of the city are submitted. The City Council shall include in its budget
an amount sufficient for the necessary expenses of the Commission.
   (D)   The Commission shall act in accordance with this division, I.C. 36-8-
3.5 et seq. and other state statutes governing merit commissions, as amended.
(Ord. 2019-1811, passed 11-18-2019)
CHAPTER 50: OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISION
Section
   
50-1.   Discharge of weapons
   
50-2.   Slingshots
   
50-3.   Obstruction of ditches, drains or gutters
Statutory reference:
   Authority to protect public health, safety and welfare, see I.C. 36-8-2-4
   Municipal home rule, see I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq.
§ 50-1  DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or airgun, BB gun or any toy
gun projecting lead, or any other type of missiles capable of producing injury
to the human body, in and about the territorial and jurisdictional boundaries
of the city, except in a regularly established shooting gallery or range.
However, this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law
from discharging a firearm in the performance of his or her duty; nor to any
citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his or her person or
property, or the property of another that is in that person’s care and custody.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not less
than $50.
(Ord. 1170, passed 8-6-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Weapons, see I.C. 35-47-1-1 et seq.
§ 50-2  SLINGSHOTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use any slingshot.
§ 50-3  OBSTRUCTION OF DITCHES, DRAINS OR GUTTERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause or suffer the
obstruction of any city ditch, drain or gutter.
CHAPTER 54: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
54-1.   Department of Parks and Recreation established; Parks and Recreation
Board
   
54-2.   Smoking in city parks
   
54-3.   Speed limit at Martinsville Jimmy Nash City Park
§ 54-1  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION ESTABLISHED; PARKS AND RECREATION
BOARD.
   (A)   The Common Council does adopt and reaffirm I.C. § 36-10-3 et seq. as
the controlling statute for the operation of the Board of Parks and Recreation;
the Department of Parks and Recreation and the Park District.
   (B)   The Park District is set forth pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-19 and
adopted.
   (C)   The Board of Parks and Recreation is established.
   (D)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall consist of four members to be
appointed by the city executive. The members shall be appointed on the basis of
their interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation.
   (E)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed as follows
pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3 et seq.:
      (1)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall consist of four members to
be appointed by the Mayor. The members shall be appointed on the basis of their
interest and knowledge of parks and recreation.
      (2)   Initial appointments to the Board of Parks and Recreation are as
follows:
         (a)   One member for a term of one year;
         (b)   One member for a term of two years;
         (c)   One member for a term of three years; and
         (d)   One member for a term of four years.
      (3)   As a term expires, each new appointment is for a four-year term.
All terms expire on the first Monday in January, but a member continues in
office until the member’s successor is appointed.
   (F)   The composition of the Board of Parks and Recreation shall include one
ex-officio member, as set forth in I.C. 36-10-3-4 being a member:
      (1)   Of the governing body of the school corporation selected by that
body; or
      (2)   An individual who resides in the school corporation, selected by
the governing body of the school corporation.
   (G)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall operate pursuant to I.C. 36-
10-3 et seq.
(Ord. 2018-532, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 54-2  SMOKING IN CITY PARKS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health
and welfare by prohibiting smoking in city parks.
   (B)   City park facilities. All city park properties, including the Jimmy
Nash City Park, the Mulberry Street Park, the Doris Daily Park, Victory Park,
Southview Property Area and Robin Road Acreage are included in and subject to
the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Enclosed areas as well as open areas. All smoking and vaping of any
form shall be prohibited in all enclosed and outdoor areas within the above
mentioned city parks.
   (D)   Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the city, including the
city’s Police Department, as well as the city’s Code Enforcement, Director of
Public Works and Board of Public Works and Safety and their authorized
assignees to enforce this section.
   (E)   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
fine of $50.
      (2)   In addition to the fine established by this section, violation of
this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by
the city’s Board of Works by restraining order, preliminary and permanent
injunctions or by other means provided for by law, and the city may take action
to recover costs of the nuisance abatement.
      (3)   Each day on which a violation of this section occurs shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation.
      (4)   The City Court and/or other court of competent jurisdiction shall
have jurisdiction over such violations and penalties.
(Ord. 2017-1735, passed 1-17-2017)
§ 54-3  SPEED LIMIT AT MARTINSVILLE JIMMY NASH CITY PARK.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to amend the posted speed
limit and to establish a new speed limit on all roadways located within the
Martinsville Jimmy Nash City Park.
   (B)   New speed limit. From the date that this section is published, the
speed limit at the Martinsville Jimmy Nash City Park shall be ten mph and that
speed limit shall be posted at various locations within the park.
   (C)   Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the city, including the
city’s Police Department, as well as the safety officer appointed for the city
parks, the Board of Public Works and Safety and any other authorized assignee
appointed to enforce this section.
   (D)   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   A person who violates this section shall be guilty of an
infraction, which is punishable by a fine of $150.
      (2)   The City Court and/or other court of competent jurisdiction shall
have jurisdiction over such violations and penalties.
(Ord. 2017-1740, passed 3-13-2017)
CHAPTER 58: PLANNING
Section
   
58-1.   Plan Commission established
   
58-2.   Time for hearings by Plan Commission
   
58-3.   Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals procedure for notice
Statutory reference:
   Plan commissions, see I.C. 36-7-4-202 et seq.
   Planning generally, see I.C. 36-7-4-100 et seq.
§ 58-1  PLAN COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   There is established an advisory Plan Commission.
§ 58-2  TIME FOR HEARINGS BY PLAN COMMISSION.
   The Plan Commission shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing upon matters
coming before it in connection with rezoning, subdivision control or other
matters as it may deem appropriate.
(Ord. 97-1391, passed 1-6-1997)
§ 58-3  PLAN COMMISSION AND BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS PROCEDURE FOR NOTICE.
   This section applies to notices given by the Plan Commission and Board of
Zoning Appeals. Public notice shall be given in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1
(I.C. 5-3-1-1 et seq.) and due notice given both by publication and by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the public and, in particular, to
each adjoining or abutting property owner, to the subject real estate
disregarding any streets, highways, alleys or other public property in
determining abutting real estate, all of which notices shall be served at least
ten days prior to the hearing as scheduled by the appropriate board. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall present the notice as issued, both for
publication and to adjoining property owners, together with an affidavit of
mailing and the return receipts for all mailed notices. Further, the petitioner
shall give notice to the board members of the appropriate board by regular
mail, including a copy of the petition and any attachments, at least five days
prior to the hearing date.
(Ord. 97-1391, passed 1-6-1997)
CHAPTER 62: SECONDHAND GOODS
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   62-1. — 62-30.   Reserved
§§ 62-1 — 62-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II:  PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
62-31.   Definitions
   
62-32.   Recordkeeping
   
62-33.   Inspection of records
   
62-34.   Retention of items
   
62-35.   Transactions with minors
   62-36. — 62-55.   Reserved
Division 2. License
   
62-56.   Required
   
62-57.   Application procedure
   
62-58.   Standard for issuance of license
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 62-31  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER or SOLICITOR. Any person who, as the duly authorized
representative or agent of a dealer, shall canvass or solicit for the
secondhand purchase or acquisition of any item containing any precious metal.
   PRECIOUS METAL. Gold, silver or platinum, alone or in combination, including
coins.
   PRECIOUS METAL DEALER. A person engaged in the business of purchasing or
acquiring secondhand any item containing any precious metal.
   WORKING DAYS. Any Monday through Friday of any week, excluding holidays
recognized by the city.
§ 62-32  RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Each precious metal dealer shall keep a record, on such standard form
as the Clerk-Treasurer shall furnish, of each transaction involving the
secondhand purchase of any item containing a precious metal. The form shall be
prepared in duplicate. The original shall be retained by the dealer, and the
duplicate shall be filed by the dealer with the Police Department by the close
of business on the first working day after the completion of the transaction.
   (B)   The dealer must maintain and record the date, time and amount paid for
each transaction.
   (C)   The dealer must maintain and record the description of each item
purchased, to include:
      (1)   Name of manufacturer;
      (2)   Serial number;
      (3)   Distinguishing marks;
      (4)   Weight; and
      (5)   Pattern or setting of any precious or semi-precious stones.
   (D)   The dealer must maintain and record the description of each seller, to
include:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Address;
      (3)   Date of birth;
      (4)   Age;
      (5)   Hair;
      (6)   Race;
      (7)   Sex;
      (8)   Height;
      (9)   Weight;
      (10)   Build;
      (11)   General appearance;
      (12)   Distinguishing marks; and
      (13)   Social Security number.
§ 62-33  INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   The original record of each secondhand transaction in any item
containing any precious metal shall be subject to inspection and examination by
any member of the Police Department and any member of the Police Department
shall be permitted to examine and inspect any and all items purchased by a
precious metal dealer which fall within the scope of this article.
   (B)   There is specifically excepted from the terms of this article any
transaction by a person engaged in business within the city who is either
accepting returns for cash, credit or replacement of any item originally
purchased from that person, or exchanging an item for another item of greater
value. In addition, the terms of this article shall not include any purchase by
a retailer from a bona fide manufacturer, nor any banking institution licensed
to do business in the state.
§ 62-34  RETENTION OF ITEMS.
   It shall be the duty of each precious metal dealer to retain each and every
item containing a precious metal purchased secondhand by him or her in the same
state or condition in which it was received, at the place of business where
purchased, for a period of not less than ten complete working days, which time
period shall begin to run on the first working day following transfer of the
duplicate record of the transaction to the Police Department. Furthermore, the
article may not be resold, exchanged, altered or otherwise disposed of during
the ten-day retention period.
§ 62-35  TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS.
   No precious metal dealer shall transact any business involving a secondhand
purchase of an item containing a precious metal from a minor unless such minor
is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
§§ 62-36 — 62-55  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
§ 62-56  REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person who carries on business as a precious metal dealer shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity with the city.
   (B)   The license fee for the license required by this section shall be as
prescribed in § 34-466 of this code of ordinances and may be redetermined from
time to time by the Common Council.
   (C)   The license fee shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer upon the filing
of an application for a license.
   (D)   If the license is denied, the license fee, less $25 for the cost of
the license investigation and inspection procedure, shall be returned to the
applicant.
   (E)   All licenses issued under this article shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance.
§ 62-57  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this article shall file a
written, sworn application with the Clerk-Treasurer. This application shall be
signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership or
by the president if a corporation. Applications shall be made on forms
available in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   The application shall state:
      (1)   The name and address and Social Security number of the applicant;
      (2)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time it is proposed to be
earned on in the city, and the local address of such individual, the permanent
address of such individual and the capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on and, if a corporation, the officers and directors
of the corporation and the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period during which the applicant desires to carry on
business; and
      (5)   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime and,
if so, the nature of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
§ 62-58  STANDARD FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application form prescribed by § 62-57 of
this chapter, the Clerk-Treasurer shall forward such application to the Chief
of Police or his or her assistant, who shall perform a criminal record check on
any person named in the application and review for accuracy all information
contained in the application within 20 days of receipt of such application.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall approve the application unless such
investigation discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s
business would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals
or general welfare; in particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has:
      (1)   Been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to precious
metal dealers;
      (4)   Committed prior fraudulent acts;
      (5)   A record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; or
      (6)   An unsatisfactory moral character.
CHAPTER 66: SOLID WASTE
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
66-1.   Solid waste disposal unit fees
   66-2. — 66-30.   Reserved
§ 66-1  SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL UNIT FEES.
   In accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-30-21, the Common Council
does hereby establish and maintain just and equitable fees for the use of and
the services rendered by the facilities of the solid waste disposal units as
prescribed in § 34-501 of this code of ordinances.
§§ 66-2 — 66-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
66-31.   Definitions
   
66-32.   Installation of garbage disposal
   
66-33.   Collection of trash
   
66-34.   Penalties
   
66-35.   Board of Public Works and Safety; supervision and control
   
66-36.   Violations
   
66-37.   Open burning
   
66-38.   Trash to be deposited and contained; accumulation of trash prohibited
   
66-39.   Unsanitary deposits
   
66-40.   Bulk household items
   
66-41.   Yard wastes
   
66-42.   Recyclables
   
66-43.   Recycling locations
   66-44. — 66-65.   Reserved
Division 2. Containers
   
66-66.   Authorized trash container specifications
   
66-67.   Number and size of containers
   
66-68.   Trash containers to be covered
   
66-69.   Placement of trash containers
   
66-70.   Unlawful use of container; deposits of trash by non-residents
prohibited
   
66-71.   Trash picking
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 66-31  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL UNIT. A store, retail or wholesale business, warehouse,
industrial plant, professional office, bank, restaurant, hotel or motel.
   DEPOSITOR. A person who places or directs trash to be placed in a receptacle
in which he or she is entitled to place trash, as required in this article.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY UNIT. A building or part of a building designed or used as
an apartment house, apartment complex, tenement house or other residential use,
which structure is used or intended to be used for occupancy by more than one
family.
   SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT. A house, apartment or mobile home designed and intended
for one-family occupancy.
   TRASH. Paper and paper products, empty tin cans, empty bottles, empty glass
containers, any off-falls from kitchen and cooking and plastic products.
Exceptions are as follows:
      (1)   Liquids;
      (2)   Liquid or water-carried wastes, which are normally disposed of in
sanitary sewer systems;
      (3)   Hazardous and biohazardous wastes;
      (4)   Bulk building material, including, but not limited to, lumber,
drywall, roofing, carpet, blocks, concrete, brick and the like;
      (5)   Appliances (i.e., refrigerators, freezers, water heaters, air
conditioners, dehumidifiers, washers, dryers, stoves, dishwashers and any other
refrigerated appliances);
      (6)   Automobile parts and accessories, tires and batteries;
      (7)   Fences or fencing material;
      (8)   Bulk household items (i.e., furniture, household fixtures, box
springs, mattresses and/or any similar items); and
      (9)   Yard waste, not to be mixed with trash (i.e., grass clippings,
brush, tree limbs, stumps, shrubs, leaves or any other vegetation).
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-32  INSTALLATION OF GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   The owner of every new dwelling unit containing a kitchen, including mobile
homes, and each dwelling unit for which a building permit to remodel or add a
kitchen is issued, shall cause a garbage grinder connected with the sanitary
sewer to be installed prior to use and occupancy for living or residential
purposes.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-33  COLLECTION OF TRASH.
   (A)   Single-family unit. The city shall systematically collect, remove and
dispose of trash from all single-family units, including mobile homes, which
units are located within the corporate boundaries of the city.
   (B)   Multiple-family unit.
      (1)   The city shall systematically collect, remove and dispose of all
trash from multiple-family units located within the corporate boundaries of the
city; provided, the trash is bagged and brought to the city street curbside.
      (2)   Multiple-family units located within the business district (i.e.,
one block in each direction of the court house square) are exempt from trash
collection.
   (C)   Commercial unit. The city shall not collect, remove or dispose of any
trash from a commercial unit located within the corporate boundaries of the
city.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-34  PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this article, for
each such offense, may be subject to imposition of a fine of at least $50.
   (B)   First offenders may be given a warning.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-35  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY; SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   In accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-30-7, the administration and
operation of all facilities for the collection of trash, including the
scheduling of the hours and days of the week for collection of trash, shall be
under the supervision and control of the Board of Public Works and Safety of
the city; and such Board shall adopt rules for the use and operation of the
city’s facilities for collection of trash, pursuant to its authority under I.C.
36-9-30-12.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-36  VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It will be considered a violation of this article for any person to
discard trash in unapproved bags or containers, or to leave trash on any public
or private property, unless specifically authorized to do so. It shall also be
a violation of this article for any person to tamper with any approved
containers.
   (B)   In addition to the fine imposed for the violation of any provision of
this article, the violator shall also be liable to the city for all damages and
expenses incurred by the city by reason of such violation in a civil action
brought for such purpose.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-37  OPEN BURNING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned leaves,
grass or brush between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. All burning shall
be contained in a barrel or other appropriate container having a grate, wire
mesh or other similar cover. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
burn or cause to be burned, at any time, asphalt, building materials, tires,
rubber or plastic materials, garbage, rubbish or any like or similar materials.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-38  TRASH TO BE DEPOSITED AND CONTAINED; ACCUMULATION OF TRASH PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   Every person generating trash shall, unless another satisfactory
means of disposal is utilized, cause the trash to be deposited and contained in
bags for that purpose.
      (2)   No trash shall be allowed to remain exposed in any building or on
any premises longer than shall be reasonably necessary to remove and deposit
the trash in proper containers.
      (3)   In addition, any kitchen scraps shall be double-wrapped for
disposal.
   (B)   No person shall keep or permit to accumulate on his or her premises or
on any property, public or private, or shall throw or cast upon any property,
public or private, ditch, lake, stream, creek or waterway any garbage, trash,
refuse or other offensive or unwholesome matter.
   (C)   (1)   Residents of the city may dispose of their own trash at the area
trash collection site.
      (2)   A charge will be assessed for this service at the site, which shall
be forwarded to the operator of the site.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-39  UNSANITARY DEPOSITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any property any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. Animal waste consisting of dog
feces and cat litter must be double-bagged.
   (B)   No person shall dispose of, for collection, any needles, syringes,
lancets or sharp objects unless they are placed in a hard plastic or metal
container with a screw-on or tightly-secured lid. Broken glass shall be
disposed of in a marked container with no sharp edges exposed. Medications are
not to be placed in trash, but shall be flushed down the sanitary sewer.
   (C)   No person shall dispose of, for collection, any soiled bandages,
diapers, disposable sheets or medical gloves, unless they are placed in a
secured fastened double plastic bag.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Litter control, see I.C. 35-45-3-2
§ 66-40  BULK HOUSEHOLD ITEMS.
   Bulk household items shall be picked up three times a year (i.e., spring,
midsummer and fall).
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-41  YARD WASTES.
   The city shall pick up grass clippings, brush, tree limbs, stumps, shrubs,
leaves or any other vegetation. Grass clippings must be bagged and cannot be
mixed with trash. Leaves shall be raked to the curbside and not bagged, or as
directed by the Mayor or the City Superintendent.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-42  RECYCLABLES.
   Newsprint, aluminum beverage cans, bimetal and ferrous cans, plastic
containers and glass are recyclable materials. A site is available if residents
wish to transport their own recyclable materials.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-43  RECYCLING LOCATIONS.
   (A)   The county senior center at 159 West Morgan Street will be the
recycling center for the city. Citizens may deposit aluminum cans and newsprint
at such location. The profits of such to go to county senior citizens.
   (B)   The city will furnish advertising for the purpose of promoting such
program. Cost of such advertising shall be paid from newsprint revenue already
received from curbside pickup. Mailing costs will be absorbed by the senior
center.
   (C)   The city will continue curbside pickup of aluminum cans and newsprint,
the first week of each month. All profits will be donated to the senior center,
less the expense incurred by the city, a maximum amount of which will be $250
per month.
   (D)   The city will furnish a location for two trucks, one of which will be
for newsprint and the other for aluminum cans. The trucks will be furnished by
the buyers. The senior center is to furnish the manpower for loading of trucks.
(Ord. 1068, passed 5-19-1980)
§§ 66-44 — 66-65  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. CONTAINERS
§ 66-66  AUTHORIZED TRASH CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.
   To be eligible for collection by the city, trash must be contained within
trash bags not to exceed 33- gallon capacity and at sufficient strength to
handle the weight limit. Bags shall contain no more than 35 pounds of trash.
Bags shall be placed in 32-gallon or less covered containers at curbside only
if an animal problem exists in the immediate area. Absolutely no loose trash
will be picked up. All trash must be in plastic bags and all bags must be
securely tied.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-67  NUMBER AND SIZE OF CONTAINERS.
   All trash containers shall have a capacity of not less than five gallons,
nor more than 33 gallons, for each separate family resident upon the premises.
The containers for each premises shall be of sufficient number and capacity to
contain all trash that may accumulate on the premises during the usual
intervals between collections.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-68  TRASH CONTAINERS TO BE COVERED.
   All trash containers shall be kept covered at all times, except when being
filled or emptied.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-69  PLACEMENT OF TRASH CONTAINERS.
   (A)   During periods of collection, all trash containers shall be placed at
curbside, or in the tree plot, or in some other place located in the public
right-of-way; but no such container shall be placed in the street, sidewalk or
public thoroughfare, or in such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   (B)   On the day of trash collection, trash shall be placed curbside prior
to 7:00 a.m., but not earlier than 6:00 p.m., on the date preceding the
scheduled collection.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-70  UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTAINER; DEPOSITS OF TRASH BY NON-RESIDENTS
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit trash into or adjacent to the
trash container of another person. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any
person who is a non-resident of the city to deposit trash generated outside the
city into or adjacent to any trash container located within the corporate
limits of the city.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 66-71  TRASH PICKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the depositor or any city
employee acting in his or her capacity, or any authorized private scavenger to
pick, sort, take, disturb or carry away any substance found in a trash
container. Exception shall be made for the three times a year when the city
picks up bulk household items.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
CHAPTER 70: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   EXCAVATIONS
         
III.   PARADES
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
70-1.   Superintendent of Streets
   
70-2.   Unloading on streets and sidewalks
   
70-3.   Street and sidewalk obstruction
   
70-4.   Materials on streets and sidewalks
   
70-5.   Structures overhanging sidewalks
   
70-6.   Sidewalks; removal of ice and snow
   70-7. — 70-40.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   General authority relative to streets and sidewalks, see I.C. 36-9-2-5 et
seq.
   Municipal home rule, see I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq.
§ 70-1  SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS.
   There is hereby established the position of Superintendent of Streets, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Superintendent of Streets shall have
charge of all streets and shall have such other powers and duties as may be
assigned to him or her by the Mayor; he or she shall be under the direction and
control of the Mayor at all times.
§ 70-2  UNLOADING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place or public way, without first placing some
sufficient protection over the pavement.
§ 70-3  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
within the city by erecting any fence, building or other obstruction or
permitting any fence, building or other obstruction to remain on such place.
Each day any such fence, building or other obstruction is permitted to remain
upon such public way or public place shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 70-4  MATERIALS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
within the city, permitting it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with its free and
unobstructed use.
§ 70-5  STRUCTURES OVERHANGING SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to suspend, hang, erect, place or
maintain any awning, canvas, cloth, sign or advertisement, of any kind over or
above any sidewalk at a height lower than seven feet above such sidewalk, as
measured from the lowest point or position of such awning, canvas, cloth, sign
or advertisement.
§ 70-6  SIDEWALKS; REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each parcel of real
estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the sidewalk abutting his
or her premises free and clear of snow and ice; and it shall be the duty of
such owner or occupant to remove all snow and ice accumulated on such parcel
within a reasonable time, which will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after the
abatement of any storm during which the snow and ice may have accumulated.
§§ 70-7 — 70-40  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: EXCAVATIONS
Section
   
70-41.   Purpose
   
70-42.   License required
   
70-43.   Permit for excavations
   
70-44.   Fees
   
70-45.   Public safety, workmanship and restoration
   
70-46.   Penalty
   70-47. — 70-80.   Reserved
§ 70-41  PURPOSE.
   The city monitors all work conducted in the streets and street right-of-ways
through the permitting process. The process allows the city to coordinate
activities and other utilities, to maintain a record of street cuts and patches
and identify specific city requirements.
(Ord. 2017-1751, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 70-42  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each person or entity to perform work within a city right-of-way must
obtain a license and must meet the following additional requirements:
      (1)   Minimum insurance amounts shall be $1,000,000 for combined bodily
injury and property damage, $1,000,000 for any occurrence relative to which
there is injury or death to one or more persons, and $100,000 for property
damage;
      (2)   Minimum bond amount shall be $25,000; and
      (3)   Follow all standards and guidelines established by the Board of
Public Works and Safety for performing work within the public right-of-way.
   (B)   The city, when performing work with its own employees, or on behalf of
itself, is exempt from this article. Also, private homeowners who wish to plant
trees within the public right-of-way, may do so without a permit, as long as
they have properly followed the law and called in their activities to Indiana
Underground and have utilities marked prior to planting the tree, and that the
tree is an approved tree for planting in the city’s tree plot.
(Ord. 2017-1751, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 70-43  PERMIT FOR EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall dig up, cut into, improve, repair, obstruct, or remove
any portion of the city right-of-way, for any purpose whatsoever, except in
cases of emergency, unless application is made to the City Engineer for
permission therefore. All applications shall state the full name and address of
the applicant, shall verify a valid license issued, shall designate the place,
extent, and purpose of such work, and shall be accompanied by a fee as
hereinafter provided. At the request of the City Engineer, applicant shall
additionally submit complete plans and specifications for the proposed work
within the right-of-way.
   (B)   Upon proper application, payment of fee, and verification of license,
the City Engineer shall issue a permit authorizing the applicant to work within
the specified right-of-way for the specified purpose. Such permit shall
designate the extent of such work and the length of time for which permission
is granted, as well as all standards and specifications that must be followed.
A copy of such permit shall be retained by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2017-1751, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 70-44  FEES.
   (A)   For each permit to engage in working in a right-of-way of this city,
in addition to making application in writing to the City Engineer, the person
or entity shall pay to the city a base fee in the amount of $75 and an
additional amount equal to $.50 per square foot for every square foot of
surface area excavated in excess of 100 square feet per cut, all of which fee
shall be referred to as the base fee.
   (B)   In addition, the following fees will be added:
      (1)   Any work which requires the closing of a street to vehicular
traffic will have an additional charge of $100 per day of road closure;
      (2)   Any work taking place on, over or under the road surface of a
street designated as a major thoroughfare, or any street within the Downtown
Business District, will have an additional charge equal to 50% of the sum of
the base fee and the road closure fee. A list of the affected streets shall be
on file in the Office of the City Engineer; and
      (3)   Any work taking place on, over or under a street that has been
reconstructed or resurfaced within the last three years will have an additional
charge equal to 50% of the sum of the base fee and the road closure fee. A list
of the affected streets shall be on file in the Office of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2017-1751, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 70-45  PUBLIC SAFETY, WORKMANSHIP AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   The person or entity to whom a permit has been issued shall erect and
maintain, at its expense, all necessary guards and danger signals; shall
furnish all necessary watchmen to protect the public and the work during its
progress; shall assume all liability, and indemnify and hold harmless the city,
for accident or damage to person or property that may occur in the course of or
by reason of the work.
   (B)   All work performed shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the city. A copy of these standards and specifications shall
be on file in the Office of the City Engineer.
   (C)   Upon completion of work, the permittee shall remove from the right-of-
way all unused material, refuse and dirt placed in the vicinity of the work.
(Ord. 2017-1751, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 70-46  PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this
article shall be financially responsible for any necessary repairs and other
costs associated with the proper restoration of the public right-of-way or
facility. All licensees found to be in violation of the provisions herein shall
also be subject to revocation or nonrenewal by the Board of Public Works and
Safety of the city license to engage in such work. In addition, said person or
entity violating any of the provisions herein shall be fined not more than $500
per day. Each day’s continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-1751, passed 8-7-2017)
§§ 70-47 — 70-80  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: PARADES
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
70-81.   Definitions
   
70-82.   Public conduct during parades
   70-83. — 70-105.   Reserved
Division 2. Permit
   
70-106.   Required
   
70-107.   Application
   
70-108.   Standard for issuance
   
70-109.   Notice of rejection of permit
   
70-110.   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
70-111.   Contents
   
70-112.   Duties of permittee
   
70-113.   Revocation
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on highways,
see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(3)
   Marching band parades, see I.C. 9-21-14-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 70-81  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRUISING. The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a continuous or
nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk, park or
other public place in the city, or cruising.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this article.
   PARKING LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers.
§ 70-82  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, except a police car
or other emergency vehicle, shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.
   (C)   Parking on parade route.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or
other public thoroughfare or part constituting a part of the route of a parade.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
of such signs.
      (3)   No person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public
thoroughfare unposted in violation of this article.
§§ 70-83 — 70-105  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
§ 70-106  REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing the conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities; and/or
      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
§ 70-107  APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer.
   (B)   An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Chief of
Police not less than five days nor more than 60 days before the date on which
it is proposed to conduct the parade.
   (C)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles that will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any assembly area;
      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file
with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the person authorizing
the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; and
      (13)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
§ 70-108  STANDARD FOR ISSUANCE.
   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the
application and from other information obtained, he or she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the contiguous areas as to prevent normal police protection to the city;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
contiguous areas;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event, and is not designated to be held purely for private
profit; and/or
   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval in
writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of the
parking lot which is the site of the parade.
§ 70-109  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall act on the application for a parade permit
within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, after the date the
application was filed.
   (B)   If he or she disapproves the application, he or she shall give notice
of his or her action to the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for his
or her denial of the permit.
§ 70-110  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit in writing to the Common Council. The written notice of appeal shall be
filed within 30 days after the date of written notice of the denial. The Common
Council shall act on the written notice of appeal within 30 days after receipt
of such notice.
§ 70-111  CONTENTS.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public place to be
traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions of miles; and
   (G)   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this article.
§ 70-112  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson
or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit
on his or her person during the conduct of the parade.
§ 70-113  REVOCATION.
   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued under this division on application of the standards for issuance as set
forth in this division.
CHAPTER 74: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
74-1.   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 74-1  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s storm water management regulations are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 2013-1680, passed 8-19-2013)
CHAPTER 78: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
         
III.   VEHICLE OPERATION
         
IV.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
         
V.   BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
         
VI.   GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
78-1.   Definitions
   
78-2.   Drivers of government vehicles subject to application of chapter
   
78-3.   Person, team, motor vehicle and other equipment engaged in road surface
work exempt from application of chapter
   
78-4.   Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicle
   
78-5.   Locations subject to applicability of chapter
   
78-6.   Applicability to person riding animal or driving animal drawing vehicle
upon roadway
   
78-7.   Obedience to Fire Department officials
   
78-8.   Operation of skateboards
   
78-9.   Obstruction of view of vehicular traffic prohibited
   
78-10.   Pruning, corner clearance
   78-11. — 78-40.   Reserved
§ 78-1  DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions in I.C. 9-13-2 (I.C. 9-13-2-1 et seq.) apply to this
chapter. In addition, for the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   BOULEVARD. Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is required
to stop before entering or crossing such boulevard.
   CHIEF POLICE OFFICER. The Chief of Police or other person authorized to
direct the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   CURB. The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles, whether
marked by curbstones or not.
   PARK. When applied to vehicles, means to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PLAY STREET. Any street or portion of a street so designated by the chief
police officer and reserved as a play area for children, from which all traffic
is barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department or other persons authorized to
perform acts necessary to implement and enforce this chapter.
   PUBLIC SQUARE. All that portion of those streets and sidewalks that form the
boundary and are immediately adjacent to the land upon which the county
courthouse is located.
   PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
   REVERSE TURN. To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to proceed
in the opposite direction.
   STOPPING. As applied to vehicles, means to stop a vehicle longer than is
actually necessary to receive or discharge passengers.
§ 78-2  DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES SUBJECT TO APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   Except as provided in §§
78-3 and
78-4 of this article, this chapter applies to the drivers of vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, this state or a political subdivision of the
state.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-6
§ 78-3  PERSON, TEAM, MOTOR VEHICLE AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ENGAGED IN ROAD SURFACE
WORK EXEMPT FROM APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   Unless specifically made applicable, this chapter does not apply to a
person, team, motor vehicle and other equipment actually engaged in work on the
surface of a highway. This chapter applies to a person and vehicle when
traveling to or from work on the surface of a highway.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-7
§ 78-4  EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   (A)   This section applies to the person who drives an authorized emergency
vehicle when:
      (1)   Responding to an emergency call;
      (2)   In the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law; or
      (3)   Responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm.
   (B)   The person who drives an authorized emergency vehicle may do the
following:
      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits if the person who drives the
vehicle does not endanger life or property; and/or
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (C)   This section applies to an authorized emergency vehicle only when the
vehicle is using audible or visual signals as required by law. An authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle is not required to be equipped
with or display red and blue lights visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   This section does not do the following:
      (1)   Relieve the person who drives an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons; and/or
      (2)   Protect the person who drives an authorized emergency vehicle from
the consequences of the person’s reckless disregard for the safety of others.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-8
§ 78-5  LOCATIONS SUBJECT TO APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   Except when a different place is specifically referred to, this chapter
applies exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways, including
streets or roads of a residential subdivision, regardless of who maintains
them.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-9
§ 78-6  APPLICABILITY TO PERSON RIDING ANIMAL OR DRIVING ANIMAL DRAWING VEHICLE
UPON ROADWAY.
   A person who rides an animal or drives an animal drawing a vehicle upon a
roadway is:
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the person who
drives a vehicle; and
   (B)   Is not subject to the provisions of this chapter that, by their
nature, have no application.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-10
§ 78-7  OBEDIENCE TO FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order,
signal or direction of a Fire Department official or any other person
authorized to perform any traffic duties.
§ 78-8  OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is riding in or by means of a
skateboard to park, stand or use any such device upon any roadway or sidewalk,
except when and where such roadway is designated as a play street.
   (B)   It is a public nuisance and a violation of this code to operate a
skateboard on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, ramps and parking areas within
the territory bounded by and including: the Martinsville Downtown Square and
the area one block in any direction from the square.
   (C)   A skateboard operated in violation of this section may be temporarily
confiscated to abate the nuisance and returned at the direction of the court or
the Police Chief.
(Ord. 97-1402, passed 8-5-1997)
§ 78-9  OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW OF VEHICULAR TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any landowner to permit any tree, shrub, bush
or similar vegetation to grow upon his or her property in such a manner as to
obstruct or hinder the view of any motorist or operator of any vehicle when
such vehicle is either approaching, traversing or departing an alley, crosswalk
or intersection.
   (B)   If any landowner fails to comply with the provisions of this section
after having been given a reasonable opportunity to do so, the city may enter
upon such property and take appropriate action to bring the property into
compliance. Furthermore, any expenses incurred may be made a lien against such
property.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to correct violations on private property and obtain lien for
same, see I.C. 36-1-6-2
§ 78-10  PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
street or sidewalk. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the
public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device
or sign.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§§ 78-11 — 78-40  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
78-41.   Distribution of traffic fines and forfeitures
   
78-42.   Powers and duties of Police Department
   
78-43.   Firefighters directing traffic
   
78-44.   Authority for enforcement
   
78-45.   Temporary regulations
   
78-46.   Ratification of traffic-control signs, signals, devices, markings
   
78-47.   Authority to erect signs
   
78-48.   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
   
78-49.   Exceptions
   
78-50.   Temporary street closings
   78-51. — 78-70.   Reserved
Division 2. Abandoned Vehicles
   
78-71.   Definition
   
78-72.   Designation; removal
   
78-73.   Storage
   
78-74.   Towing and storage fees
   
78-75.    Immediate impoundment
   78-76. — 78-95.   Reserved
Division 3. Vehicle Towing
   
78-96.   Definitions
   
78-97.   General provisions
   
78-98.   Removal and impoundment procedure
   
78-99.   Disposal of impounded vehicles
   78-100. — 78-130.   Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 78-41  DISTRIBUTION OF TRAFFIC FINES AND FORFEITURES.
   All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon forfeiture of
bail of any person charged with a violation of the traffic provisions of this
code shall be turned over to the office of the Clerk- Treasurer and disposed of
according to law as in the case of all other City Court collections.
§ 78-42  POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to:
   (A)   Direct all traffic in conformance with this chapter and to enforce the
traffic regulations as set forth in this chapter;
   (B)   Make arrest for traffic violations;
   (C)   Investigate accidents; and
   (D)   Cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions.
§ 78-43  FIREFIGHTERS DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
   All firefighters, when at the scene of a fire or other occurrence, are
authorized to direct or assist the police in directing traffic, and may limit,
divert or exclude traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of such fire or other
occurrence while it continues.
§ 78-44  AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to make arrests for traffic
violations is given to the Police Department and, except in case of an
emergency or as otherwise authorized by ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any
other person to direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle or
any other signal.
§ 78-45  TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate
unusual traffic problems, the Chief Police officer shall, at his or her
discretion, have authority to impose such traffic regulations as he or she may
deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed 14 days.
§ 78-46  RATIFICATION OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES, MARKINGS.
   All traffic-control signals, signs, devices and markings that have been
erected, installed or placed by the city are confirmed and ratified.
§ 78-47  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS.
   (A)   The chief police officer is authorized and required to mark with
proper signs and signals such major and through streets so designated by
ordinances enacted by the Common Council.
   (B)   The chief police officer is authorized and required to erect and
maintain suitable signs for the designation of one-way streets.
§ 78-48  ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The chief police officer shall determine the character of all official
traffic-control devices and shall have the exclusive right to establish and
maintain all official traffic-control devices in the city when and as required
under this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control
devices as he or she may deem necessary. All traffic-control devices shall be
the same general type, and all such traffic devices employed to indicate one
particular warning or regulation shall be uniform and as far as possible shall
be placed uniformly.
§ 78-49  EXCEPTIONS.
   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforceable against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation the sign required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. However, when any particular
section of this chapter does not state that signs are required, such section
shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice.
§ 78-50  TEMPORARY STREET CLOSINGS.
   (A)   Whenever any street or public place is being repaired, constructed,
reconstructed, cleaned or any other work is being done by the city, any
contractor or public utility, or whenever any parade or other such use of any
such street has been authorized by the city, or whenever any street or public
place is ordered to be closed to traffic due to fire, accident or any other
reason in an emergency involving the public safety or welfare, the City
Engineer, the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief, is authorized to make and
enter orders and to post appropriate temporary signs or placards on the street
or public place, or to station police or fire officers, or other persons,
indicating that any or all vehicles are wholly or partly excluded from parking
upon all or the portions of any such streets or public places, that are so
designated or from remaining there, or from entering, during any such emergency
and until the conditions requiring such restrictions are terminated.
   (B)   Whenever and while so posted, or so instructed and directed by any
such officer or other authorized person, no vehicle shall enter upon, remain or
be parked on any such place so prohibited or limited, notwithstanding any
provision of law. All vehicles already so parked shall be promptly removed by
the owner, or may be removed by any city authorities.
   (C)   Such restrictions may also be applied to persons whenever any other
dangerous or harmful conditions render the restrictions necessary.
§§ 78-51 — 78-70  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 78-71  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this division, the following definition apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As defined in I.C. 9-13-2-1.
(Ord. 97-1403, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 78-72  DESIGNATION; REMOVAL.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a police officer of the city finds a vehicle to be an
abandoned vehicle, he or she shall attach to it a notice to remove pursuant to
the provisions of I.C. 9-22-1 (I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq.). The Police Department is
authorized to order the removal of any abandoned vehicle or parts left at any
place within the city which has not been removed within the time provided by
the notice. Any vehicle or parts removed pursuant to this chapter may be
removed by the Police Department or by a commercial towing firm.
      (2)   The city may enter into contracts with commercial towing firms or
with garages for necessary removal and storage services.
   (B)   If an officer determines that the market value of a vehicle or parts
is $500 or less, he or she may remove the vehicle or parts in accordance with
the provisions of this division.
(Ord. 97-1403, passed 8-18-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq.
   Authority to so provide, see I.C. 9-22-1-13, 9-22-1-14
§ 78-73  STORAGE.
   (A)   Any vehicle removed pursuant to this division shall be impounded until
lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with law.
   (B)   The impounded vehicle shall be stored at a garage owned and operated
by the Police Department.
   (C)   Notice of the impoundment shall be given in accordance with I.C. 9-22-
1-2.
§ 78-74  TOWING AND STORAGE FEES.
   (A)   (1)   The owner or lienholder, or the authorized representative of an
owner or lienholder, of any abandoned vehicle that has been removed and
impounded pursuant to this division may appear and claim the vehicle within 15
days of the mailing of notice pursuant to I.C. 9-22-1-20.
      (2)   The removal and storage fees for an impounded vehicle shall be in
accordance with the schedule specified in § 34-591 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Upon payment of the required fees and proof of entitlement, the
vehicle shall be released to the claimant.
§ 78-75  IMMEDIATE IMPOUNDMENT.
   Whenever the presence of a vehicle in a public place constitutes an
immediate hazard to the public safety, a police officer of the city may cause
such vehicle to be impounded immediately and within 24 hours shall send notice
of the impoundment by certified mail to the owner of such vehicle, if known,
stating the fact that the vehicle has been impounded, the location of the
vehicle and the right of the owner to secure possession of such vehicle upon
payment of the required fees in § 78-74 of this chapter.
§§ 78-76 — 78-95  RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. VEHICLE TOWING
§ 78-96  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED TOWING SERVICE. Any person engaged for hire in the performance of
towing or otherwise removing vehicles for hire who has been notified or
requested by the Police Department to tow vehicles.
   OWNER. The last record title holder to a vehicle according to the records of
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the state.
   PARK. Any vehicle parked, stopped, standing or unattended.
   VEHICLE. Any device designed to travel over or along the ground and used to
transport persons or property or to pull machinery or other equipment.
§ 78-97  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in any of the following
circumstances, and such violations are declared public nuisances and shall be
subject to the removal and impoundment procedures authorized in Div. 2 of this
article.
      (1)   Any vehicle that has accumulated three or more unpaid parking
tickets in the city within any consecutive 12-month period, for which parking
violation notices have been issued, but have not been either paid or slated
into a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Any vehicle that constitutes an impediment to the free flow of
traffic in the area in which the vehicle is found.
      (3)   Any vehicle whose operator is unable to move such vehicle due to
the person’s arrest or other incapacity.
   (B)   When any vehicle is parked in any of the circumstances enumerated in
subsection (A) above, such facts shall be prima facie evidence that the owner
is chargeable for the violation.
§ 78-98  REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any officer of the Police Department or such other persons
specifically designated by the Board of Public Works and Safety to monitor and
enforce the parking provisions of this chapter discovering a vehicle authorized
to be towed shall cause the vehicle to be removed by an authorized towing
service; however, the owner or operator shall be permitted to remove the
vehicle before the towing service has left the place of violation upon payment
of the fine and towing service charge to the Clerk-Treasurer, or upon filing
bond for that amount and executing promise to appear in court.
   (B)   Impounded vehicles shall be released upon payment of the towing and
storage charges upon order of the Police Department or the judge of a court of
competent jurisdiction, or such vehicle shall be released upon the owners
posting a bond with the Clerk-Treasurer in a sum equal to the amount of the
fine, towing charge and storage fees and executing a written promise to appear
in court.
   (C)   In all instances of removal and impoundment, an ordinance violation
shall be filed against the owner or operator in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (D)   The towing service charge and storage fee shall be the same as those
fees established in § 78-74 of this chapter.
§ 78-99  DISPOSAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   Impounded vehicles shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
I.C. 9-22-1 (I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq.).
§§ 78-100 — 78-130  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: VEHICLE OPERATION
Section
   
78-131.   Obedience to signs required
   
78-132.   Entering intersections, crosswalks
   
78-133.   Reverse turns or U-turns
   
78-134.   Backing vehicles
   
78-135.   Vehicles crossing sidewalks
   
78-136.   Restrictions on commercial vehicles
   
78-137.   Freight-carrying vehicles
   
78-138.   Motorcycles; clinging to moving vehicles
   78-139. — 78-170.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle operation generally, see I.C. 9-21-8-1 et seq.
§ 78-131  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   A person who drives a vehicle must obey the markings or signs posted under
this chapter or pursuant to authority granted by ordinance or resolution unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-4-18, 9-21-8-41(a)
§ 78-132  ENTERING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any
intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of
any traffic- control signal that may be located at the intersection or
crosswalk.
§ 78-133  REVERSE TURNS OR U-TURNS.
   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within
an intersection or upon any street in a business district or where authorized
signs are erected to prohibit the movement or any other location unless the
movement can be made without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic
that may be affected by such movement.
Statutory reference:
   Turns from direct course to be made with reasonable safety, see I.C. 9-21-8-
24
§ 78-134  BACKING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the vehicle at
any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning movement. A vehicle
from any parking position shall be backed by the operator in such manner as to
proceed on the same side of the roadway in the lawful direction of travel.
§ 78-135  VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within
any sidewalk space, except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by special
permit from the chief police officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the
vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building or lot and across a sidewalk, or
its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. On
entering the roadway from the alley, driveway or building, the operator shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The operator
of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn into an alley from the
roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
Statutory reference:
   Duty to yield when entering highway from private road or driveway, see I.C.
9-21-8-34
   Stopping before crossing sidewalk in business or residential district, see
I.C. 9-21-8-42
§ 78-136  RESTRICTIONS ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   All commercial vehicles exceeding 5,000 pounds in gross weight shall
be restricted at all times to those streets specified by resolution; however,
such vehicles may be operated on the street for the purpose of delivering or
picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering such street at
the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding on the
street no further than the nearest intersection. This subsection (A) does not
apply to local public passenger bus operations.
   (B)   Except on state highways or state-controlled highways, no commercial
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds shall be operated in any
residence district between the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; however, if
this restriction results in an undue hardship or unfair competition, the Board
of Public Works and Safety shall have the power to authorize the issuance of
special permits as deemed necessary for the protection of the rights of any
individual.
Statutory reference:
   Authorize to impose size and weight restrictions, see I.C. 9-20-l-3(c)
§ 78-137  FREIGHT-CARRYING VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate or allow to be operated a
freight-carrying vehicle or a vehicle designed to carry freight with a gross
weight over 16,000 pounds on a city street unless:
      (1)   Permission has been obtained from the Police Chief to operate said
vehicle on a city street or said vehicle is being operated to conduct business
for or on behalf of the city;
      (2)   Said vehicle is transporting freight or material to or from a
business site within the city; and/or
      (3)   Said freight-carrying vehicle is making a delivery of material or
supplies, including construction equipment to a site within the city, in which
case said vehicle shall travel over the shortest possible route upon the city
streets from the point of entry and shall then leave the street at the nearest
available point of exit.
   (B)   In the event there is any discrepancy concerning the weight of a
vehicle stopped by police authorities, said vehicle shall be directed to a
weight scale for a determination of the weight of said vehicle.
(Ord. 2001-1462, passed 3-19-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit commercial vehicles, see I.C. 9-20-1-3(c)
§ 78-138  MOTORCYCLES; CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any motorcycle shall attach the motorcycle or himself
or herself to any moving vehicle on any roadway.
Statutory reference:
   Motorcycles, see I.C. 9-21-10-1 et seq.
§§ 78-139 — 78-170  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
78-171.   Notice of parking violation; penalty for violation
   
78-172.   Penalties recovered by Clerk-Treasurer
   
78-173.   Enforcement of parking restrictions and prohibitions
   
78-174.   Obstructing traffic
   
78-175.   Parking of commercial vehicles at night
   
78-176.   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
   
78-177.   Diagonal parking authorized
   
78-178.   Parking outside parking space
   
78-179.   Backing of vehicles to curb
   
78-180.   Changing or tampering with tire marks, similar devices
   
78-181.   Parking on parade route
   
78-182.   Owner responsibility
   
78-183.   Parking in parks or playgrounds
   78-184. — 78-215.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate standing or parking, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(1)
   Stopping, standing and parking generally, see I.C. 9-21-16-1 et seq.
§ 78-171  NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATION; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of Police Department personnel or such other
persons specifically designated by the Board of Public Works and Safety to
attach to vehicles in violation of the provisions of this article a notice to
the owner or operator of the vehicle advising the owner or operator of the
nature of the violation and the amount of the fine.
   (B)   The fine for each parking violation shall be $25 if paid within five
days or $50 if paid thereafter.
   (C)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle in violation of the provisions
of this article fails to pay the required fine within ten days of the date a
notice of violation is issued, such fact shall be certified to the City
Attorney, who may initiate a proceeding to enforce the provisions of this
article pursuant to I.C. 34-4-32-1.
   (D)   Any vehicle whose owner or operator accumulates three or more unpaid
parking tickets within any consecutive 12-month period which have not been
either paid or slated into a court of competent jurisdiction shall be declared
a public nuisance and may be removed by an authorized towing service in
accordance with the provisions of Art. II of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-1746, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 78-172  PENALTIES RECOVERED BY CLERK-TREASURER.
   Any and all fees, fines or penalties collected or recovered in the
administration of this article shall be deposited with the Clerk-Treasurer in
accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-12-4.
§ 78-173  ENFORCEMENT OF PARKING RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department or such other persons
specifically designated by the Board of Public Works and Safety to monitor and
enforce the parking provisions of this article, and such persons shall be
authorized to mark the tires of vehicles or employ such other methods or
devices necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 78-174  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park any vehicle in any street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as would leave available less than ten feet of width of
the roadway for free movement of traffic.
§ 78-175  PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AT NIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any truck or
commercial vehicle or for the person in charge of such vehicle, to park or
stand such vehicle or to permit such vehicle to be parked or stood upon any
street or alley between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. for a period
of time longer than one hour.
§ 78-176  RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this article restricting or prohibiting the stopping
or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times, or at those times specified
in this article, or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary
to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or comply with the
directions of a police officer, firefighter or official traffic-control device.
   (B)   All parking restrictions, prohibitions and time limits shall be
designated and illustrated on a parking control map, which map is incorporated
in this section by reference.
      (1)   Two-hour parking. No person shall park or stop a vehicle for a
continuous period longer than two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on any day, except Sunday, on those streets so designated for two-hour
parking on the parking control map.
      (2)   Fifteen-minute parking. No person shall park or stop a vehicle for
a continuous period longer than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sunday, on those streets so designated for 15-
minute parking on the parking control map.
      (3)   Parking prohibited. No person shall park or stop a vehicle at any
time on those streets so designated as streets upon which parking is prohibited
on the parking control map.
      (4)   Parking unrestricted. Parking shall be unrestricted on those
streets so designated as unrestricted on the parking control map, and except as
otherwise provided in this article.
   (C)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from his or her duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.
   (D)   The chief police officer shall determine on what streets or portions
of streets stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. Whenever
under authority of or by this article or any other ordinance any parking limit
is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas are
restricted to handicapped parking, it shall be the duty of the chief police
officer to erect appropriate signs giving notice. However, in lieu of erecting
such signs or in conjunction therewith, the chief police officer may cause the
face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to which parking is prohibited
at all times to be painted a solid yellow color.
      (1)   When a curb has been painted a solid yellow color, no person shall
park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent to any curb so marked.
      (2)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of this
article, in each block giving notice, no person shall park a vehicle between
the hours specified by official signs on any day, except Sundays on any street
so marked.
§ 78-177  DIAGONAL PARKING AUTHORIZED.
   The chief police officer may establish diagonal parking at certain places,
requiring the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a
certain portion of the adjacent roadway. However, diagonal parking shall not be
established where the roadway space required would be within ten feet of the
centerline of any street. The chief police officer shall designate such places
by suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings on the pavement the required
angle and the width of the roadway space within which such vehicle shall park.
§ 78-178  PARKING OUTSIDE PARKING SPACE.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park such vehicle
that any part of the vehicle shall extend beyond the lines marking the side or
the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.
§ 78-179  BACKING OF VEHICLES TO CURB.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street; except that,
wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading; provided that, such
loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not consume
more than 30 minutes.
   (B)   Such backing of trucks or wagons is prohibited at all times and on all
streets in the city where any truck or wagon so backed interferes with the use
of the roadway of moving vehicles or occupies road space within ten feet of the
centerline of the street.
§ 78-180  CHANGING OR TAMPERING WITH TIRE MARKS, SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person shall tamper with or change or attempt to tamper with or change
any mark, insignia or other device used or implemented by a police officer or
other authorized person to monitor or check a parked or stopped vehicle in a
restricted parking zone for the purpose of circumventing or avoiding the
parking restrictions set forth in this article.
§ 78-181  PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
   (A)   The chief police officer is authorized, whenever in his or her
judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along
a street or part of a street constituting a part of the route of a parade or
procession, to erect temporary traffic signs to that effect, and to prohibit
and prevent such parking.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of such signs or directions.
§ 78-182  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of
this article regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.
§ 78-183  PARKING IN PARKS OR PLAYGROUNDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any
section of any public park, playground, play lot or tot lot within the city not
designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a roadway.
However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and regularly
maintained roadway in any such park or playground where at least two wheels of
the motor vehicle are resting on such roadway.
§§ 78-184 — 78-215  RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
Section
   
78-216.   Impoundment of bicycles
   
78-217.   Traffic laws to apply
   
78-218.   Operating a motorized bicycle
   
78-219.   Riding on roadways and bike paths
   
78-220.   Carrying articles
   
78-221.   Attaching to vehicles
   
78-222.   Bicycles to yield to pedestrians and give warnings
   
78-223.   Riding bicycles on sidewalks in Business District
   
78-224.   Parking
   78-225. — 78-239.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate bicycles, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(9)
   Bicycles generally, see I.C. 9-21-11-1 et seq.
   Bicycles to be subject to traffic laws, see I.C. 9-21-11-2
§ 78-216  IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any bicycle in violation
of any of the provisions of this article may be impounded for a period of time
not to exceed 60 days.
§ 78-217  TRAFFIC LAWS TO APPLY.
   Every person riding a bicycle and/or motorized bicycle within the city shall
be subject to all motor vehicle traffic laws, signs and signals, except those
provisions of laws which, by their nature, do not apply to bicycles and/or
motorized bicycles.
(Ord. 1171, passed 8-20-1984)
§ 78-218  OPERATING A MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   (A)   A person operating a motorized bicycle shall not ride other than upon
a permanent and attached regular seat, nor carry any other passenger other than
upon a firmly attached and regular auxiliary seat.
   (B)   A person may not ride upon a motorized bicycle unless seated under
this section.
(Ord. 1171, passed 8-20-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions as to bicycles, see I.C. 9-21-11-3
§ 78-219  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BIKE PATHS.
   (A)   When operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a roadway, bicycle
operators shall ride as near to the right-hand side as is practicable and shall
ride not more than two abreast.
   (B)   Whenever a bike path has been provided for the exclusive use of
bicycles or motorized bicycles, bicycle or motorized bicycle operators shall
use the bike path.
   (C)   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon the sidewalk
within the city limits.
   (D)   The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles on such roadway by any person; and, when
such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the signs.
(Ord. 1171, passed 8-20-1984)
§ 78-220  CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents him or her from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
(Ord. 1171, passed 8-20-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions as to bicycles, see I.C. 9-21-11-7
§ 78-221  ATTACHING TO VEHICLES.
   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall attach it or himself or
herself to any vehicle on a roadway.
(Ord. 1171, passed 8-20-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions as to bicycles, see I.C. 9-21-11-5
§ 78-222  BICYCLES TO YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS AND GIVE WARNINGS.
   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and shall give the required audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
§ 78-223  RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon the sidewalk
within the Business District.
§ 78-224  PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon the street other than upon the roadway
against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building, or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§§ 78-225 — 78-239  RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Section
   
78-240.   Definitions
   
78-241.   Operation
   
78-242.   Operators
   
78-243.   Financial responsibility
   
78-244.   Time of operation
   
78-245.   Place of operation
   
78-246.   Occupants
   
78-247.   Traffic rules
   
78-248.   Registration
   
78-249.   Exemptions
   
78-250.   Penalty
§ 78-240  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued by
Indiana or any other state.
   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart or
recreational off- road vehicle in an amount not less than required by state law
for motor vehicles operated on public highways in the state.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle with four wheels originally designed for operation on a
golf course and powered by a battery or internal combustion motor.
   RECREATIONAL OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. A motorized off-highway vehicle that:
      (1)   Is 64 inches or less in width;
      (2)   Is designed for travel on at least four non-highway or off-highway
tires;
      (3)   Is designed for recreational use by one or more individuals;
      (4)   Has a non-straddle seat or saddle;
      (5)   Has a steering wheel for steering control;
      (6)   Is not a lawn mower; and
      (7)   Has a manufactured from the factory set of headlights, taillights
and brake lights.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-241  OPERATION.
   The operation of a golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle within the
city is strictly prohibited unless the golf cart or recreational off-road
vehicle is operated and equipped in full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-242  OPERATORS.
   Only valid licensed drivers, 16 years of age or older, and issued a driver’s
license from a state’s Bureau of Motor Vehicles may operate a golf cart or
recreational off-road vehicle in the city.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-243  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The operator of a golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle must show
financial responsibility when operating a golf cart or recreational off-road
vehicle. Written proof of financial responsibility must be available either on
the golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-244  TIME OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts and recreational off-road vehicles shall not be operated on city
streets during one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise
unless the golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle is equipped with two
operating headlights (one on each side of the front of the golf cart or
recreational off- road vehicle) and two operating taillights with brake lights
(one on each side of the rear of the golf cart or recreational off-road
vehicle) which are visible from a distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-245  PLACE OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts and recreational off-road vehicles may be operated on city
streets which have a posted speed limit of 30 mph or less. Golf carts and
recreational off-road vehicles shall not be operated on city sidewalks or upon
any state highways located within the city, specifically SR 37 and SR 39. Golf
cart and recreational off-road vehicle traffic shall be prohibited on Morgan
Street, Main Street, Morton Avenue, Burton Lane and South Ohio Street south of
Gray Street (however, golf carts and recreational off-road vehicles may cross
these streets) in the city.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-246  OCCUPANTS.
   The number of occupants in a golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle
shall be limited to the number of persons for whom factory seating is installed
and provided on the golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle. The operator
and all occupants shall be seated in the golf cart or recreational off-road
vehicle and no part of the body of the operator or occupant shall extend
outside the perimeter of the golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle while
the golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle is being operated. No one under
the age of eight years is allowed to ride on the back seat of the golf cart or
recreational off-road vehicle unless accompanied by an adult.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-247  TRAFFIC RULES.
   Golf carts and recreational off-road vehicles shall obey all of the rules of
the road and shall display a “slow moving vehicle” sign of the same type
required under state law, as well as a registered sticker from the city, valid
for the current year.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-248  REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Golf carts and recreational off-road vehicles shall be registered with
the city on or before May 1 annually. The city incurs administrative costs in
providing materials for the registration and for approved stickers to be placed
upon the golf carts and recreational off-road vehicles, and in inspecting the
vehicles.
   (B)   Therefore, an administration/inspection fee shall be paid through the
office of the city’s Clerk- Treasurer.
   (C)   Registration tags will be issued by the city’s Police Department after
a satisfactory inspection of the golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle has
been completed.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-249  EXEMPTIONS.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety for the city may exempt from the
provisions of this article the use of golf carts or recreational off-road
vehicles in favor of public safety personnel and/or the use of golf carts and
recreational off-road vehicles during special events. All special events
participants should be identified as such and each individual must provide
proof of insurance and a valid driver’s license before being allowed to operate
a golf cart or recreational off-road vehicle during any special event.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 78-250  PENALTY.
   A violation of the provisions of the city code pertaining to this traffic
regulation occurring after the adoption of this article shall constitute a
Class C infraction and a violation of this article and upon a finding of such
violation the violator shall be fined a sum not to exceed $100. Two or more
violations within a calendar year may result in the revocation of the golf cart
or recreational off-road vehicle permit by Chief of Police for a period of up
to six months.
(Ord. 2016-1712, passed 4-4-2016)
CHAPTER 82: UTILITIES
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   WATER
         
III.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
82-1.   Filling swimming pools; fee
   82-2. — 82-30.   Reserved
§ 82-1  FILLING SWIMMING POOLS; FEE.
   (A)   The following shall be the rules and requirements for filling of
swimming pools using water supplied by the city’s water utility.
      (1)   Filling of pools using a fire hydrant or flush hydrant is
prohibited.
      (2)   Pools may be filled using city water that is measured and metered
through the water utility customer’s water meter.
      (3)   Customer must notify the city’s utility office prior to filling the
pool and provide the utility office with the capacity of the pool in gallons or
the dimensions of the pool. The average depth, length and width or diameter,
will be used to calculate capacity. Depth will be measured from the normal
water level of the pool to the bottom of the pool or in the case of a partial
filling to the existing water level. The city may inspect the pool to verify
the capacity. In no case will a credit be allowed in excess of the calculated
pool capacity and the credit must reasonably reflect an increased water usage
due to filling of the pool.
      (4)   Based on the capacity of the pool, the utility office will adjust
the sewer portion of the customer’s bill for the water used to fill the pool
since the water did not enter the sanitary sewer.
      (5)   Each customer is allowed one sewer adjustment annually for filling
of swimming pool. If a customer desires an additional sewer credit for
refilling of the pool, the adjustment must be approved by the city’s Board of
Public Works and Safety. If a refill adjustment is approved by the Board, it
will be the difference between the month the refill was made and the customer’s
average water usage over the prior three months.
   (B)   Sewer adjustment for wading pools, landscape ponds and water features
is prohibited, also prohibited is an adjustment for a swimming pool having a
capacity of less than 3,000 gallons.
(Ord. 1079, passed 7-6-1981; Ord. 2007-1608, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2009-1627,
passed 5-4-2009)
§§ 82-2 — 82-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: WATER
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
82-31.   Established
   
82-32.   Inspection
   
82-33.   Fire hydrants
   
82-34.   Payment from waterworks
   
82-35.   Emergencies
   
82-36.   Turning off supply
   
82-37.   Interfering with works
   
82-38.   Liability for damage to hydrants by vehicles
   
82-39.   Rates and charges
   82-41. — 82-60.   Reserved
Division 2. New Service and Connections
   
82-61.   Application for new service
   
82-62.   Tapping into system
   
82-63.   Cutting off service
   
82-64.   Specifications for connections
   
82-65.   Location, installation of meters
   
82-66.   Maintenance
   
82-67.   Stopcocks and waste cocks required
   
82-68.   Depth of service pipes
   
82-69.   Steam boilers; responsibility
   
82-70.   Shutoff valve for boilers
   82-71. — 82-80.   Reserved
Division 3. Cross-Connection Control
   
82-81.   Definition
   
82-82.   Prohibition
   
82-83.   Inspections and examinations
   
82-84.   Discontinuance of service; written findings
   
82-85.   Backflow preventer
   
82-86.   State provisions
   
82-87.   Program for protecting public water system from contamination due to
backflow
   82-88. — 82-100.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Waterworks authorized, see I.C. 36-9-2-14
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 82-31  ESTABLISHED.
   There is established the city water utility.
§ 82-32  INSPECTION.
   A water/wastewater utility representative shall have the right, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., to inspect all water service piping and water
appurtenances inside a consumer’s premises.
§ 82-33  FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person shall take water from any fire hydrant, except for fire purposes,
without permission of the Mayor or City Superintendent.
§ 82-34  PAYMENT FROM WATERWORKS.
   The Common Council elects to receive payment in lieu of taxes from the
waterworks.
(Ord. 97-1404, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 82-35  EMERGENCIES.
   During a fire, flood, drought or other emergency, the Mayor may, after
giving notice of the emergency in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, make it unlawful to use water for all purposes, except domestic household
use and fire purposes.
§ 82-36  TURNING OFF SUPPLY.
   Only water/wastewater utility employees may turn the water supply on or off
at the shutoff devices located in front of the water meter.
§ 82-37  INTERFERING WITH WORKS.
   No person shall cover or interfere with any curb box, water meter, valve box
or fire hydrant without permission of the Mayor or City Superintendent.
§ 82-38  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO HYDRANTS BY VEHICLES.
   If a vehicular accident causes the breaking or disconnection of a fire
hydrant, the owner of the vehicle involved shall pay for the hydrant’s repair.
§ 82-39  RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   There are established for the use of and the service rendered by the
water/wastewater system of the city the rates and charges for all users of the
waterworks as specified in § 34-622 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The rates approved in this section shall provide for a reasonable
return on the water utility plant of the city and such other legal and
necessary expenses as provided for in I.C. 8-1.5-3-8.
   (C)   The Common Council hereby elects to receive payment in lieu of taxes
from the waterworks.
(Ord. 97-1404, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 2004-1536, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 2006-
1570, passed 3- -2006; Ord. 2010-1648, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 2012-1668, passed
5- -2012)
Statutory reference:
   Water rates and charges, see I.C. 8-1.5-3-8
§§ 82-40 — 82-60  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. NEW SERVICE AND CONNECTIONS
§ 82-61  APPLICATION FOR NEW SERVICE.
   All applications for new water service shall be made to the Water/Wastewater
Manager.
§ 82-62  TAPPING INTO SYSTEM.
   All taps into the water/wastewater system shall be made under supervision of
the Mayor or City Superintendent.
§ 82-63  CUTTING OFF SERVICE.
   In addition to cutting off service for nonpayment of water bills, water
service may be cut off to any customer who wastes or improperly uses water,
after that fact has been called to his or her attention, or who interferes with
any water appurtenances or appliances belonging to the city.
§ 82-64  SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.
   All water connections shall conform to all state rules and regulations.
§ 82-65  LOCATION, INSTALLATION OF METERS.
   All water meters shall be installed either outside in tiles or inside the
consumer’s premises in the location and manner determined by the Water/
Wastewater Superintendent. Any refusal of prospective users to agree to such
meter location or installation shall be sufficient reason to refuse water
service until such requirements are met.
§ 82-66  MAINTENANCE.
   After a connection is made to the water/wastewater utility system, the city
shall maintain the portion of the line from the water main to the meter. The
person receiving service shall maintain the portion running from the meter into
the house.
§ 82-67  STOPCOCKS AND WASTE COCKS REQUIRED.
   All water service pipes must have stopcocks and waste cocks between the
outside water meter and the consumer’s premises, for emergency shutoffs and
repairs.
§ 82-68  DEPTH OF SERVICE PIPES.
   All water service pipes shall be placed as far below the frost line as
possible.
§ 82-69  STEAM BOILERS; RESPONSIBILITY.
   Persons making attachments of steam boilers that take their water supply
directly from the service pipe and depend upon the hydraulic or hydrostatic
pressure of the city’s water system for supplying the water under pressure
shall do so at their own risk. The city shall not be responsible for any
accident or damages.
§ 82-70  SHUTOFF VALVE FOR BOILERS.
   All house boilers used for domestic purposes shall be provided with vacuum
valves designed to prevent any collapsing or damage resulting from shutting
water off from the distribution pipes. The city shall not be responsible for
the imperfect action of such valves.
§§ 82-71—82-80  RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 82-81  DEFINITION.
   A CROSS-CONNECTION shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the city’s water utility (COM-WU) water system, and the
other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or
steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the
other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the
two systems.
(Ord. 2015-1702, passed 8-24-2015)
§ 82-82  PROHIBITION.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No interconnection
shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of COM-WU may
enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved by the COM-WU and by the state’s
Department of Environmental Management in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 8-10.
(Ord. 2015-1702, passed 8-24-2015)
§ 82-83  INSPECTIONS AND EXAMINATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the COM-WU to cause inspections to be made of
all properties served by the public water system where cross-connections with
the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established
by the COM-WU.
   (B)   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the COM-WU
shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine the
property served by a connection to the public water system of COM-WU for cross-
connections. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of access
or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be deemed evidence of the
presence of cross-connections.
(Ord. 2015-1702, passed 8-24-2015)
§ 82-84  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; WRITTEN FINDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   The COM-WU is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this
division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary
to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system.
      (2)   Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice is
served on the owner, lessee or occupants of the property or premises where a
violation is found or suspected to exist. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance
with the provisions of this division.
   (B)   If it is deemed by the COM-WU that a cross-connection or an emergency
endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a
written finding to that effect is filed with the city’s Utility Office Manager
and delivered to the consumer’s premises, service may be immediately
discontinued. The consumer shall have an opportunity for hearing before the
city’s Board of Public Works and Safety within 20 days of such emergency
discontinuance.
(Ord. 2015-1702, passed 8-24-2015)
§ 82-85  BACKFLOW PREVENTER.
   (A)   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories and all other hazardous
users install and maintain a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer in
the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing.
   (B)   The reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall not be
installed below ground level.
   (C)   In addition to IDEM Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-104(c), the following customer
facilities need a backflow prevention device: all commercial and industrial
facilities/buildings; residential single- and multi-family buildings and any
other structure connected to the COM-WU where the building permit is issued
after the effective date of this division. In addition, any building or
structure that has been more than 50% destroyed shall comply have backflow
prevention devices installed. Further, any building, structure or facility
where the water service is relocated, service size is changed or a new meter is
installed a backflow prevention device shall be installed either as a separate
device or as an integral part of the meter service.
   (D)   If, in the judgment of the Utility Superintendent, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
system, the Utility Superintendent will give notice to the water consumer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his
or her own expenses, install such an approved device at a location and in a
manner approved by the Utility Superintendent and shall have inspections and
tests made of such approved devices as required by the Utility Superintendent
and in accordance with the IDEM Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-10.
(Ord. 2015-1702, passed 8-24-2015)
§ 82-86  STATE PROVISIONS.
   This division does not supersede the state’s Plumbing Code, the IDEM Rule
327 I.A.C. 8-10 or any other ordinance of the city with respect to water
service, but is supplementary to them.
(Ord. 2015-1702, passed 8-24-2015)
§ 82-87  PROGRAM FOR PROTECTING PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM FROM CONTAMINATION DUE TO
BACKFLOW.
   (A)   A cross-connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the city water system, and the other, water from a private
source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals,
whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow
depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the water utility
and by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management in accordance with
327 IAC 8-10.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the water utility to cause inspections to be
made of all properties served by the public water system where cross-
connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of
inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall
be established by the water utility.
   (D)   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the water
utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine
the property served by a connection to the public water system of city for
cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property
so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of access
or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be deemed evidence of the
presence of cross-connections.
   (E)   The water utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this
section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary
to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water
service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice is served on the
owner, lessee, or occupants of the property or premises where a violation is
found or suspected to exist. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this section.
   (F)   If it is deemed by the water utility that a cross-connection or an
emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer
and delivered to the consumer’s premises, service may be immediately
discontinued. The consumer shall have an opportunity for hearing within ten
days of such emergency discontinuance.
   (G)   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories, and all other hazardous
users install and maintain a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer in
the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing.
   (H)   The reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall not be
installed below ground level.
   (I)   This section does not supersede the Indiana Plumbing Code, the IDEM
Rule 327 IAC 8-10 or the city plumbing ordinance, but is supplementary to them.
   (J)   In addition to IDEM Rule 327 IAC 8-10-4(c), the following customer
facilities currently have backflow prevention:
      (1)   Indiana Mentor Transition Housing, 110 W. Pike Street;
      (2)   390 S. Mulberry Street;
      (3)   410 W. Cunningham Street;
      (4)   Walmart in Grand Valley;
      (5)   Duke Energy, 390 N. Main Street;
      (6)   Costin Funeral Home;
      (7)   Home Bank, 670 Birk Road;
      (8)   McDonalds, 2010 Burton Lane;
      (9)   Jimmy Nash City Park Pool;
      (10)   Turkey Hill, 1880 S. Ohio Street;
      (11)   Martinsville High School;
      (12)   REMC, 300 Morton Avenue;
      (13)   92 Lavianan Court;
      (14)   15 Industrial Drive;
      (15)   West Middle School Football Field, 109 E. Garfield;
      (16)   Donna Brummet, 490 E. Pike Street;
      (17)   Bill and Shay Morrison, 1109 Tomahawk Place;
      (18)   Bernard Williams, 295 Bailliere Drive;
      (19)   Neal and Summers Mortuary, 110 E. Poston Road;
      (20)   Autozone, 869 Morton Avenue;
      (21)   Taco Bell, 695 Southview Drive;
      (22)   IU Morgan Health Hospital;
      (23)   Brian Ferling, 788 E. Lincoln Trail;
      (24)   7340 State Road 39;
      (25)   Steak and Shake, 650 Birk Road;
      (26)   Caleb Harbert, 2084 Hospital Drive;
      (27)   Martinsville Little League on Douglas Street;
      (28)   Brothers Paint and Body, 1009 Morton Avenue;
      (29)   For Bare Feet; and
      (30)   Twig Corporation.
   (K)   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
system, the Superintendent of Water will give notice to the water consumer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his
or her own expenses, install such an approved device at a location and in a
manner approved by the Superintendent of Water and shall have inspections and
tests made of such approved devices as required by the Superintendent of Water
and in accordance with the IDEM Rule 327 IAC 8-10.
(Ord. 2017-1752, passed 8-7-2017)
§§ 82-88 — 82-100  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
82-101.   Definitions
   
82-102.   Regulatory power of city
   
82-103.   Powers of the Board of Public Works and Safety
   
82-104.   Garbage, waste
   
82-105.   Septic tanks prohibited
   
82-106.   Installation of toilet facilities required
   
82-107.   Discharges
   82-108. — 82-130.   Reserved
Division 2. Building Sewers and Connections
   
82-131.   Permission required
   
82-132.   Connection charges
   
82-133.   Building sewer permits
   
82-134.   Use of old sewers
   
82-135.   Separate sewers required
   
82-136.   Extensions of sewers outside corporate limits
   
82-137.   Connections to sewerage system by certain out-of-city properties
   
82-138.   Superintendent to supervise
   
82-139.   Materials generally
   
82-140.   Pipe materials
   
82-141.   Pipe laying generally
   
82-142.   Joints and connections generally
   
82-143.   Size
   
82-144.   Depth
   
82-145.   Change in direction
   
82-146.   Slope
   
82-147.   Grade and alignment
   
82-148.   Bearing wall
   
82-149.   “Y” branch connection
   
82-150.   Prohibited connections
   
82-151.   Excavations
   
82-152.   Lifting of sanitary sewage
   
82-153.   Expenses and liabilities
   82-154. — 82-175.   Reserved
Division 3. Private Sewage Disposal Systems
   
82-176.   Authorized
   
82-177.   Public sewer unavailable
   
82-178.   Construction permit
   
82-179.   Inspection
   
82-180.   Compliance with state’s Board of Health recommendations
   
82-181.   Connection to public sewer
   
82-182.   Maintenance of sanitary conditions
   82-183. — 82-205.   Reserved
Division 4. Industrial Discharges
Subdivision I. In General
   
82-206.   Prohibitions and limitations
   
82-207.   Exclusion of other industrial wastes
   
82-208.   Responsibility for obstructing or damaging sewers
   
82-209.   Prior approval for certain wastes
   
82-210.   Pretreatment facilities
   
82-211.   Prior approval of pretreatment facilities
   
82-212.   Operation of pretreatment facilities
   
82-213.   Grease and sand traps
   
82-214.   Installation of control manhole
   
82-215.   Control manholes
   
82-216.   Discharge of pollutants by licensed waste haulers
   82-217. — 82-230.   Reserved
Subdivision II. Administration and Enforcement
   
82-231.   Sanctions
   
82-232.   Termination of wastewater service
   
82-233.   Appeal
   
82-234.   Inspection by Superintendent
   
82-235.   Liability of city
   
82-236.   Entrance by Superintendent onto city easements
   
82-237.   Laboratory procedures; effect of analysis
   
82-238.   Accidental discharge; notification procedure
   
82-239.   Use of representative analyses
   
82-240.   Data subject to EPA audit and review
   
82-241.   Submission of data on industrial wastes
   
82-242.   Waste sampling
   82-243. — 82-265.   Reserved
Division 5. Rates and Charges
   
82-266.   Collection; amount
   
82-267.   Reading of meters
   
82-268.   Billing period; bill collection
   
82-269.   Billing to tenant; landlord’s liability
   
82-270.   Billing; multiple user meters
   
82-271.   Billing; no acceptable meter
   
82-272.   Option to install water meter
   
82-273.   Unmetered source of water
   
82-274.   Metered water does not enter sewer
   
82-275.   Fire protection; rate adjustment
   
82-276.   Right to determine sewage strength and content
   
82-277.   Right to adjust on basis of sewage content
   
82-278.   Adjustment
   
82-279.   Delinquent bills
   
82-280.   Collection through the tax duplicate
   
82-281.   Collection through court actions
   82-282. — 82-300.   Reserved
Division 6. Shireman Estates Surcharges
   
82-301.   Homeowners
   
82-302.   Vacant lot owners
   
82-303.   Sewerage Works Construction Fund; Sewerage Works Bond and Interest
Redemption Account
   82-304. — 82-325.   Reserved
Division 7. Deposits by Commercial Sanitarians
   
82-326.   Definitions
   
82-327.   Fee required for deposit into city system
   
82-328.   Authority to utilize sewers and sewage treatment system
   
82-329.   Licensing requirements
   
82-330.   Disposal of waste
   
82-331.   Penalties
   82-332. — 82-350.   Reserved
Division 8. Contribution Requirements For Users
   
82-351.   Definitions
   
82-352.   Availability costs
   
82-353.   Wastewater treatment plant connections
   
82-354.   Manner of payment
   
82-355.   Off-site trunk sewerage
   
82-356.   Ownership of system
   
82-357.   Inspection costs and approval of sewers
   
82-358.   Allocation of receipts
   
82-359.   Annexation remonstrance restriction
   
82-360.   Amendment of provisions
Statutory reference:
   Municipal sewage works, see I.C. 36-9-23-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 82-101  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BENEFICIAL USES. Domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial use, power
generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation
and enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and
other uses, both tangible or intangible, as specified by state or federal law.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) OF SEWAGE, SEWAGE EFFLUENT, POLLUTED WATERS
OR INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The quantity of dissolved oxygen in milligrams per liter
required during stabilization of the decomposable organic matter by aerobic
biochemical action under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20°C.
The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods.
   BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY. The administrative governing body of the
public utilities of the city.
   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system, which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to a point
approximately four feet outside the foundation wall of the building.
   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) LATERAL SEWER. The extension from the building drain to
the sewerage system or other place of disposal.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) OF SEWAGE, SEWAGE EFFLUENT, POLLUTED WATERS OR
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion of the
organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong
chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   CITY. The City of Martinsville, or any duly authorized officials acting in
its behalf.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the city’s
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
   DEPARTMENT. The city wastewater treatment plant, including the sewer
collection and wastewater treatment facilities.
   EFFLUENT. Water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing out
of a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.
   EQUIPMENT. All movable, non-fixed items necessary to the wastewater
treatment process.
   GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage or sale of produce.
   GROUND (SHREDDED) GARBAGE. Garbage that is shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the conditions
normally prevailing in the sewerage system, with no particle being greater than
one-half inch in dimension.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, such as chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum pump trucks and the like.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Any pollutants that are not compatible pollutants.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy
discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from an industrial, manufacturing,
commercial or business process or from the development, recovery or processing
of any natural resource earned on by any person and shall further mean any
waste from an industrial user.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewerage system, including sewer service
connections, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewerage system, including service
connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellars,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers
and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash
waters or drainage. INFLOW does not include and is distinguished from
infiltration.
   INSPECTOR. A person authorized by the city through the Board of Public Works
and Safety or the Superintendent of the Department.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR. A contributor that has:
      (1)   A flow of more than 50,000 gallons per average workday;
      (2)   In its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
federal law; or
      (3)   Significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributors, on the wastewater treatment plant or the quality of its effluent.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, lake or other body of
surface water or ground water.
   NPDES PERMIT. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
setting forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants.
   NUISANCE. Anything that is injurious to health or offensive to the senses or
an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfort
or enjoyment of life or property.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE EXPENSES. All annual expenses, including
replacement related directly to operating and maintaining the sewerage works as
identified in Uniform System of Accounts for Wastewater Utilities or as
prescribed by the state board of accounts under general headings, Plant
Operation and Maintenance, Sewer Operation and Maintenance, Customer Accounts,
Administrative and General, Insurance and Taxes.
   pH. The logarithm (to the base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration of a solution expressed in gram-atoms per liter of solution.
   POLLUTION. An alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste
to a degree that unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial uses or
facilities that serve such beneficial uses.
   RECEIVING STREAM. The watercourse, stream or body of water receiving the
waters finally discharged from the wastewater treatment plant.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The discharge from sanitary conveniences of dwellings
(including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or
institutions, free from storm water and surface water and industrial wastes.
   SEWAGE. The water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments, singular or in any combination,
together with such ground waters, surface waters and storm waters as may be
present.
   SEWER.
      (1)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer that carries both storm water, surface
water and ground water runoff and wastewater.
      (2)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
      (3)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries wastewater and to which storm
waters, surface waters and ground waters and unpolluted industrial wastewater
are not intentionally admitted.
      (4)   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm water, surface water and
ground water drainage, but excludes wastewater.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The network of sewers and appurtenances used for
collecting, transporting and pumping sewage to the wastewater treatment plant.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation and
as set forth in Congressional Record 40 C.F.R. part 136.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The administrative head of the department and/or the
appointed representative of the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.
      (1)   Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in
water, sewage or other liquid and are removable by laboratory filtration.
      (2)   Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per liter.
      (3)   Quantitative determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   USER. Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the sewerage system.
   USER CLASSES. Each recipient of municipal wastewater treatment services
shall be either in the industrial class or the non-industrial class (including
domestic, commercial, institutional and governmental).
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL CLASS. Any user as determined by the Board of Public
Works and Safety, identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
of 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under
the following divisions:
         (a)   Division A, relating to agriculture, forestry and fishing;
         (b)   Division B, relating to mining;
         (c)   Division D, relating to manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E, relating to transportation, communications,
electric, gas and sanitary services; and
         (e)   Division I, relating to services.
      (2)   NON-INDUSTRIAL CLASS. All users whose wastes are segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences where regular domestic
wastes are those wastes generated by normal domestic activity as determined by
the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   WASTE. Includes sanitary sewage and any and all other waste substances,
liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of
human or animal origin, or from any producing, processing, manufacturing or
industrial operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within
containers of whatever nature prior to and for purposes of disposal.
   WASTEWATER. The water-carried waste from residences, business buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments, singular or in any combination,
together with such ground waters, surface waters and storm waters as may be
present.
   WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS. The individual chemical,
physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume, flow
rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the
contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. The arrangement of devices, structures and
equipment used for treating and disposing of sewage and sludge.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Any water, surface or underground, within the
boundaries of the state, except confined waters in sewers, lakes and the like.
§ 82-102  REGULATORY POWER OF CITY.
   The Mayor shall make and enforce any regulations necessary for the safe,
economical and efficient management of the sewerage system.
§ 82-103  POWERS OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.
   The Department of Water/Wastewater Utility shall be in charge of the
sewerage works.
§ 82-104  GARBAGE, WASTE.
   No one shall deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the city itself or the city’s jurisdiction
any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 82-105  SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
§ 82-106  INSTALLATION OF TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   The owner of any structure abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is or may eventually be a public or combined sewer must, at his or
her expense, install suitable toilet facilities inside the structure. The owner
must connect the facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of the official
notice to do so if the sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to require connections, see I.C. 36-9-23-30
§ 82-107  DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewer. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Discharges to combined and storm sewers. Storm water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on the Superintendent’s approval to a storm sewer, combined sewer or
natural outlet.
§§ 82-108 — 82-130  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 82-131  PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   No one shall uncover, make connections or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written
permit from the city.
§ 82-132  CONNECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   City residents shall pay a fee in the amount established by the Board
of Public Works and Safety to the city water/wastewater utility for each sewer
connection made to any lot, parcel of real estate or building. No sewer
constructed from private funds will be connected into any city sewer line until
a fee in the amount established by the Board of Public Works and Safety has
been paid for each existing connection to that lot, parcel of real estate or
building.
   (B)   Non-residents shall pay a fee in the amount established by the Board
of Public Works and Safety to the city water/wastewater utility for each sewer
connection made to any lot, parcel of real estate or building.
   (C)   This section does not apply, change or modify fees as established for
property owners in Shireman Estates. This section applies to residents with
property outside of the territorial limits of Shireman Estates.
(Ord. 1330, passed 10-3-1994; Ord. 97-1396, passed 1-16-1996)
Statutory reference:
   Connection fees, see I.C. 36-9-23-29
§ 82-133  BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits, for residential and
commercial service and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Superintendent. Permit and inspection fees for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit,
as prescribed in § 34-623 of this code of ordinances, shall be paid to the city
at the time the application is filed.
§ 82-134  USE OF OLD SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be connected with new buildings only when they are
found by the Superintendent to meet all the requirements of this article.
§ 82-135  SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer must be provided for every
building.
   (B)   However, if one building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer can be constructed to the rear building, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building.
§ 82-136  EXTENSIONS OF SEWERS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The installation, construction or extension of sewers by the city outside
the corporate limits of the city and the connection or extension of sewers into
the city’s sewerage system from outside the city limits shall be prohibited,
except upon prior approval by the Common Council by ordinance.
§ 82-137  CONNECTIONS TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM BY CERTAIN OUT-OF-CITY PROPERTIES.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety may permit a property located outside
the city limits to connect to an existing city sewer if the property abuts,
adjoins and is immediately contiguous to the street, alley or easement in which
the sewer is located.
§ 82-138  SUPERINTENDENT TO SUPERVISE.
   (A)   The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer.
   (B)   The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent.
§ 82-139  MATERIALS GENERALLY.
   Unless otherwise permitted by the Mayor, any part of the building sewer
located within ten feet of a water service pipe must be constructed of cast
iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipes with leaded joints shall
also be required if the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots.
§ 82-140  PIPE MATERIALS.
   (A)   All sanitary sewers connections shall use Board of Public Works and
Safety approved six-inch diameter PVC pipe from the city sanitary sewer to a
point no greater than five feet from the building where a six-inch diameter
cleanout shall be installed. Slope of the six-inch diameter PVC connection pipe
shall be a minimum of one-eighth inch per foot from the cleanout to the city
sanitary sewer.
   (B)   No building will be connected to the city sanitary sewers until all
connection fees have been paid.
(Ord. passed 4-1-1996)
§ 82-141  PIPE LAYING GENERALLY.
   The manner of laying pipes used in connection with a building sewer shall be
in accordance with all applicable regulations of the state’s Board of Health.
§ 82-142  JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS GENERALLY.
   All building sewer pipes, pipe joints and joint connections shall be made in
accordance with the state’s Plumbing Code promulgated by the Administrative
Building Council. All joints and connections must also be made gas-tight and
water-tight.
§ 82-143  SIZE.
   A building sewer’s diameter must be at least six inches if it is made of
iron, and at least four inches if it is made of plastic.
§ 82-144  DEPTH.
   Whenever possible, a building sewer shall be brought to the building below
the basement floor. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from
frost.
§ 82-145  CHANGE IN DIRECTION.
   All changes in the direction of a building sewer shall be made only with
properly curved pipes and fittings.
§ 82-146  SLOPE.
   The slope of a building sewer shall be subject to the Superintendent’s
approval, but in no event shall the slope of a six-inch pipe be less than one-
eighth inch per foot.
§ 82-147  GRADE AND ALIGNMENT.
   Building sewers shall be laid at a uniform grade and shall be aligned as
straight as possible.
§ 82-148  BEARING WALL.
   No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any
bearing wall which the sewer might weaken.
§ 82-149  “Y” BRANCH CONNECTION.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made by
the “Y” branch if it is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer
is 12 inches or less in diameter and no properly located “Y” branch is
available, the owner shall, at his or her expense, install a “Y” branch in the
public sewer at the location specified by the Superintendent. If the public
sewer is more than 12 inches in diameter and no “Y” branch is present, a neat
hole may be cut in the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry
in the downstream direction at a 45-degree angle. A 45-degree ell may be used
to make the connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the
inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the
point of connection shall be at the same as or a higher elevation than the
invert of the public sewer. A smooth neat joint shall be made and the
connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special
fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the
Superintendent.
§ 82-150  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   No one shall connect roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer
or drain which in turn is connected to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 82-151  EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   All excavations required for installing a building sewer shall be open
trench work unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. All pipe backfills
shall be performed in accordance with the state’s Plumbing Code. No backfills
shall be placed until the work has been inspected by the Superintendent.
   (B)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. All
streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
§ 82-152  LIFTING OF SANITARY SEWAGE.
   In any buildings in which the building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by that drain shall be lifted
by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. A water-
operated sewage erector shall not be used.
§ 82-153  EXPENSES AND LIABILITIES.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner or person installing the
sewer shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused, directly or
indirectly, by the installation.
§§ 82-154 — 82-175  RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 82-176  AUTHORIZED.
   Where connection to a public sewer is not required, the building sewer shall
be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with all
recommendations of the state’s Environmental Management Board.
§ 82-177  PUBLIC SEWER UNAVAILABLE.
   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
provisions of this division.
§ 82-178  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   Before construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner must
obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent. The permit application
shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary
by the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as prescribed by § 34-624 of
this code of ordinances shall be paid to the city when the application is
filed.
§ 82-179  INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Superintendent may inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the owner shall notify the Superintendent when the work is
ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
   (B)   The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice
by the Superintendent.
§ 82-180  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE’S BOARD OF HEALTH RECOMMENDATIONS.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the state’s Board of Health and
the county’s Health Department. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where
the area of the lot is less than 6,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 82-181  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   When a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system as provided in § 82-106 of this chapter, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division;
and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 82-182  MAINTENANCE OF SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at his or her own expense.
§§ 82-183 — 82-205  RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES
SUBDIVISION I. IN GENERAL
§ 82-206  PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   Except as provided in this division, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged to any public sewer any of the following:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 160°F;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of
fats, oils, greases or waxes;
   (C)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or mineral oil or any other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (D)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either alone or by
interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or
hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and
repair;
   (E)   Any garbage that has not been properly ground;
   (F)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, wood, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, paunch manure, butchers’ offal or any other
solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system
or the wastewater treatment plant;
   (G)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols in excess of 0.50 milligram
per liter;
   (H)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six or higher than nine or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or posing hazards
to the structures, equipment or personnel of the sewerage works;
   (I)   Any copper in excess of one milligram per liter in any wastes
discharged into a public sewer;
   (J)   Any zinc in excess of five milligrams per liter in any wastes
discharged into a public sewer;
   (K)   Any chromium (hexavalent) in excess of one milligram per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer;
   (L)   Any chromium (trivalent) in excess of two milligrams per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer;
   (M)   Total chromium in any wastes discharged into a public sewer shall not
be in excess of three milligrams per liter;
   (N)   Any nickel in excess of one milligram per liter in any wastes
discharged into a public sewer;
   (O)   Any lead in excess of one-tenth milligram per liter in any wastes
discharged into a public sewer;
   (P)   Any cadmium in excess of 0.02 milligram per liter in any wastes
discharged into a public sewer;
   (Q)   Any cyanides, as CN ions, in excess of one milligram per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer;
   (R)   Any waters or wastes containing acid metallic pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions;
   (S)   Any toxic radioactive isotopes, without a special permit. The
radioactive isotopes I 131 and P 32 used in hospitals are not prohibited if
they are properly diluted before being discharged into the sewerage system;
   (T)   Any waters or wastes containing any toxic substances in quantities
that are sufficient to interfere with the biochemical processes of the
wastewater treatment plant or that will pass through the plant into the
receiving stream in amounts exceeding the standards set by federal, interstate,
state or other competent authority having jurisdiction or any waters or wastes
containing iron or any other toxic ions, compounds or substances in
concentrations or amounts exceeding the limits established by the Board of
Public Works and Safety. In no event shall the limits exceed those set forth in
Appendix C of the Federal Guidelines for Pretreatment of Pollutants Introduced
Into Publicly Owned Treatment Works, published October, 1973, or exceed the
limits and restrictions set forth in the city’s NPDES Permit No. IN-0020303
incorporated in this subsection by reference;
   (U)   Any waters or wastes that for a duration of five minutes or more have
a concentration more than five times the average concentration of the BOD or
the suspended solids of the customer’s sewage discharged during a 24-hour
period of normal operation; and
   (V)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual provisions, attention and expense would be required to
handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant, its pumping stations
or other facilities.
§ 82-207  EXCLUSION OF OTHER INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   Any industrial wastes may be excluded when conditions are such that NPDES
permit restrictions cannot be met.
§ 82-208  RESPONSIBILITY FOR OBSTRUCTING OR DAMAGING SEWERS.
   If a public sewer becomes obstructed or damaged because any of the
substances designated in § 82-206 of this chapter were improperly discharged,
the person responsible for the discharge must pay for the expenses incurred by
the city in cleaning out, repairing or rebuilding the sewer.
§ 82-209  PRIOR APPROVAL FOR CERTAIN WASTES.
   Review and acceptance by the Superintendent must be obtained before the
discharge into the public sewers of sewage having:
   (A)   A BOD greater than 250 milligrams per liter;
   (B)   A suspended solids content greater than 250 milligrams per liter; and
   (C)   Other contaminants or characteristics which, by their nature or
quantity, might be harmful to the structures, processes or operations of the
sewerage works or to health, whether by themselves or through interacting with
other wastes in the public sewers.
§ 82-210  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   When, after a review, the Superintendent concludes that the person must
first modify or eliminate harmful constituents, the person shall either modify
the wastes at the point of origin or shall provide and operate at his or her
own expense any preliminary treatment or processing facilities necessary in
order to render the wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
§ 82-211  PRIOR APPROVAL OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment or processing facilities shall be submitted to the city
for examination and approval. No construction shall begin until the Board of
Public Works and Safety has given its written approval. Such approval shall not
exempt the person from the obligation to make further reasonable adaptations of
the facilities when necessary to secure the results desired. Plans,
specifications and other pertinent information shall also be submitted to the
Stream Pollution Control Board for approval in accordance with Stream Pollution
Control Board Res. 15.
§ 82-212  OPERATION OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   When preliminary treatment facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operating condition by the person at
his or her own expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the city.
The person shall maintain suitable operating records and shall submit to the
Superintendent any monthly summary reports of the character of the influent and
effluent that the Superintendent prescribes.
§ 82-213  GREASE AND SAND TRAPS.
   Whenever the Board of Public Works and Safety determines that interceptors
or traps are needed to protect the sewerage system or the operations of the
wastewater treatment plant from grease, oil, sand or similar substances
occurring in a customer’s sewage, such traps shall be installed by the customer
on his or her own lines at his or her own expense. He or she shall maintain
them so that none of such substances can be carried over into the public
sewers. All traps shall be subject to the city’s approval as to construction,
location and installation.
§ 82-214  INSTALLATION OF CONTROL MANHOLE.
   The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole shall be safe,
accessible and constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The sewer owner shall install the manhole at his or her own
expense and shall keep it safe and accessible at all times.
§ 82-215  CONTROL MANHOLES.
   Anyone discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer may be required by
the Board of Public Works and Safety to construct and maintain at his or her
own expense one or more control manholes at a specified location or locations
to facilitate the observation, measurement and sampling of the wastes. These
manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the city’s standards and
specifications. The Board may also require the person to install and maintain
an approved volume-measuring device in the manhole. Plans for the installation
of control manholes and related equipment must be approved by the Board of
Public Works and Safety before construction is begun.
§ 82-216  DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS BY LICENSED WASTE HAULERS.
   Licensed commercial or industrial waste haulers may discharge compatible
pollutants and those incompatible pollutants within the limits of admissibility
set out in this division to the wastewater treatment plant at a time and place
and in such amounts as permitted by the city. Wastewater so received must have
been generated from within the county.
§§ 82-217 — 82-230  RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 82-231  SANCTIONS.
   When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has been taking place in
violation of the admissibility requirements prescribed in this division, it
may:
   (A)   Require the user to submit for approval a detailed time schedule of
specific actions the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation
of requirements;
   (B)   Issue an order to cease and desist, and direct that the user not
complying with such provisions:
      (1)   Comply immediately;
      (2)   Comply in accordance with a time schedule set by the city; or
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a
threatened violation.
   (C)   Petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent
injunction, or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of
such a discharge.
§ 82-232  TERMINATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE.
   The city may terminate wastewater service if a violation of any provision of
this division is found to exist, or if a discharge causes or threatens to cause
a condition of pollution or nuisance, or causes the city to violate the terms
of its NPDES Permit No. IN-0020303. This provision is in addition to other
statutes, rules or regulations authorizing termination of service for
delinquency in payment.
§ 82-233  APPEAL.
   (A)   Any user affected by any decision, action or determination, including
cease and desist orders, made by the Superintendent, interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this article, or any permit issued in this
article, may file with the Superintendent a written request for reconsideration
within ten days of the decision setting forth in detail the facts supporting
the user’s request for reconsideration.
   (B)   If the ruling made by the Superintendent is unsatisfactory to the
person requesting reconsideration, he or she may, within ten days of the
notification, file a written appeal to the Board of Public Works and Safety.
The written appeal shall be heard by the Board within 30 days of the date of
filing. The Board shall make a final ruling on the appeal within 15 days of the
close of the meeting. The Superintendent’s decision, action or determination
shall remain in effect during the period of reconsideration.
§ 82-234  INSPECTION BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized city employees bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this division. Entry shall normally be made
during daylight or operating hours or at reasonable times. The Superintendent
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterworks or facilities for waste treatment.
§ 82-235  LIABILITY OF CITY.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
82-234 of this chapter, the Superintendent or duly authorized city employees
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company. The company shall not be held liable for injury or death to the city
employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its
property by city employees, and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
§ 82-236  ENTRANCE BY SUPERINTENDENT ONTO CITY EASEMENTS.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized city employees bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within the easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
§ 82-237  LABORATORY PROCEDURES; EFFECT OF ANALYSIS.
   Laboratory procedures used in the examination of industrial wastes shall be
those set forth in Standard Methods. However, alternative methods for certain
analyses of industrial wastes may be used subject to mutual agreement between
the Superintendent and the user; provided, they meet federal requirements as
set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 36. The city may, without charge to the user, make
initial analysis of the user’s wastes as well as other initial tests the
Superintendent may deem advisable. Regular periodic check analyses and analyses
made by the city at the request of the user shall be charged to the user
according to the standard work order billing practice. All such analyses shall
be binding in determining strength of wastes, surcharges and other matters
dependent upon the character and concentration of wastes.
§ 82-238  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE; NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Users shall notify the city immediately upon accidentally discharging
wastewater in violation of this division, in order to enable countermeasures to
be taken by the city to minimize damage to the sewerage system, wastewater
treatment plant, treatment processes and the receiving stream. This
notification shall be followed, within 15 days of the date of occurrence, by a
detailed written report describing the causes of the accidental discharge and
the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification will
not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewerage
system, wastewater treatment plant or treatment process, or for any fines
imposed by the city.
   (B)   A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted advising designated
responsible employees to call the wastewater treatment plant in case of
accidental discharge in violation of this division.
§ 82-239  USE OF REPRESENTATIVE ANALYSES.
   Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of the user’s wastes
has been obtained, the city shall make a determination of the character and
concentration of the user’s wastes by using data based on analyses of similar
processes or data for his or her type of business that are available from the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or from industry-recognized authoritative
sources. This method, if selected by the city, shall continue until an adequate
analysis has been made.
§ 82-240  DATA SUBJECT TO EPA AUDIT AND REVIEW.
   All data collected pertaining to industrial wastes, including records kept
by each industrial user, shall be subject to audit and review by the
Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 82-241  SUBMISSION OF DATA ON INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   Anyone who discharges industrial wastes into the city’s sewerage
system shall, upon the written request of the Board of Public Works and Safety,
fill out and file with the city within 90 days an industrial wastes
questionnaire to be furnished by the city, in which he or she shall set out the
quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged into the city’s sewerage
system. Anyone wishing to establish a new connection to a public sewer for the
purpose of discharging industrial wastes must also fill out and file a
questionnaire, which shall include actual or predicted data relating to the
quantity and characteristics of the wastes to be discharged.
   (B)   When special circumstances would make complying with the 90-day time
schedule an unreasonable burden on the person, an extension of time, not to
exceed 90 days, may be granted by the Board of Public Works and Safety upon
presentation of a proper application.
§ 82-242  WASTE SAMPLING.
   (A)   (1)   Any industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be
subject to periodic inspection and determination of character and
concentration. The examination shall be made as often as the Superintendent
deems it necessary (but at least once a year) and may include the use of
suitable continuously monitoring instruments in appropriate cases. Samples
shall be collected either manually or by approved mechanical devices and in
such a manner as to be representative of the overall composition of the wastes.
      (2)   The sampling period shall be for a period of at least seven
consecutive days. When the sampling program extends for more than seven
consecutive days, the city may select the seven consecutive days of its choice.
Every care shall be exercised in collecting the samples to ensure their
preservation, until analyzed, in a state comparable to that at the time the
samples were collected.
   (B)   The installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the wastes and shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety. Access to
sampling facilities shall be granted at all times to the Superintendent.
§§ 82-243 — 82-265  RESERVED.
DIVISION 5. RATES AND CHARGES
§ 82-266  COLLECTION; AMOUNT.
   For the use and the service rendered by the sewerage works, sewer charges
shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real estate
or building that is or could be connected to the city’s wastewater utility or
otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the wastewater utility of the
city, which charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an
amount determinable as provided in § 34-625 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 1330, passed 10-3-1994; Ord. 2004-1546, passed 12-6-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Sewer rates, see I.C. 36-9-23-25 et seq.
§ 82-267  READING OF METERS.
   Water meters shall be read once each month (or period equaling a month).
§ 82-268  BILLING PERIOD; BILL COLLECTION.
   All sewer rates and charges shall be prepared and billed by the city and
collected in the manner provided by law. The first billing may be for a period
of more or less than one full month, in order to make the monthly collection
period correspond with the city’s water meter readings. All bills shall
thereafter be rendered each month (or period equaling a month). Sewer charges
shall be collected by the utility office manager.
§ 82-269  BILLING TO TENANT; LANDLORD’S LIABILITY.
   Wastewater utility rates and charges may be billed to the tenant occupying
the property served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owner.
However, such billings shall not relieve the owner from liability if payment is
not made by the tenants. The property owner has the right to examine the
collection records to determine whether the charges have been paid by the
tenants, but the examination must be made at the office in which the records
are kept and must be during regular business hours.
§ 82-270  BILLING; MULTIPLE USER METERS.
   (A)   If two or more residential lots, parcels of real estate or buildings
discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into the sanitary sewage
system are being billed on a metered basis and share a single water meter, the
quantity of water used shall be average for each user. The minimum charge and
the sewage rates and charges shall apply to each user served through the single
water meter.
   (B)   If two or more dwelling units (such as trailers, apartments or
housekeeping rooms) discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into
the sanitary system are billed on a metered basis and share a single meter, the
billing shall be for a single service. However, there shall be an additional
charge of $0.93 per month for each dwelling unit over one served through the
meter. In the case of trailer parks, the number of dwelling units shall be
interpreted as the maximum capacity for trailers in the park, plus any other
dwelling units served through the meter. A DWELLING UNIT shall mean a room or
rooms or other living space in which cooking facilities are provided.
§ 82-271  BILLING; NO ACCEPTABLE METER.
   If a lot discharging sewage does not use city water, and the water used is
not measured by a water meter acceptable to the city, the amount of water used
shall be measured in the manner determined by the city, in order to ascertain
the sewer rate or charge.
§ 82-272  OPTION TO INSTALL WATER METER.
   Any person whose water is not measured by an acceptable water meter, or who
uses water that does not flow through an acceptable water meter may, at his or
her own expense, install and maintain a water meter. If that meter is
acceptable to the city and all water flows through it, his or her sewer rates
shall be based on the meter.
§ 82-273  UNMETERED SOURCE OF WATER.
   If a lot discharging sewage uses city water as well as water from another
source, which is not measured by a meter acceptable to the city, the amount of
water used shall be measured as determined by the city in order to ascertain
the sewer rate or charge.
§ 82-274  METERED WATER DOES NOT ENTER SEWER.
   If a lot discharging sewage uses over 7,000 gallons of water per month, and
it is shown to the city’s satisfaction that a portion of the measured water
does not enter the sewerage system, the city may determine the percentage of
metered water entering the sanitary sewage system. That percentage shall
constitute the basis of sewage service charges. However, the city may require
or permit the installation of additional meters at the owner’s expense so as to
determine the quantity of water actually entering the sewerage system.
§ 82-275  FIRE PROTECTION; RATE ADJUSTMENT.
   When a metered water supply is also used for fire protection, the city may
make equitable adjustments in the sewer charges.
§ 82-276  RIGHT TO DETERMINE SEWAGE STRENGTH AND CONTENT.
   The city may measure and determine the strength and content of all sewage
and wastes discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
§ 82-277  RIGHT TO ADJUST ON BASIS OF SEWAGE CONTENT.
   (A)   The city may base its charges not only on volume but also on the
strength and character of the sewage and wastes it treats and disposes of.
   (B)   Sewer charges shall be based on the strength of the sewage and liquid
wastes as determined by an analysis of samples taken by the city. The strength
and character of the sewage and wastes shall be based on the quantity of
suspended solids, and five-day BOD and COD in samples of the sewage and wastes.
An excessive strength surcharge will be charged as specified in § 34-625 of
this code of ordinances.
§ 82-278  ADJUSTMENT.
   The Common Council accepts and approves the rate report and finds that such
rates are necessary to meet the requirements of the sewage works and payment of
the operating and maintenance expenses of the sewage works including the debt
service requirements for all outstanding bonds.
(Ord. 97-1411, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 2006-1569, passed 3-6-2009)
§ 82-279  DELINQUENT BILLS.
   (A)   Charges for sewage service shall be due on the due dates shown on the
bills.
   (B)   (1)   Any service charge not paid by the due date (approximately 15
days after the bill is rendered) shall be considered delinquent.
      (2)   A delinquent charge, together with any applied penalty, shall be
collected as set forth by law and ordinance.
§ 82-280  COLLECTION THROUGH THE TAX DUPLICATE.
   (A)   Delinquent sewage service charges may be made a lien against the
property served through certification to the Auditor and to the County
Recorder.
   (B)   The delinquent service charges, together with the mandatory penalty of
10%, shall be placed on the tax duplicate and be collected in the same manner
as regular taxes and assessments are collected.
Statutory reference:
   Collection remedies for unpaid sewer bills, see I.C. 36-9-23-33
§ 82-281  COLLECTION THROUGH COURT ACTIONS.
   In addition to all other remedies, the city shall have the right to bring a
civil action to recover any delinquent charges, together with a penalty of 10%
and a reasonable attorney’s fee. It may also foreclose any lien with recovery
of the charge, a penalty of 10% and a reasonable attorney’s fee.
§§ 82-282 — 82-300  RESERVED.
DIVISION 6. SHIREMAN ESTATES SURCHARGES
§ 82-301  HOMEOWNERS.
   A $500 connection charge will be paid before 2-1-1983 and a $27 monthly
surcharge will be paid, in addition to normal monthly sewage charges set forth
in Ord. 975, as amended. The monthly surcharge shall be payable 1-1-1984, and
each month thereafter through and including 7-1-2002; provided, the foregoing
charges will not be due for any property owner who pays the sum of $2,500 on or
before 2-1-1983.
§ 82-302  VACANT LOT OWNERS.
   Vacant lot owners shall pay a connection charge as follows.
   (A)   A $500 connection charge will be paid before 2-1-1983, and, at such
time when a connection is made to the wastewater utility, a connection charge
equal to $27 times the number of months that have elapsed from 1-1-1984, to the
date the connection is made will be paid, subject to a maximum of $2,500, plus
a surcharge of $27 per month thereafter until 7-1-2002, which shall be in
addition to the normal monthly sewage charges;
   (B)   A $2,500 connection charge will be paid before 2-1-1983, and the
surcharge and aforementioned connection charge will not be collected from those
lot owners; provided, the normal monthly sewage charges shall be paid when the
property uses the sewerage system; or
   (C)   If no connection charge is paid before 2-1-1983, at such time when a
connection is made to the sewerage works system, a connection charge equal to
$500, plus accrued interest from 2-1-1983, at an annual rate of 13%, plus $27
times the number of months that have elapsed from 1-1-1984, to the date the
connection is made, subject to a maximum of $2,500, and a $27 monthly surcharge
from the date of connection will be paid until 7-1-2002. The foregoing shall be
in addition to the normal monthly sewage charges.
§ 82-303  SEWERAGE WORKS CONSTRUCTION FUND; SEWERAGE WORKS BOND AND INTEREST
REDEMPTION ACCOUNT.
   All of the charges paid before or during the construction period of the
Shireman Estates Collection System shall be paid into the Sewerage Works
Construction Fund. All such charges paid after construction is completed shall
be paid into the sewerage works bond and interest redemption account.
§§ 82-304 — 82-325  RESERVED.
DIVISION 7. DEPOSITS BY COMMERCIAL SANITARIANS
§ 82-326  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CESSPOOL. A cavity in the ground that receives human excrement and domestic
waste to be partially absorbed directly by the surrounding soil.
   COMMERCIAL SANITARIAN. Any individual, partnership, broker, firm,
association or corporation engaged in or carrying on the business of servicing
or maintaining septic tanks, seepage pits or cesspools.
   SEEPAGE PIT. A dry well, leaching pit or any other cavity in the ground
which receives the liquid discharge of a septic tank.
   SEPTIC TANK. A septic toilet, chemical closet or any other water-tight
enclosure used for storage and decomposition of human excrement and domestic
waste.
   SERVICING AND MAINTAINING. Cleaning and removing waste from the septic tank,
seepage pit or cesspool, and recovering the waste as before being exposed for
cleaning.
§ 82-327  FEE REQUIRED FOR DEPOSIT INTO CITY SYSTEM.
   The provisions of this division do not create a right to deposit waste into
the municipal wastewater utility system unless the required fee is paid to the
city and the city accepts such fee.
§ 82-328  AUTHORITY TO UTILIZE SEWERS AND SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.
   Any commercial sanitarian who performs and satisfies the provisions of this
division shall be allowed to deposit waste from any septic tank, seepage pit or
cesspool into the wastewater utility.
§ 82-329  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   Any commercial sanitarian who applies to the Clerk-Treasurer for a license
to deposit waste in the sewers and sewage treatment system must satisfy the
following requirements.
   (A)   The applicant must state the nature and address of his or her
business, as well as any other information required by the Board of Public
Works and Safety.
   (B)   The application must be made with the Clerk-Treasurer on or before
March 1 of each year. The applicant must pay an annual license fee specified in
§ 34-626 of this code of ordinances, payable to the city’s sewer utility.
   (C)   The applicant must demonstrate that he or she is properly licensed by
the state’s Health Commissioner pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 25-35-1-
1 through 25-35-1-8.
§ 82-330  DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   (A)   All waste recovered from any septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool
shall be deposited in the municipal sewage treatment system of the city only at
locations designated by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   (B)   All vehicles operated by a commercial sanitarian shall be kept clean,
and the municipal disposal site shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at
all times.
§ 82-331  PENALTIES.
   Any commercial sanitarian who violates any provision of this division or who
disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this division
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.
§§ 82-332 — 82-350  RESERVED.
DIVISION 8. CONTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS FOR USERS
§ 82-351  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer external (off-site) to a development.
   LATERAL. The individual user’s sanitary sewer that connects such user’s
building to the local or trunk sewer.
   LOCAL SEWER. A sewer within (on-site) a development being served.
   OVERSIZING. An increase in the size of a local sewer, including lift
station, for the purpose of providing sanitary sewer service to an area outside
the development. The difference in material and labor costs for OVERSIZING
local sewers that will be used as a part of trunk sewers to serve other areas
as outlined in § 82-352(D) and (E) of this chapter will be considered
interceptor costs and shall qualify for refunding.
   OWNER OF REAL ESTATE. An individual, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, governmental unit or charitable and other non-profit organization
holding legal title to real estate.
   TRUNK SEWER. See INTERCEPTOR SEWER.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 82-352  AVAILABILITY COSTS.
   No connection to any city-owned trunk sanitary sewer shall be allowed until
a permit is obtained and payment as a contribution to aid in construction has
been made into the city sewage collection fund, which is a depository of such
contributions and designated funds. These contributions shall be regarded as a
benefit as defined by the Common Council. This is a benefit cost intended to
provide funds for sewage collection and improvement projects by the city or
owners of real estate and provide owners of real estate such protection as is
afforded by the provisions of statutes of the state for sanitary sewerage
facilities constructed by said owners of real estate under contract with the
city.
   (A)   Amount.
      (1)   These costs, designated as availability costs, shall be fixed by
the city as hereinafter provided. Such availability costs shall be and are
hereby established in the sum as specified in § 34-627 of this code of
ordinances per single-family residence to be served or its wastewater flow
equivalent as defined in Attachment Number 1, EDU Schedule, to Ord. 2003-1500,
and shall be from time to time updated and set by the city after receiving
input by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.
      (2)   Project costs, in all cases, shall expressly include reasonable and
documented construction costs, legal costs, engineering costs, construction
inspection and testing costs and easement acquisition costs as shall be
administered and defined by the Board of Public Works and Safety. Easements in
each case, as may be required by the Board of Public Works and Safety, must be
obtained by the owner of the real estate. Projects that shall be funded from
the Sewage Collection Fund shall include new trunk and interceptor sewers,
improvements to existing trunk or intercept sewers and such sewage collection
improvements projects as determined by the Board of Public Works and Safety and
subject to approval by the Common Council when necessary.
      (3)   The availability cost as specified in § 34-627 of this code of
ordinances per equivalent dwelling unit or its waste load equivalent may be
allocated to and paid into the project cost of the specific interceptor
extension (offsite interceptor and on-site oversizing) for which it is paid.
      (4)   The applicant-owners of real estate applying for sewer extensions
shall make payments to the city utility office for such payment in accordance
with costs, as set forth. Payments are due and shall be made in accordance with
§ 82-354 of this chapter.
      (5)   Payment of the availability cost may be made in cash or by the
dedication to the city’s sewer system facilities consisting of interceptor
sewers, forced mains, lift stations and other related sewer system facilities
other than on-site sewers and service lines acceptable to and preapproved by
the Board of Public Works and Safety. To the extent that the cost of such
dedicated property is less than the required availability cost, the owner or
developer shall pay the balance of said cost in cash.
      (6)   Trunk sewer extension projects shall be, in accordance with the
latest development plan, developed and approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety. Plans and specification for specific trunk sewerage extensions, and
for all local, lateral and sub-trunk sewers, shall be submitted to and receive
approval from the Board of Public Works and Safety and all applicable
regulatory agencies prior to start of construction. A copy of all such
approvals shall be filed with the City Superintendent in the City Hall within
ten days after receipt of approval.
   (B)   Additional funds contributed. The above availability costs shall be
strictly non-refundable. If by prior agreement, in order to extend the trunk
sewer system, additional funds are necessary to extend the sewer to the owners
of real estate, such additional funds advanced or contributed by said owners of
real estate for the extensions and/or oversizing to meet the requirements of
the city are refundable without interest. However, such refunds may be made
only from the developer availability accounts deposits. In no event will any of
the city sewerage revenues be used, committed or encumbered to repay any such
funds advanced or contributed, nor will the city’s General Fund be used,
committed or encumbered to repay any such funds advanced or contributed. It is
expressly declared that such repayment, if any, will be made under the
provisions of and will be repaid only from funds deposited in the Sewage
Collection Fund on the basis of first in, first out. No provision of this
division shall be construed as a guarantee by the city that the owners of real
estate advancing funds will be fully reimbursed therefor.
   (C)   Accounts. Two separate accounts will be established from the
availability costs assessed and proceeds shall be placed in the Sewage
Collection Fund, which will consist of the two funds set out below.
      (1)   In one account will be deposited 50% of the assessed availability
cost that shall be used, at the discretion of the Board of Public Works and
Safety, subject to approval, when necessary, by the Common Council, for work on
the existing sewerage. The name of this account will be the city availability
account.
      (2)   The second account will be established from 50% of the availability
cost assessed. This second account shall be used for reimbursement, refunds and
repayment to owners of real estate for extension and/or resizing to meet
requirements of the city and for which a prior written agreement was
negotiated. The name of this account will be the developer availability
account.
   (D)   Oversizing. Refunding of costs for oversizing to meet city
requirements shall be made only for the portion of the oversizing which lies
within the real estate owner’s development as requested in writing by the Board
of Public Works and Safety. In the event the availability cost does not provide
sufficient funds to extend and/or oversize the trunk sewer as needed, no such
sewer extension into the development, or oversizing, will be considered by the
Board of Public Works and Safety unless the owners of real estate desire to
advance and pay the excess costs of the project. In the event oversizing of
sewage lift stations and other applicable appurtenances and/or oversizing and
extensions of trunk sewers constructed within their development by owners of
real estate are necessary to deliver sewage from other areas to the trunk
sewer, or from one trunk to another, such oversizing shall be deemed to be part
of the trunk sewer cost to the extent of the oversizing only, and as such would
be considered for refund under the provisions of subsection (B) above. Any
required extensions to the property line by owners of real estate necessary to
deliver sewage from other areas to the trunk sewer, or from one trunk to
another, will be considered part of the trunk sewer cost and not part of the
on-site local sewer cost, and as such would be considered for refund under
provisions of subsection (B) above.
   (E)   Repayment method. Repayment, reimbursement or refund for oversizing or
extension costs must be requested by the real estate owner at the time of
application for sewer extension and should be requested from the Board of
Public Works and Safety. The amount of eligible repayment will be negotiated
with the Board of Public Works and Safety prior to signing of the final plat by
the city’s Plan Commission and, in the event there is not a final plat to be
executed, then this must be accomplished prior to the filing for approval of
the sewer extension (infrastructure) with the state’s Department of
Environmental Management. The amount of eligible repayment, reimbursement or
refund set by the Board of Public Works and Safety for oversizing shall be for
construction, labor and materials only. The repayment, reimbursement or refund
for sewer extension shall be the project cost as defined in § 82-352(A) of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
Editor’s note:
   Attachment Number 1, EDU Schedule, to Ord. 2003-1500, mentioned in this
section, is not printed herein but is on file in the city’s Clerk-Treasurer’s
office.
§ 82-353  WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Where an individual connection is sought for acreage or developed
areas inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, sewer users shall pay
a connection cost based on an equivalent development unit (EDU) factor pursuant
to Attachment Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500 for a single-family residence, which
is hereby initially fixed and established as specified in § 34-628 of this code
of ordinances and hereafter shall be amended and revised as needed to reflect
changes in land uses, water conservation technology and general trends in water
use as recommended by the Board of Public Works and Safety and approved by the
Common Council. This unit cost per EDU assumes an average daily EDU wastewater
flow of 300 gallons per day at a unit cost for additional wastewater treatment
capacity of $1.50 per gallon of plant capacity. New sewer connections in
conjunction with their designated type of service referenced in Attachment
Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500 will presently pay a connection cost based on the
multiplication of the listed EDU factor times the amount as specified in § 34-
628 of this code of ordinances. The equivalent user cost may, from time to
time, be updated and changed by the city. Funds collected, including inspection
costs, shall be deposited into the city’s Plant Expansion and Improvement Fund.
Funds collected shall be used for the expansion and other capital improvements
of sewerage facilities including bond payments on past capital projects and
future capital projects relating to the city sewerage system.
   (B)   Users not listed in Attachment Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500 (which is
made a part of this division) or any user which the Board of Public Works and
Safety believes to vary substantially (substantially meaning by more than 30%
from the EDU factor listed in Attachment Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500 or a user
who due to some unique characteristic does not fit in any category listed on
Attachment Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500) shall have its EDU factor determined by
the Board of Public Works and Safety based on projected EDU wastewater flows or
any other equitable means as determined by the Board of Public Works and
Safety. For the purposes of reviewing the unit contribution, the usage of a
single-family residence will be considered as 300 gallons per day. Users listed
in Attachment Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500 shall also be billed a monthly rate in
accordance with current sewer rate charges. After the connection of a user, if
the type of use changes as listed in Attachment Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500 to a
greater use, then the user shall pay the additional fees established by the EDU
factor listed in Attachment Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
Editor’s note:
   Attachment Number 1, EDU Schedule, to Ord. 2003-1500, mentioned in this
section, is not printed herein but is on file in the city’s Clerk-Treasurer’s
office.
§ 82-354  MANNER OF PAYMENT.
   Payment of the availability and connections costs shall be made at the
following times and in the following manner.
   (A)   Availability costs. The first half of the availability cost shall be
paid at the time of the issuance of the plan or planned unit development
approved by the city’s Plan Commission, approving the plat for recording
purposes. In the event the property is being platted in sections, the
installment shall be due on the respective sections as they are platted. In the
event the property is not part of a plat or planned unit development, then one-
half shall be due and paid upon completion of the construction of the proposed
sewer improvements and the acceptance by the city, which shall occur prior to
the issuance of any building permit on structures served by the line. This
initial payment shall be based upon a minimum of one-tenth of an EDU per 1,000
square feet. The balance of the availability cost shall be paid at the time of
occupancy based upon actual EDU calculations determined by the city at that
time based upon the city’s determination of the applicable use under Attachment
Number 1 to Ord. 2003-1500. In the event the use changes during the occupancy
to a greater number of EDUs, then the additional monies shall be due
immediately upon the change of use.
   (B)   Connection costs. Connection costs shall be due and payable upon
application for connection to the city sanitary sewer system. In the event the
use changes from the date of occupancy to a greater number of EDUs, then
additional fees shall be due and owing immediately. Upon a showing to the Board
of Public Works and Safety of some undue hardship and public need or
enhancement by the connection the Board of Public Works and Safety shall have
the discretion to waive the connection fees. Connection costs do not include
the cost of making the lateral sewer connection to the city sewer. Each user is
responsible for paying all costs associated with making their lateral sewer
connection.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
Editor’s note:
   Attachment Number 1, EDU Schedule, to Ord. 2003-1500, mentioned in this
section, is not printed herein, but is on file in the city’s Clerk-Treasurer’s
office.
§ 82-355  OFF-SITE TRUNK SEWERAGE.
   (A)   All easements shall be dedicated to the city and shall be obtained by
and, if necessary, paid for by the owners of real estate. Easements shall be in
a form approved by the city.
   (B)   (1)   The owners the real estate applying for trunk sewer service
shall deposit with the city adequate funds to pay for appurtenant non-
construction costs prior to the city proceeding with preparation of plans and
specifications, if required.
      (2)   If the project does not proceed to completion after project costs
are established, money so deposited by the owners of real estate shall be non-
refundable and will be used to pay incurred expenses. If funds are in excess of
expenses, the excess will be returned to the owners of real estate making the
deposit or their successors.
      (3)   If the project progresses to completion, the deposit will be
credited to the total project cost.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 82-356  OWNERSHIP OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   All extensions to the city sewerage system shall be dedicated to and
must be accepted by the city before connection and, once connected, shall
become and remain thereafter the sole property of the city without further
dedication thereof.
   (B)   The owners of real estate making such dedication shall post, at the
time of dedication, three years’ maintenance equal to 20% of the project cost
in a form acceptable to the city.
   (C)   Owners of real estate shall agree and furnish affidavit that they have
paid in full contractors, material men and laborers in cash the full cost of
said extension or extensions.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 82-357  INSPECTION COSTS AND APPROVAL OF SEWERS.
   The owners of real estate obtaining a permit of sewerage extensions shall
submit plans for sewers, including trunk sewers to be constructed, to the city
for review and approval prior to start of construction. During construction of
said sewers, the owners of real estate shall pay the expense of an inspector
appointed or approved by the city to assure that the construction of the
facilities are in compliance with current standards and specifications
established by the city. Upon completion of construction, the owners of real
estate shall provide certified record construction drawings to the city within
30 days. If certified record construction drawings are not provided, as above
required, the city may prepare these at the expense of said owners of real
estate. No potential reimbursable expenses of oversizing and/or offsite
interceptor construction will be allowed until record drawings are provided and
approved.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 82-358  ALLOCATION OF RECEIPTS.
   (A)   The availability costs provided in §§ 82-352 and 82-354 of this
chapter shall be collected by the city utility office and deposited to the
Sewage Collection Fund.
   (B)   The individual connection charges provided in §§ 82-353 and 82-354 of
this chapter shall be collected by the city utility office and deposited to the
Plant Expansion and Improvement Fund.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 82-359  ANNEXATION REMONSTRANCE RESTRICTION.
   All persons, corporations, LLCs or other legal entities owning property, or
their survivors, heirs, or assigns, who shall connect to any sewer main built
pursuant to this chapter shall agree in writing prior to said connection to
waive their rights to remonstrate against annexation by the city. All persons,
corporations, LLCs or other legal entities, their heirs and assigns owning
property shall petition the court for voluntary annexation as soon as all legal
standards as to contiguity have been met and, as a part of the consideration
for connecting to the sanitary sewer system of the city, the property owner
shall cooperate in all ways and assist in the completion of the annexation.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 82-360  AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   This division and the costs and charges set out herein may be amended from
time to time by the Common Council when conditions exist that indicate to the
Common Council that charges herein are not equitable for the customer of the
municipal sewage system or of the subdividers, developers or owners of property
with connection to such sewage system.
(Ord. 2003-1500, passed 1-6-2003)
CHAPTER 86: VEGETATION
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION
         
III.   TREES AND SHRUBS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   86-1. — 86-30.   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Municipal home rule, see I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq.
§§ 86-1 — 86-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION
Section
   
86-31.   Adoption of statutory provisions
   
86-32.   Penalties
   
86-33.   Removal of weeds, debris and other rank vegetation
   
86-34.   Notice to remove vegetation; enforcement
   
86-35.   Collection of moneys from property owners
   86-36. — 86-65.   Reserved
§ 86-31  ADOPTION OF STATUTORY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All terms and provisions of I.C. 36-7-10.1-3 are adopted in connection
with the removal of weeds and other rank vegetation, and such provisions in
their entirety are incorporated into this article and made a part of this
article as fully as though set out in their entirety in this section.
   (B)   Two copies of I.C. 36-7-10.1-3 shall be on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection in accordance with the provisions of I.C.
36-1-5-4.
(Ord. 97-1406, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 86-32  PENALTIES.
   Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this article, for each
such offense, may be the subject of an imposition of a fine, such fine to be in
the amount of $150. Each day that the violation occurs shall be considered an
additional violation.
(Ord. 2016-1710, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1745, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 86-33  REMOVAL OF WEEDS, DEBRIS AND OTHER RANK VEGETATION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DEBRIS. The remains of something broken down or destroyed.
      RANK VEGETATION. Those weeds and growing vegetation which are excessively
vigorous in growth, shockingly conspicuous, malodorous and/or flagrant.
      WEEDS. Any plant that is not valued where it is growing, and is of rank
growth, tends to overgrow or choke out more desirable plants and/or is listed
as a weed in the U.S. Department of Agricultural publication entitled Common
Weeds of the United States or in any similar government publication or those
defined herein.
   (B)   Violation. It is a violation of this section to have weeds, rank
vegetation and/or debris on any real property (the “property”) located within
the city’s corporate limits.
   (C)   Requirement to cut. All owners of property located within the city
shall cut and remove weeds and other rank vegetation growing thereon that
exceeds an average height of nine inches and shall keep their property clear of
debris.
(Ord. 2016-1710, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1745, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 86-34  NOTICE TO REMOVE VEGETATION; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation notice. In the event of a violation of this section, the
Police Department, Board of Public Works and Safety, and the Code Enforcer or
any of their designees shall issue a written notice (the “violation notice”) to
the violating landowner. The violation notice shall identify the violation and
order the landowner to correct the same within seven calendar days from the
date on which the violation notice is served on the landowner (the “abatement
period”). Personal service, service by U.S. certified mail or any other manner
of service recognized in the Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure shall constitute
proper service upon the landowner for purposes of this section.
   (B)   Appeal. Any violation notice issued pursuant to this section may be
appealed to the City Court if written notice of appeal is served by the
landowner to the City Clerk-Treasurer. The timely appeal of a violation notice
shall toll the abatement period pending the issuance of a decision thereon by
the City Court.
   (C)   City to abate. If the landowner fails to timely abate each violation
set forth in a violation notice, the landowner shall be deemed to have granted
permission to the city to enter the landowner’s property for the limited
purpose of cutting and/or removing such debris, weeds or rank vegetation
located thereon and identified in the violation notice. In such case, the
Clerk-Treasurer, or his or her designee, shall prepare a certified statement as
to the actual administrative and other costs incurred by the city in taking
such action and serve a copy of the invoice on the landowner. The landowner
shall, within seven calendar days from the date on which the landowner is
served with such invoice (the “payment period”), pay in full the amount stated
thereon to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
   (D)   Failure to pay. If the landowner fails to timely pay an invoice issued
pursuant to this section, the Clerk-Treasurer, or his or her designee, shall
certify to the County Auditor the amount of the invoice, plus any additional
administrative costs incurred in the certification of the same. The Auditor
shall place the total amount so certified on the tax duplicate for the property
at issue, and the total amount, including any accrued interest, shall be
collected as delinquent taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to the
General Fund of the city.
   (E)   Time of appeals. The City Court shall hear any timely requested appeal
of a notice of violation or invoice within 30 calendar days following receipt
of the same and shall thereafter promptly issue a written decision granting or
denying, in whole or in part, the appeal. The date on which the City Court’s
decision is served on the landowner shall thereafter become the first calendar
day of the abatement period or payment period, as applicable.
   (F)   Venue. The City Court shall be the court of proper venue and
jurisdiction for the enforcement of this section.
   (G)   Limits. This section supplements and does not limit any other remedy
or action available in law or in equity regarding the subject matter hereof.
   (H)   Applicability. This section shall not apply to an agricultural
district.
(Ord. 2016-1710, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1745, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 86-35  COLLECTION OF MONEYS FROM PROPERTY OWNERS.
   If the owner fails to pay said sum assessed for the removal and/or cutting
of the debris, weeds or rank vegetation within the time prescribed, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall file a certified copy of the statement of costs in the
Auditor’s office of the county and the Auditor shall place the amount so
claimed on the tax duplicate against the lands of the landowner affected by the
lien and the same shall be collected as taxes disbursed to the General Fund of
the city.
(Ord. 2016-1710, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1745, passed 2-1-2016)
§§ 86-36 — 86-65  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
86-66.   Definitions
   
86-67.   Interference with city
   
86-68.   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   86-69. — 86-90.   Reserved
Division 2. City Tree Board
   
86-91.   Created, established
   
86-92.   Members’ term of office
   
86-93.   Compensation
   
86-94.   Duties and responsibilities
   
86-95.   Operation
   86-96. — 86-115.   Reserved
Division 3. Public Property
Subdivision I. In General
   
86-116.   Public tree care
   
86-117.   Tree topping
   86-118. — 86-130.   Reserved
Subdivision II. Street Trees
   
86-131.   Removal of stumps
   
86-132.   Street tree species to be planted
   
86-133.   Spacing
   
86-134.   Distance from curb and sidewalk
   
86-135.   Distance from street corners and fireplugs
   
86-136.   Utilities
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 86-66  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-67  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city or any of its agents while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any trees, park trees
or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-68  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a
hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a
potential threat to other trees within the city.
   (B)   The city’s Tree Board will notify in writing the owners of such trees.
   (C)   Removal shall be done by such owners at their own expense within 60
days after the date of service of notice.
   (D)   If an owner fails to comply with such provisions, the city shall have
the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the
owner’s property tax notice.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§§ 86-69 — 86-90  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. CITY TREE BOARD
§ 86-91  CREATED, ESTABLISHED.
   There is created and established a City Tree Board, which shall consist of
five members who are residents of the county, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-92  MEMBERS’ TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of the five persons to be appointed to the Tree Board by the Mayor
shall be three years. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member,
his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpected portion of the term.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-93  COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-94  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and update annually, and administer a written plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of
trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan
will be presented annually to the Common Council and, upon its acceptance and
approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. The
Board, when requested by city officials, shall consider, investigate, make
findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming
within the scope of its work.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-95  OPERATION.
   The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§§ 86-96 — 86-115  RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. PUBLIC PROPERTY
SUBDIVISION I. IN GENERAL
§ 86-116  PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The
Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part of a
tree that is in an unsafe condition or that by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other
pest.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of such
trees is in accordance with this article.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-117  TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to top any street
tree, park tree or other tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as the
severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter
within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain
trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices
are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the
Tree Board.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§§ 86-118 — 86-130  RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION II. STREET TREES
§ 86-131  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-132  STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   (A)   No species other than those included in this list may be planted as
street trees without written permission of the Tree Board.
   (B)   The following list constitutes the official street tree species for
the city:
      (1)   Small trees. Cherries Flowering (sp), Crabapple Flowering (sp),
Dogwood Flowering (sp), Golden Rain Tree, Hawthorne (sp), Pear (Bradford),
Redbud and Plum (Purpleleaf);
      (2)   Medium trees. Hackberry, Honeylocust (Thornless), Linden or
Basswood (sp), Oak (English), Birch (River), White Birch and Sweet Gum; and
      (3)   Large trees. Ginkgo, Grey Ash, Maple (Hard), Pecan, Red Maple,
White Ash, Yellow Poplar and Red Oak.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-133  SPACING.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in § 86-132 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted
closer together than the following, except in special plantings designed or
approved by a landscape architect:
   (A)   Small trees: 30 feet;
   (B)   Medium trees: 40 feet; and
   (C)   Large trees: 50 feet.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-134  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines will be in
accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 86-132 of this
chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb than the following, and
no tree may be planted closer to any sidewalk than one foot:
   (A)   Small trees: two feet;
   (B)   Medium trees: three feet; and
   (C)   Large trees: four feet.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-135  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.
   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street
tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
§ 86-136  UTILITIES.
   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in § 86-132
of this chapter may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead
utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(Ord. 1271, passed 9-6-1990)
CHAPTER 90: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   TAXICABS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   90-1. — 90-30.   Reserved
§§ 90-1 — 90-30  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: TAXICABS
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
90-31.   Definition
   90-32. — 90-50.   Reserved
Division 2. Business License
   
90-51.   Required
   
90-52.   Application; information required
   
90-53.   Insurance prerequisite to license
   
90-54.   Amount of insurance required
   
90-55.   Number of licenses
   
90-56.   Procedure when more applications than licenses allowable
   
90-57.   Right of Common Council to deny license
   
90-58.   License fee
   
90-59.   Refund of license fee
   
90-60.   Expiration date
   
90-61.   Renewal
   
90-62.   Transfer
   
90-63.   Revocation
   90-64. — 90-85.   Reserved
Division 3. Drivers
   
90-86.   Qualifications
   
90-87.   List to be submitted to Clerk-Treasurer
   
90-88.   Charge for submitting list
   
90-89.   Substitute drivers
   
90-90.   Regulation of condition and fitness
   
90-91.   Inspections
   90-92. — 90-110.   Reserved
Division 4. Vehicles
   
90-111.   Inspections
   
90-112.   Place and time of inspection
   
90-113.   Vehicle inspection certificate
   
90-114.   Operation of defective or dangerous vehicle
   
90-115.   Sanitary conditions of vehicles
   90-116. — 90-135.   Reserved
Division 5. Operational Requirements
   
90-136.   Efficient service required
   
90-137.   Fares
Cross-reference:
   Traffic and Vehicles, see
Ch. 78
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 90-31  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle designed or constructed to accommodate or
transport not more than six passengers excluding the driver, the principal
operation of which is confined to the city and not operating over any definite
route and the destination of which is designated by the passenger at the time
of such transportation.
§§ 90-32 — 90-50  RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. BUSINESS LICENSE
§ 90-51  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any
taxicab without a license.
§ 90-52  APPLICATION; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person desiring a taxicab license shall make a verified
application in writing to the Clerk- Treasurer on a form supplied by the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (B)   Such application shall give the name of the applicant and his or her
place of residence and the number and description of the vehicles proposed to
be used by him or her, and shall state the amount of liability insurance earned
or to be carried by him or her to ensure the payment of any final judgment that
might be rendered for damages resulting from negligent or unlawful operation of
the vehicles.
§ 90-53  INSURANCE PREREQUISITE TO LICENSE.
   No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant shall have filed the
required insurance policies obtained by him or her with the Clerk-Treasurer. If
such policies are found by the Clerk-Treasurer to conform to the requirements
of this article, he or she shall give the applicant a receipt and shall safely
keep the policy in his or her official custody.
§ 90-54  AMOUNT OF INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Each applicant for a taxicab license shall obtain an insurance policy that
provides indemnity of not less than $15,000 because of bodily injury to or
death of any one person as the result of any one accident, and not less than
$30,000 because of bodily injury to or death of any two or more persons as the
result of any one accident, and not less than $5,000 because of property damage
as the result of any one accident.
§ 90-55  NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   Only one taxicab license for each 500, or major fraction, of city population
as determined by the latest United States census shall be allowed.
§ 90-56  PROCEDURE WHEN MORE APPLICATIONS THAN LICENSES ALLOWABLE.
   Any time there are more applications for taxicab licenses than there are
taxicab licenses allowable under this article, the Common Council shall decide
who shall be issued a license.
§ 90-57  RIGHT OF COMMON COUNCIL TO DENY LICENSE.
   The Common Council may, for any reason, deny any person a taxicab license.
§ 90-58  LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee to be charged and collected when an application for a
taxicab license is made shall be as prescribed in § 34-691 of this code of
ordinances.
§ 90-59  REFUND OF LICENSE FEE.
   No taxicab license fee shall in any event be refunded.
§ 90-60  EXPIRATION DATE.
   All taxicab licenses shall expire on January 1 following its date of issue.
§ 90-61  RENEWAL.
   Any person lawfully holding a taxicab license and not in violation of this
article shall be entitled to renew the license by payment of the required fees
and compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 90-62  TRANSFER.
   No taxicab license shall be transferable.
§ 90-63  REVOCATION.
   In addition to the other penalties provided by law, taxicab licenses may be
revoked by the Mayor for any violation by any licensee or his or her employee
of any of the provisions of this article or any penal statutes of the state.
§§ 90-64 — 90-85  RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. DRIVERS
§ 90-86  QUALIFICATIONS.
   Only skillful and experienced drivers with the appropriate state driver’s
licenses shall be allowed to drive taxicabs.
§ 90-87  LIST TO BE SUBMITTED TO CLERK-TREASURER.
   Each taxicab licensee shall, on January 1 of each year, furnish the Clerk-
Treasurer with a list of the names and places of residence of all persons
employed by him or her to drive his or her taxicabs. The Clerk-Treasurer shall
keep the list on file in his or her office.
§ 90-88  CHARGE FOR SUBMITTING LIST.
   Each taxicab licensee shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer a fee as prescribed
in § 34-642 of this code of ordinances for each taxicab driver.
§ 90-89  SUBSTITUTE DRIVERS.
   If any taxicab driver whose name has been submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer
as required by this division should quit or be disabled, the taxicab licensee
may employ a substitute driver if the licensee files the name of such person
with the Clerk-Treasurer within 48 hours after he or she begins work.
§ 90-90  REGULATION OF CONDITION AND FITNESS.
   The Chief of Police shall regulate the condition and fitness of all taxicab
drivers.
§ 90-91  INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall inspect at least once each month, or as often as
necessary, every taxicab driver in order to determine his or her condition and
fitness.
§§ 90-92 — 90-110  RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. VEHICLES
§ 90-111  INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall inspect, at least once each month or as often as
necessary, each taxicab to test and ascertain whether its general and
mechanical condition is such as to render its operation reasonably safe and to
ascertain whether there are any violations of any law relating to taxicabs.
§ 90-112  PLACE AND TIME OF INSPECTION.
   The required taxicab vehicle inspection shall be made at such times and
places as the Chief of Police shall direct.
§ 90-113  VEHICLE INSPECTION CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Upon approval of the mechanical condition of a taxicab upon its first
inspection, the inspecting officer shall issue to its owner a certificate
signed by him or her stating that such taxicab has successfully passed such
inspection and stating the date, the state license tag number, the certificate
of title number, the engine number, the name and make of such taxicab and the
name of its owner.
   (B)   At each monthly inspection thereafter, the inspecting officer shall
indicate upon the inspection certificate the date of such inspection indicating
his or her approval or disapproval and sign the certificate.
   (C)   These inspection certificates shall be maintained by the licensee and
shall be made available to any police officer upon request.
§ 90-114  OPERATION OF DEFECTIVE OR DANGEROUS VEHICLE.
   No defective or dangerous taxicab shall be operated. If any taxicab is found
to be defective or dangerous, it shall not be operated until repairs are made
and the Chief of Police has determined, after an inspection, that the vehicle
is reasonably safe.
§ 90-115  SANITARY CONDITIONS OF VEHICLES.
   All taxicabs shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police.
§§ 90-116 — 90-135  RESERVED.
DIVISION 5. OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 90-136  EFFICIENT SERVICE REQUIRED.
   All taxicabs shall give good, efficient and sufficient service to persons
desiring transportation.
§ 90-137  FARES.
   (A)   Zones. There shall be created, for the purpose of charging taxicab
fare on an unmetered basis, five zones.
   (B)   Amount. The maximum fare to be charged by any taxicab for service to
any person shall be as established by the Common Council.
CHAPTER 94: ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
      Article
         
I.   IN GENERAL
         
II.   DISTRICTS
         
III.   AUTHORIZED USES AND REQUIREMENTS
         
IV.   SPECIAL USES
         
V.   SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURES
         
VI.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
         
VII.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
         
VIII.   NON-CONFORMING USE (GRANDFATHER)
         
IX.   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT
         
X.   COMMISSION AND BOARD FILING PROCEDURES
         
XI.   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
         
XII.   REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
         
XIII.   INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, SEPARABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE
         
XIV.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL
         
XV.   HISTORIC DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
         
XVI.   MISCELLANEOUS TABLES
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Section
   
94-1.   Title
   
94-2.   Short title
   
94-3.   Interpretation
   
94-4.   Non-interference with greater restrictions otherwise imposed
   
94-5.   General definitions
   94-6. — 94-14.   Reserved
§ 94-1  TITLE.
   The title of this chapter shall be “An Ordinance for the Development Through
Planning and Zoning of the Area Within the Jurisdiction of the Plan Commission
of the City of Martinsville, Indiana”.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-2  SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the “Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance
of Martinsville, Indiana”.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-3  INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare.
   (B)   It is not the intent of this chapter, nor should it be the result of
this chapter, that any usage of land existing at the time or prior to the
passage of this chapter, which was illegal or unlawful under former zoning
ordinances or regulations, should become legal or lawful under the terms of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-4  NON-INTERFERENCE WITH GREATER RESTRICTIONS OTHERWISE IMPOSED.
   It is not the intention of this chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, nor to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any ordinances, other than those expressly repealed
hereby, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in
conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be adopted
or approved; except that, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon
the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or requires
larger open spaces or greater lot area per family, than are required or imposed
by such easements, covenants or agreements between parties, or by such
ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-5  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   Words used in the present tense include the future tense the terms “shall”
and “must” are always mandatory. Definitions which contain provisions that,
allow, restrict, prohibit, modify or require specific action with respect to:
land uses; development standards; Commission or Board procedures; subdivision
of land or any other act are enforceable under this section; the same as if
cited in the text of the body of this document and shall apply throughout this
chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building located on the same lot as a
principal building which does not alter or change the character of the premises
and which is not used for human occupancy.
   ACTS. The Advisory Planning Act, I.C. 36-7-1 through 36-7-1200 and I.C. 36-
7-1400 through I.C. 36-7-1500 series and all acts amendatory thereto.
   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE (OFF-PREMISE SIGN). Any outdoor structure designed for
the purpose of advertising or making known any service or commodity that is not
available upon the property on which the structure is located. This definition
will include billboards of any size or shape, any semi-trailer, motor home, or
similar vehicle, licensed or unlicensed, that remains in the same location for
more than 90 days, which has prominently displayed, visible to the public, a
sign, message, logo, design or any other written or graphic message to
announce, advertise or make known any off- premises, retail, commercial,
industrial, or business use or service, including political campaign
advertising. ADVERTISING STRUCTURES must meet the requirements of § 94-37 of
this chapter.
   AIRCRAFT. A weight-carrying machine or structure for flight in or navigation
of the air that is to be supported by the air either by the buoyancy of the
structure or by the dynamic action of the air against its surfaces.
   AIRPORT. Any area which is used or intended to be used for the taking off
and landing of aircraft and any appurtenance areas which are used or intended
to be used for airport building or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways
and tie-down areas.
   ALLEY. A right-of-way other than a street, road, crosswalk or easement
designed to provide a secondary means of access for the special accommodation
of the property it reaches.
   ALTERATIONS. See STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. A building designed to house three or more families and
used exclusively for residential purposes.
   APPLICANT. The owner or owners of real estate who makes application to the
Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals of the city for action by said
Commission or Board affecting the real estate owned thereby.
   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used
for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers, and
where no repair work is done, except minor incidental repair of automobiles or
trailers to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure or land used for the
dispensing, sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories,
including lubrication and replacement or installation of minor parts or
accessories, but not including major repair work such as motor replacement,
transmission replacement, body or fender repair or spray painting.
   BLOCK. An area that abuts a street and lies between two intersecting streets
or barriers such as railroad rights-of-way or watercourses.
   BOARD. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Martinsville, Indiana.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, not available to transients, in which meals are
regularly provided for compensation for at least three persons.
   BUFFER ZONE. All that area outside the corporate limits of the city that is
within the zoning jurisdiction of the city as provided by statute and as
defined by ordinance of Common Council of the city.
   BUILDING. A roofed structure for the shelter, support, enclosure or
protection of persons, animals or property.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY BUILDING.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no structural connection with another
building.
   BUILDING, FRONT LINE. The line of the face of the building nearest the front
lot line.
   BUILDING HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the ground elevation
to the highest point of the roof for a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard
roof; to the height of the highest eave of a gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. An employee of the City Superintendent who is empowered
to inspect and approve improvement location permits.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL OR PRIMARY. A building in which the principal use of the
lot or premises on which it is located is conducted, including a building that
is attached to such a building in a substantial way, such as by a roof. With
respect to residential uses, the PRINCIPAL BUILDING shall be the main dwelling.
   BUILDING AREA. The horizontal projected area of the buildings on a lot or
premises including accessory buildings, but excluding open areas or terraces,
unenclosed porches not more than one story high, and architectural features
that project no more than two feet.
   BUILDING LINE (SETBACK LINE). The line that establishes the minimum
permitted distance on a lot between the front line of a building and the street
right-of-way line.
   BUSINESS. The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of goods,
wares, merchandise, or services, the maintenance or operation of offices or
recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.
   CARPORT. Same as PRIVATE GARAGE.
   CAR WASH. A building, or portion thereof, where mechanical devices of any
type, wash automobiles, trucks or other self-powered vehicles.
   CELLULAR TOWER, CELLULAR SITE or COMMUNICATIONS TOWER. The tower, building
and other improvements constructed, placed, installed and maintained for the
purpose transmitting, retransmitting or broadcasting any electromagnetic
(radio) signal, analog or digital, for use of mobile or portable communication
devices, including television and radio, of any kind and including tower to
tower transmitting.
   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbarium, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate stating that the occupancy and use
of land or a building or structure referred to therein complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
   CITY. The incorporated City of Martinsville, Indiana.
   CITY COUNCIL. Referred to herein as simply the CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The
legislative body of the city and is responsible for approving ordinances
including ordinances that may be presented for zoning map changes.
   CITY ENGINEER. An Indiana licensed engineer designated by the city to
furnish engineering consultation in the administration of these regulations.
The CITY ENGINEER is a member of the Plan Commission.
   CITY SUPERINTENDENT. An employee of the city who is empowered by the city’s
Plan Commission to administer and enforce this chapter, including subdivision
control and Building Codes.
   CLINIC. Establishments in which patients are admitted for medical, dental or
optometric study or treatment and in which the services of at least two
physicians, dentists, optometrists, osteopaths or chiropractors are provided.
   COMMISSION. A planning commission serving a single government jurisdiction
established as defined under I.C. 36-7-1-2, as amended. The city’s PLAN
COMMISSION is an advisory plan commission.
   COMMITMENT(S). The Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals may require or
allow the landowner to make binding written commitment(s) as a requirement for
approval of any zoning change, special exception, special use or subdivision.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Inclusive physical, social and economic plans and
policies in graphic and written statement form for the development of the city
prepared and adopted by the Commission pursuant to the I.C. 36-4-4-500 and
including any part of such plan and/or policies separately adopted and any
amendments to such plan and/or policies, or parts thereof. It does not include
the implement ordinances such as this chapter.
   CONDOMINIUM. Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land and certain
parts of a building thereon which would normally be used by all occupants, such
as yards, foundations, basements, floors, walls, hallways, stairways, elevators
and all other related common elements, together with individual ownership in
fee of a particular unit or portion of such building, which building shall be
the same as a dwelling, either single, double or multi-family, as the case may
be.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail business that offers to the public readily
consumable items. Included in this definition is the dispensing of vehicle fuel
and other vehicle fluids that are prepackaged and removed from the premises.
Not include are any type of vehicle repair or servicing, except for dispensing
of vehicle fuel.
   COOPERATIVE. A building or land in which an individual owns stock in a
corporation with the right through a proprietary lease to occupy a portion of
the land or part of the building, which building shall be the same as a
dwelling, building, which building shall be the same as a dwelling, either
single, double or multi-family, as the case may be.
   COUNTY. The County of Morgan, Indiana.
   DAY CARE CENTER or DAY NURSERY. Any institution operated for the purpose of
providing care and maintenance to six or more unrelated children separated from
their parents or guardians or a person in loco parentis (one who acts in place
of parents) during a part of the day for two or more consecutive weeks
excepting a school or other bona fide educational institution.
   DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURE. The intentional destruction, demolition or removal
of a structure including, houses, garages, sheds, office buildings, foundations
and basements, factories, warehouses, radio cellular or microwave towers,
chimneys, water towers or tanks, underground storage tanks, septic tanks,
cisterns, wells (gas, oil or water).
   DESIGNATED OFFICIAL. The member of the city’s Advisory Plan Commission
designated by Commission rules as the required signatory for the execution of
secondary (final) plat approval. The Secretary of the Advisory Plan Commission
of the city when necessary shall attest to the signature of the DESIGNATED
OFFICIAL.
   DETACHED BUILDING. A building that has no structural connection with another
building.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, whether the landowner or landowner’s agent, engaged
in developing a lot or group of lots or structures for use or occupancy. If
other than the record landowner is the developer, then the DEVELOPER shall have
the written authorization of the landowner to make any application, commitment
or submittal to the Commission or Board.
   DISTRICT. A section of the jurisdictional area for which uniform regulations
governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of use of buildings and
land, and open spaces about buildings, are herein established.
   DRIVES, (PRIVATE). Vehicular driveways, paved or unpaved, which are wholly
within private property, except where they intersect with public streets within
public rights-of-way.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. An establishment selling foods, frozen desserts or
beverages to consumers, the establishment being designed, intended or used for
the consumption of such items on the premises outside of the building in which
they were prepared.
   DWELLING. A building or part of a building that is used primarily as a place
of abode, but not including a hotel, motel lodging house, boarding house,
tourist home or mobile home, as defined in this chapter. Use of any other
structure, travel trailer, camper, tent, garage or similar structures as a
DWELLING for a period of more than 14 days in any calendar year is prohibited
unless it is in a district where such use is specifically permitted.
   DWELLING, DOUBLE. A two-family dwelling that is a single building designed
to house two families living side by side and used exclusively for residential
purposes.
   DWELLING DUPLEX. A two-family dwelling that is a single building designed to
house two families living one above the other and used exclusively for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed for more than
two families and used exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for, or occupied by,
one family exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling or part of a dwelling used by one family as a
place of abode.
   EASEMENT. An authorization grant made by a property owner for use by another
of any designated part of his or her property for a clearly specified purpose
such as utilities, drainage, signs, landscaping and the like.
   EASEMENT, ACCESS OR INGRESS/EGRESS. An easement for the purpose of providing
access, both vehicular and pedestrian, to and from, lots or parcels, that do
not have direct access to a public street or road. For the purpose of this
chapter, an EASEMENT that provides access to four or fewer, parcels or lots,
shall be not less than 30 feet in width.
   FAMILY. One or more person living as a single housekeeping unit, but not
including a group occupying a hotel, motel, club, nursing home, dormitory,
fraternity or sorority house.
   FARM, CONFINEMENT FEEDING. The confined feeding of livestock and poultry on
a tract or contiguous tracts of land for food or pleasure purposes in lots,
pens, sheds and buildings where food is supplied to the animals by means other
than grazing.
      (1)   A CONFINEMENT FEEDING OPERATION shall mean the confined feeding of:
         (a)   Three hundred or more head of cattle;
         (b)   Six hundred or more head of swine, sheep or goats;
         (c)   One thousand five hundred or more head of poultry; or
         (d)   Ten or more head of horses or mules.
      (2)   And/or, any confinement feeding that exceeds per acre per year for
the entire farm:
         (a)   Three or more head of cattle;
         (b)   Twenty or more head of swine;
         (c)   One hundred fifty or more head of poultry;
         (d)   Ten or more head of sheep or goats; or
         (e)   Four or more head of horses or mules.
      (3)   And/or, any area wherein five square feet or less of feed lot area
is provided per laying hen or eight square feet or less per hog weighing less
than 225 pounds, or 15 square feet or less per lamb or ewe, or 50 square feet
or less per heifer or steer, or 100 square feet or less per beef and/or dairy
cow or bull; provided that, this definition shall not apply to operations
involved in the processing of products of CONFINEMENT FEEDING OPERATIONS.
   FARM, GENERAL. Land used for agricultural operations and production of
agricultural products including truck gardening, forestry, the operation of a
tree or plant nursery, or the production of livestock, as defined herein. Also,
the processing and sale of farm products produced on the land by the resident
owner or tenant. Not included in this definition is the slaughtering of animals
for commercial or retail sales or confined feeding operations. Unless otherwise
allowed in this chapter, keeping or maintaining livestock and poultry in any
district other than “agricultural” is prohibited.
   FILLING OR SERVICE STATION. The same as AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general or temporary condition of partial or compete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of run-off of surface water from
any source.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood, without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one tenth of a
foot.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain subject to inundation by the
regulatory or base flood, but located outside the floodway.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area subject to inundation by the regulatory or base flood,
but for which the floodway fringe delineations have not been provided.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building for storage of residential vehicles.
   GARAGE, AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. A building other than a public or private garage,
used for the care, repair or equipment of automobiles.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any garage, other than a private garage, for the parking of
vehicles.
   GARAGE SALE. The organized sale, barter or exchange, of new or used
merchandise, household items, clothing, furniture, appliances, vehicles,
equipment or any similar items from any structure, yard, sidewalk or driveway
within any residential district or any other district where retail sales are
prohibited. GARAGE SALES, yard sales and similar activities may be held in a
residential district, by an individual, not for commercial or business purpose;
provided, said sales do not take place at the same address or location more
than four days in any 90-day period and provided safe and adequate parking is
available as determined by the city’s Police Department or the County Sheriff.
Sale days more frequent than allowed by this definition or if unsafe or
congested traffic conditions occur as a result of a sale, then there would be a
violation of this chapter and the violating party would be subject to the
remedies and penalties of Art. XII and § 94-241 of this chapter.
   GARAGE, TRUCK REPAIR. A building, other than a public or private garage,
used for the care, repair or equipment of trucks over one ton, or when such
vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale.
   GRANDFATHER CLAUSE. A traditional or common use term for a non-conforming
use. See Article VIII of this chapter for non-conforming use restrictions.
   GREATER ZONING CLASSIFICATION. Any zoning classification with a lower
density.
   GROUND FLOOR AREA - RESIDENTIAL. The square floor area of a residential
building within its largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane
at the ground level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages,
carports and exterior stairways. In the case of a bi-level type structure where
the level above the grade line contains complete living facilities including
living, cooking and sleeping areas, that level may be used to compute the
ground floor area. The average width (defined as: total ground floor area,
exclusive of garage, patio, porch or deck, divided by the overall length of
longest side of the dwelling) of any structure to be used as a residential
building shall be not less than 18 feet. This provision does not apply to
mobile or manufactured homes within a mobile home park or planned unit
development approved for mobile homes.
   HARDSHIP. A perceived difficulty with regard to one’s ability to improve
land stemming from the application of the development standards of this
chapter, which may or may not be subject to relief by means of variance. In and
of themselves, self-imposed situations and claims based on a perceived
reduction of or restriction on economic gain shall not be considered HARDSHIPS.
Self-imposed situations include: the purchase of land with actual or
constructive knowledge that, for reasons other than physical characteristics of
the property, the development standards herein will inhibit the desired
improvement; any improvement initiated in violation of the standards of this
chapter; any result of land division requiring variance from the development
standards of this chapter in order to render that site buildable.
   HOME DAY CARE or HOME NURSERY. Any home or residence used for the purpose of
providing care and maintenance to not more than five unrelated children
separated from their parents or guardians or a person in loco parentis (one who
acts in place of parents) during a part of the day for two or more consecutive
weeks.
   HOME OCCUPATION, CUSTOMARY. An occupation carried on by an occupant at his
or her place of residence which occupation shall be subordinate and incidental
to the residential use of said residence; provided that, there shall be no
external evidence of the occupation other than one non-lighted identification
sign not exceeding three square feet in area to be placed flat against the
residence where the occupation is conducted; that there is no commodity or
service sold upon the premises; except that, which is produced thereon; there
shall be no traffic congestion or traffic hazard created by the home
occupation: only the occupant or members of his or her family, normally
residing on said premises, handle all the work and does not employ others at
the residence or elsewhere in said occupation; no external changes, additions,
enlargements or exterior alterations relating in any way to the home occupation
shall be permitted; there shall be no physical expansion of utilities or
community facilities beyond that normal to the residential use of the property;
and that said HOME OCCUPATION shall be terminated upon transfer of said
property to any person other than a member of the immediate family residing on
the property.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings in which lodging is
provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to
transient guests, in contradiction to a boarding house or lodging house.
   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A permit that states that the proposed
erection, construction, enlargement or improvement of property or structures
referred to therein complies with the provisions of this chapter.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK. A tract of land that is planned and developed as a
distinctive unit featuring landscaped open spaces and well designed structures
to be used for research, offices, experimental and testing laboratories, light
industrial storage and distribution facilities, and for necessary uses to the
convenience of employees, and is controlled by an organization guaranteeing the
continued maintenance of all commonly used areas and installations.
   INSTITUTION. Any home, orphanage or other facility maintained or conducted
by any group of persons, a firm, association, corporation or governmental body
engaged in receiving and caring for dependent, neglected, handicapped or
permanently disabled persons, or children in danger of becoming delinquent or
in operating for gain a private business of boarding children who are
unattended by parents or guardians or dependent mentally ill.
   JOINT OWNERSHIP. Joint ownership among persons shall be constructed as one
and the same owner for the purpose of imposing subdivision regulations.
   JUNKYARD. Any lot, parcel or tract of real estate, platted or unplatted, at
which personal property is or may be salvaged for reuse, resale or reduction or
similar disposition and is owned, possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled
or sorted, including, but not limited to, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper
matter; and property used for the dismantling, wrecking, storage, sale or
dumping of two or more inoperative motor vehicles or their parts. This shall
not include tractors, combines, pickers, disks, plows or other similar farm
machinery that is owned by a farm operator and is used for parts replacement
for machinery currently being used in the farming operation.
   JURISDICTIONAL AREA. The incorporated area within the city and any or all of
the unincorporated territory (buffer zone) within two miles of the city
boundaries lying within the county as designated on the map entitled
“jurisdictional area” or “buffer zone”, together with the legal description of
said area, recorded in the office of the Recorder of the county and is by
reference hereby made a part of this chapter.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which more than five or more dogs or cats
that are commonly kept as household pets. Exception: a litter of pups or
kittens not over five months old.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. A highway to which abutting properties are denied
access.
   LIVESTOCK. Animals commonly maintained, raised or kept on a farm including,
cattle, horses, swine, goats, sheep and poultry. Also, included in the
definition are fish or other aquatic animals such as shrimp or prawns raised in
ponds or lakes for commercial purposes.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS. The off-street area required for the receipt
or the distribution, by vehicle, of material or merchandise which in this
chapter is held to be a 12-foot by 75- foot loading space with a 14-foot height
clearance.
   LODGING HOUSE. The same as BOARDING HOUSE.
   LOT. Any lot, parcel or tract, of land abutting upon a street or on a
recorded easement that has a separate and distinct legal description. A LOT
will have a unique parcel number in the records of the Auditor of the county.
In determining lot area, no part thereof shall be included that is within the
limits of a dedicated street or within the limits of a private access easement.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting
streets.
   LOT, COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by all buildings on
the premises.
   LOT, ELEVATION. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the
elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the walls adjoining the street. For
buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the
ELEVATION of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining the streets
shall determine the ground level.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.
   LOT (OR PARCEL) OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder or a parcel of
land, having a separate and distinct legal description, the deed of which has
been recorded in the office of the County Recorder and existed prior to passage
of this chapter.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
   LOT, WIDTH. The dimension of a lot, measured between side lot lines on the
minimum building line as established by this chapter.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. Any property line separating the lot from the street or
access easement. Also, the front of a lot shall be determined by the principal
direction in which the front of the primary structure faces. The City
Superintendent shall determine which face of the building is the front of the
primary structure.
   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line, and in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, the line
that, for its entire length is completely within the lot and parallel with and
at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary that is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line. In no instance shall the sideline be closer than the sidelines for that
district.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit, designed and built in a factory, which
bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law of 1974 (42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq.).
   MINERAL EXTRACTION. Mining, quarrying or the removal of rock, sand, gravel
or other earth material.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure larger than 320 square feet, designed
for use as a year-round residential dwelling.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any area of land that has one owner upon which two or more
manufactured homes or mobile homes are supported by wheels or a foundation.
   MODULAR HOME. Any structure designed to move on the highway and manufactured
to be used as a dwelling under the laws of the state.
   OFFICIAL THOROUGHFARE PLAN. A plan for major streets and highways which sets
forth the location, alignment, dimensions, identification and classification of
existing dimensions, identification and classification of existing and proposed
streets, highways and other thoroughfares.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT.
      (1)   A district that places additional conditions or restrictions on
use, development or improvement of land in the base or underlying district. An
OVERLAY DISTRICT cannot be subdivided or developed.
      (2)   However, the underlying district can be subdivided, developed or
improved as long as such division, development and improvements are in
conformance with the OVERLAY DISTRICT conditions and restrictions; and,
provided that, said uses, development or improvements are not prohibited by the
restrictions of the OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
   PARCEL. A piece of land having a legal description formally set forth in a
conveyance together with a description of its location, shape and size in order
to make possible its easy identification.
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area, other than a street or alley, designed
for use or used for the temporary parking of more than four motor vehicles when
available for public use, whether free or for compensation or as an
accommodation.
   PARKING SPACE. A space other than on a street or alley, designed for use or
used for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle, and being not less than nine
feet wide and 20 feet long exclusive of passageways.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association or
organization, or any other group that acts as a unit.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A portable or self-propelled vehicular structure
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel and vacation use which:
      (1)   Either:
         (a)   Is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a recreational
vehicle;
         (b)   Is not more than the statutory body width for highway purposes
as determined by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles; and
         (c)   Is of any weight provided its body length does not exceed 32
feet.
      (2)   Or:
         (a)   Is a structure mounted on an automobile or truck; and
         (b)   Is designated as a use for sleeping or temporary habitation.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered
or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the state.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and
registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the state.
   SALVAGE YARD. See JUNKYARD.
   SETBACK. The distance from the respective lot line beyond which buildings
may be placed. Also, buildings shall not be placed closer to the respective lot
line than the setback distance.
   SIGN. Any medium including, but not limited to, changeable copy signs,
banners, awnings, electronic message boards, or flags, designed for the purpose
of advertising, information, or making known any service or commodity that is
available. This definition also includes logos, trademarks, and corporate
insignias, but does not apply to color schemes.
   SIGN PERMIT EXPIRATION DATES.  All permits for advertising structures and
freestanding signs that are not permanent shall expire 30 days after date
issued, or for a fixed period of time not to exceed a collective 30 days out of
a calendar year.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING (NOT PERMANENT).  Any non-permanent outdoor structure,
not to exceed 28 square feet in size, designed for the purpose of advertising
or making known any service or commodity that is available on the premises,
that stands apart from any building or structure on the property, and has
attached its own support structure, completely by frame or pole and is
displayed for a fixed period of time not to exceed a collective 30 days out of
a calendar year.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING (PERMANENT).  Any permanent outdoor structure, designed
for the purpose of advertising or making known any service or commodity that is
available on the premises, that stands apart from any building or structure on
the property, and has attached its own support structure, completely by frame,
pole, or foundation and must be designed and anchored to withstand 70 miles per
hour wind by a design professional (architect/engineer).
   SIGN, POLITICAL. See ADVERTISING STRUCTURE.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY.  Any outdoor signage to include, but not limited to,
banners, flags, or yard signs on premise, not fixed to a permanent foundation
and displayed for a fixed period of time not to exceed a collective 30 days out
of a calendar year for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or
ideas to the public about a subject related to the activities on the premises
upon which it is located.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. The authorization of a use, that the Board specifically
authorizes being permitted in the district concerned if it meets special
conditions and upon application.
   STOCKYARD. Any parcel, lot or tract where, in any 30-day period, a total of
more than; 150 head of cattle; 300 head of swine, sheep or goats; 750 head of
poultry; or ten head of horses, pones or mules, are confined in a building or
held in pens for the purpose of sale, transfer, auction, shipping or slaughter,
or any operation where livestock is purchased for the purpose of resale within
30 days.
   STREET. A right-of-way established for or dedicated to the public use that
affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. A STREET may be
designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, lane,
drive, place or other appropriate name.
   STREET DEAD-END. A local street with only one outlet and not having an
appropriate terminus (turn around) for the safe and convenient reversal of
traffic including public safety.
   STREET PRIVATE. A right-of-way or easement for the public use for vehicular
and pedestrian traffic that is owned and maintained by a private person or
entity and not by a governmental body. Its owner or owners may limit use of a
private street. PRIVATE STREETS may serve residential or non- residential
properties.
   STREET PUBLIC. A right-of-way dedicated for the public use for vehicular and
pedestrian traffic to be owned and maintained by the governmental body having
jurisdiction. Other ancillary uses such as drainage and/or utility facilities
may also be included within public right-of-way.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any
substantial change in the exterior walls, roof, electrical systems, plumbing
systems or mechanical equipment.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   A division of any parcel of land into two or more parcels, sites or
lots, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area for the purpose of
transfer of ownership, sale or building development. Also, the improvement of
one or more parcels of land, not under one ownership, for construction of
residential, business, industrial or commercial structures or groups of
structures the development of which requires land for streets, open spaces,
common areas or creation of easements for access, drainage or public utilities
to service the varied facilities. SUBDIVISION OF LAND is permitted in every
zoning district, except overlay districts. In overlay districts, SUBDIVISION OF
THE LAND in the underlying district is permitted.
      (2)   Exemption from platting requirements: for the purposes of these
regulations, the following are not considered a SUBDIVISION and, therefore, are
exempt from the platting requirements of this chapter:
         (a)   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a
descendant or a court decree for the distribution of property;
         (b)   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnations as
defined and provided under state law;
         (c)   Widening of existing street right-of-way by a government entity
for the public good;
         (d)   Land acquisition for street or public mass transit system right-
of-way by a government entity for the public good;
         (e)   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundary lines which does not result in the change of the present land usage;
and
         (f)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of parcels between
adjoining land owners, provided that no additional building sites are created
other than for accessory buildings.
   SUPERINTENDENT. See CITY SUPERINTENDENT.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any structure, facility or container, above ground, on ground
or in-ground, temporary or permanent, which has been constructed, installed or
erected for the purpose of providing a swimming or bathing facility. However,
for the purpose of this chapter, any such structure that has a maximum sidewall
height of two feet or less is not a SWIMMING POOL.
   THOROUGHFARE. The same definition as STREET.
   TOURIST HOME. A building in which one, but not more than five, guest rooms
are used to provide or offer overnight accommodations to transient guests for
compensation.
   TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL. A secretarial or business school whether private
or public, or a school for the teaching of music, dancing, barbering, hair
dressing, drafting, industrial or technical arts.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. An area, premises, space or place, including service
buildings thereon, in which parking or rental space for trailers on a temporary
basis is provided to the public for compensation.
   TRUCK SERVICE CENTER. An occupancy which provides especially for the
servicing of trucks, with incidental operations similar to those permitted for
“automobile service center”.
   USE. The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land for a
person’s service, benefit or enjoyment.
   UTILITIES. Any entity, public or private, that provides an essential or
desired service to the public that is delivered via wires, cables, pipes,
ducts, conduits or mains. Including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers,
water, telephone, electric, natural gas, cable television, internet service or
any other service provided to the public that the Plan Commission determines is
a utility.
   VARIANCE, DEVELOPMENT. A specific approval granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals in the manner prescribed by this chapter, to deviate from the
development standards, such as height, bulk, setback or area, that this chapter
otherwise prescribes.
   VARIANCE, DIMENSIONAL. See VARIANCE, DEVELOPMENT.
   VARIANCE, USE. The approval of a “use” other than that prescribed by this
chapter, as specifically approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   VISION CLEARANCE. A triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot,
free from any kind of obstruction to vision between the heights of three and 12
feet above established street grade, determined by a diagonal line, connecting
two points measured 25 feet equidistant from the right-of-way corner along each
right-of-way line. Further no structure, landscaping or fence shall be erected
or maintained on any lot or parcel that, in the opinion of the City Engineer,
would restrict sight distance such that there would be a danger to vehicles or
pedestrians using streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys or other public rights-of-
way that adjoin the property. (See § 94-33(M) of this chapter.)
   WAIVER. A specific approval granted by the Plan Commission that permits a
deviation from the development standards of this chapter, including the
subdivision control article (Art. XIV of this chapter). WAIVERS must be made in
writing at the time application is made for PUD or subdivision primary plat
approval including minor plats. Waiver request must be specific as to the
development standard to be waived and the extent of the variation desired.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA (OVERLAY). Areas near wellfields used to supply
water for public purposes wherein certain potentially hazardous land uses near
such wellfield areas shall be regulated and restricted to a greater extent than
the underlying zoning.
   WORK STATION. An area in a business or industrial use classification
specifically equipped for the occupancy of one employee to conduct their work
activity.
   YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open unoccupied and
unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, unoccupied
other than steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and similar
structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the street right-
of-way line and the building line.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
rear of the main building and the rear lot line unoccupied other than by
accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the required space,
the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear
of such main building.
   YARD SALE. See GARAGE SALE.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side lot line,
extending from the front yard or front lot line where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard is measured
horizontally, at 90 degrees with the side lot line, from the nearest point of
any building.
   ZONING COMMITMENT. See COMMITMENT(S).
   ZONING MAP. The map entitled “Martinsville Zoning Map”, dated as may be
applicable, and any amendments thereto, as shown on the primary Martinsville
Zoning Map on display in City Hall.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011; Ord.
2017-1742, passed 4- -2017)
§§ 94-6 — 94-14  RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DISTRICTS
Section
   
94-15.   Establishment of districts
   
94-16.   Description of districts
   
94-17.   Wellhead protection
   
94-18.   Zoning maps
   
94-19.   Conversion of former districts
   94-20. — 94-29.   Reserved
§ 94-15  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The jurisdictional area is hereby classified and divided into
districts designated as follows:
 
District Designation Primary Use
AG Agricultural/Residential
B1 Professional Business
B2 Local Business
B3 General Business
B4 Heavy Business
FP Floodplain Overlay
I1 Light Industrial
I2 Medium Industrial
I3 Heavy Industrial
I4 Special Industrial
OS Open Space
R1 Residential Single-Family
R2 Medium Density Residential
R3 High Density Residential
W1 Wellhead Protection 1-year travel
W2 Wellhead Protection 5-year travel
 
   (B)   In general, uses allowed in a zoning district are allowed in higher
zoning districts of the same type. Example: R1 use is allowed in R2 Residential
Districts; B1 uses are allowed in B2 and B3 Business Districts; I1 uses are
allowed in I2 Districts. This shall be the interpretation used in this chapter
with the following restrictions: single-family residential use (R1) are
prohibited in High Density Residential (R3) District; B1, B2 and B3 uses are
prohibited in B4 District. All business (B) uses are allowed in a PUD- Business
district if specifically approved as part of the PUD plan: I1, I2 and I3 uses
are prohibited in Special Industrial (I4) District. Where a use is allowed in
more than one zoning type, the lower uses cannot be extended into the higher
zoning type beyond that which is allowed in Table 1. Example: Table 1 allows
for a specific use in B3, B4 and I1 Districts this use shall not be extended
into any higher industrial districts; a specific use is allowed in R3 and B2
Districts, this use shall not be allowed into any higher business districts. A
use that requires a special exception is restricted to those districts
specifically shown in Table 1.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-16  DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICTS.
   (A)   FP - Floodplain Overlay District.
      (1)   General. This is an overlay district and is designated to be
located in all areas that are defined as being within the floodplain and
identified in the city’s Ordinance For Flood Hazard Areas (Ord. 96-1381; see
Appendix C), and all amendments thereto, as floodplain. In general, these lands
are in an Agricultural District (AG) and will consist of land adjacent to
streams or other natural drainage channels or areas that are low lying,
difficult to drain, and subject to flood. Any ground shown as a floodplain
fringe (those areas outside the floodway) in the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), as defined in the Flood Hazard
Ordinance, and all amendments thereto, which is filled to a level two feet
above the 100-year flood elevation (base flood elevation (BFE)) with a
structural compacted fill in accordance with FEMA requirements shall no longer
be considered in the floodplain overlay district, provided the owner of the
property requests the Plan Commission to remove the overlay designation.
Procedure for removal shall be the same as filing for a petition for zoning
change. A Letter of Map Revision by Fill (LOMR-F) that has been approved by
FEMA must accompany the zoning change application.
      (2)   Representative principal uses. Agriculture, including customary
agricultural buildings and structures, but not including permanent dwellings,
nurseries, structures and greenhouses. Ord. 96-1381, see Appendix C and
revision, shall control construction or improvement of buildings.
      (3)   Special exception uses. Recreational uses that do not require
permanent structures such as baseball or football fields, parks, riding
stables, fishing lakes, boat docks. Also, gravel pits, mines and stone
quarries; provided that, all other ordinances are met and necessary state and
federal permits are obtained.
   (B)   AG - Agricultural District.
      (1)   General. This district is designed to recognize the existence of
agriculture as the dominant land use, with ancillary residential use.
      (2)   Representative uses. Agriculture and agricultural buildings;
provided that, livestock shall not be held in a confined feeding operation, as
defined in § 94-5 of this chapter, within 1,320 feet of any lot in an area
zoned R1 Residential, R2 Residential or R3 Residential as defined in this
chapter. Public parks, playgrounds, orchards, nurseries and greenhouse
operations shall also be allowed in this district. Residential uses that comply
with § 94.33 of this chapter and the AG District of Tables 2a through 2c of
said section.
      (3)   Right to farm. Nothing in this chapter shall require existing
farming operations, as of the effective date of this chapter, to alter, change
or relocate their operations to comply with the setback or outside storage
provisions established herein. Confined feeding shall not be permitted, except
as provided in subsection (B)(1) above.
      (4)   Special exceptions. The following uses shall be allowed by special
exception: campgrounds, residential country clubs, gravel and mining operations
(so long as all other ordinances, state and local) and standards are met,
churches, schools, cemeteries, airports, swimming clubs, stables and similar
recreational uses.
      (5)   Restrictions. Livestock confinement operations and stockyards as
defined in this chapter.
   (C)   OS - Open Space.
      (1)   General. This district is designed to recognize the need for parks,
recreation areas, nature areas, for the purpose of buffering zoning districts
for recreation and aesthetic purposes.
      (2)   Representative uses. Parks, planting strips of trees and flowers.
      (3)   Special exceptions. None.
      (4)   Restrictions. None.
   (D)   Rural Residential Districts.
      (1)   RR(a), RR(b) and RR(c), Rural Residential (RR) District defined.
         (a)   This district is generally a transitional district between urban
residential areas and traditional agricultural districts. Typically, this
district is used for land where difficult terrain or other topographical
features make small lot, high density, residential developments impractical.
This district may also be characterized by land that is less suitable for row
crop cultivation and may be partially or fully timbered. Generally, these
districts are located in areas where sanitary sewers are not available and,
therefore, lots must be larger to accommodate on site waste disposal systems.
         (b)   Primary use for land in these districts is for single-family
residential consisting of one detached dwelling per lot. Other uses by right in
these districts are: crop cultivation; keeping a limited number of livestock in
a manner that is in keeping with good animal husbandry practice (see Animal
Unit Equivalents (AUE) table); timber harvesting and tree farm.
      (2)   Rural Residential Single-Family sub-districts shall be defined.
         (a)   RR(a) is to be defined as, single-family, rural residential
estates having a minimum lot area of ten acres. Livestock may be kept with
restrictions on the number of animals.
         (b)   RR(b) is to be defined as, single-family, rural residential
estates having a minimum lot area of five acres. Livestock, except swine, may
be kept with restrictions on the number and type of animals.
         (c)   RR(c) is to be defined as, single-family, rural residential
estates having a minimum lot area of one acre if sanitary sewers are available
and two acres if on site waste disposal system is required. Livestock, except
swine, may be kept with restrictions on the number and type of animal.
      (3)   Representative uses. Single-family residential, consisting of one-
family, detached dwellings. Limited farming operations, including keeping of
livestock are permitted.
      (4)   Special exceptions. Large animal veterinarian; commercial track
farm; commercial greenhouse; public park or public recreation area; day care
and group home. A special exception is also required for any use related to
religious activities.
      (5)   Restrictions and development standards. See § 94-33(A) through (P),
Table 2a and Table AUE.
   (E)   Residential Districts, R1, R2 and R3.
      (1)   R1 - Residential Single-Family.
         (a)   General. This is a single-family dwelling district that shall
include areas that should be residential in character. The classifications
within the R1 Zoning District shall vary in minimum lot size and ground floor
area of structure based upon density and compatibility with the area and the
master plan for the city.
         (b)   Definitions. Residential single-family classifications shall be
defined as follows.
            1.   R1(a) is to be defined as low density single-family
residential.
            2.   R1(b) to be defined as medium low-density single-family
residential.
            3.   R1(c) to be defined as medium high-density single-family
residential.
            4.   R1(d) to be defined as high-density single-family residential.
         (c)   Representative uses. Single-family residential, consisting of
one-family, detached dwellings. Other uses would include public parks,
playgrounds and related non-commercial recreational areas.
         (d)   Special exceptions. Church, synagogue, temple without school and
see Table 1.
         (e)   Restrictions and development standards. See § 94-33(A) through
(P), Table 1, Table 2a and Parking Table 3a.
      (2)   R2 - Residential.
         (a)   General. This district is designated to recognize two-family
residential units in those areas that should be residential in character. This
area shall be more densely developed than the R1 Districts, but not as densely
developed as the R3 Districts.
         (b)   Definition. R2 shall be defined as an area for two-family
dwelling units.
         (c)   Representative uses. Two-family dwelling units, parks and
playgrounds.
         (d)   Special exceptions. R1 uses are permitted which meet the minimum
development standards as shown in Table 2a: church; synagogue; temple without
school. See Table 1.
         (e)   Restrictions and development standards. Height regulations, lot
area, frontages and setbacks. See § 94-33(A) through (P) of this chapter, Table
1, Table 2a and Parking Table 3a.
      (3)   R3 - Residential.
         (a)   General. This district designates the most densely developed
multi-family residential units. It includes multi-family uses, consisting of
three or more units with minimum lot size based on the number of dwelling units
in a building. The requirements as to minimum size of lots and ground floor
area of buildings are less than those specified for the other residential uses.
         (b)   Representative uses. Multi-family residential uses consisting of
units of three dwellings per unit or greater, parks and playgrounds and other
similar recreational uses.
         (c)   Special exceptions. See use listings in Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions and development standards. See § 94-33(A) through
(P) of this chapter, Table 1, Table 2a and Parking Table 3a.
   (F)   Business Districts B1, B2, B3 and B4. The four business district
classifications are established to provide adequate areas for the variety of
business and commercial land uses that will be needed to serve present and
future residents of the jurisdictional area.
      (1)   B1 - Professional Business District.
         (a)   General. This district is located in areas where professional
offices should be maintained without opening the area to higher business uses
that would not be compatible with adjacent land uses.
         (b)   Representative uses. Attorneys’ offices, dentists’ offices,
counseling offices, insurance offices, optometrists and psychiatrists.
         (c)   Special exceptions. See use listings, Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions.
            1.   Hours of operation open to clients and public from 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m.
            2.   See § 94-37 of this chapter for sign restrictions and
provisions.
         (e)   Development standards. Height regulations, lot area, frontage,
setbacks, yard requirements, parking and loading. (See § 94-33(A) through (Q)
of this chapter, Table 2b and Parking Table 3b.)
      (2)   B2 - Local Business.
         (a)   General. This district is designed and located in areas adjacent
to residential neighborhoods to accommodate the primary needs of that locality.
This district should place convenience and necessity facilities close to
consumers in limited areas.
         (b)   Representative uses. Retail business establishments such as
appliance stores, auto accessory stores, bakeries, small grocery store and
convenience market, book or stationery store, café  or restaurant, camera or
photographic supply, laundromats, laundry, candy or ice cream store,
delicatessen, offices, drugstore, fabric shop, floor covering store, florist
shop, gift shop, haberdashery or women’s ready-to-wear shop, hardware or paint
store, hobby shop, jewelry store, meat market, shoe store, variety store, bank
branch, funeral home, barber shop, beauty shop, church and schools.
         (c)   Special exception. See use listings, Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions. Total primary building floor area shall not exceed
9,000 square feet. Outside storage must be screened from public view with
approved permanent screening. Pods, trailers and other similar enclosures, used
for storage for more than ten consecutive calendar days, are prohibited.
Merchant can display retail items not manufactured on site, not including
inventory, on the outside. See § 94-37 of this chapter for sign restrictions
and provisions.
         (e)   Development standards. Height regulations, lot area, frontage,
setbacks, yard requirements, parking and loading. (See § 94-33(A) through (Q)
of this chapter, Table 2b and Parking Table 3b.)
      (3)   B3 - General Business District.
         (a)   General. This district is designed to include areas suitable for
most other types of business and higher volume retail sales uses not included
in the B1 or B2 Business Districts.
         (b)   Representative uses. Wholesale businesses, motels, hotels,
drive-in eating establishments, shopping centers, shopping malls, strip
business centers, taverns, restaurants, gasoline stations, golf driving range,
skating rink, bowling alley, nightclub and similar enterprises, carpenter shop,
electrical or heating shop, dry cleaning shop, sign painting shop, church, mini
warehouses.
         (c)   Special exceptions. The following uses shall be by special
exception only: the automobile repair, tire stores, truck repair, trailer
repair, trailer sales, farm implements sales, automobile sales and body shops.
Also, see use listings in Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions. See § 94-37 of this chapter for sign restrictions
and provisions. Outside display allowed for retail sales items not manufactured
on site and not inventoried outside. Outside storage allowed but must be
screened from public view with approved permanent screening. Pods, trailers and
other similar enclosures, used for storage for more than ten consecutive
calendar days, are prohibited.
         (e)   Development standards. Height regulations, yard requirements,
lot area, frontages and setbacks, parking and loading. (See § 94-33(A) through
(Q) of this chapter, Table 2b and Parking Table 3b.)
      (4)   B4 - Heavy Business.
         (a)   General. This district is designed to include areas that have
heavy outdoor display of vehicles or equipment for retail sales, heavy vehicle
repair and facilities that require large buildings for recreational use or
large outdoors recreational facilities.
         (b)   Representative uses. Automobile repair; tire stores with service
centers, truck repair, trailer repair, trailer sales, farm implement repair and
dealers, automobile sales and service body shops, lumberyards, kennel and large
indoor and outdoor commercial recreational facilities. Also, see use listings
in Table 1.
         (c)   Special exceptions. See Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions. See § 94-37 of this chapter for sign restrictions
and provisions.
         (e)   Development standards. Height regulations, yard requirements,
lot area, frontages and setbacks, parking and loading. (See § 94-33(A) through
(Q) of this chapter, Table 2b and Parking Table 3b.)
   (G)   Industrial Districts, I1, I2, I3 and I4.
      (1)   I1 - Light Industrial.
         (a)   General. This district is designed and located in areas most
suitable for light industrial uses because of their location near necessary
infrastructure and buffering from residential land uses. This district shall
consist of various types of storage, manufacturing and fabricating done in an
enclosed facility. This shall consist of uses such as block plants, lumber
companies. The above types of uses shall be allowed unless the business
utilizes techniques that are more consistent with the definitions set out in
I2, Medium Industrial District, or any other industrial district.
         (b)   Special exceptions. See use listings, Table 1.
         (c)   Restrictions. All outside storage must be screened. The business
hours of any light industrial use shall be no greater than 6:00 a.m. through
12:00 midnight. The business should not use hazardous materials: create any
type of noise, air, or water pollution, based upon state standards, conducted
within 50 feet of a residential property line. The sign requirements for I1
shall be the same as set out for B3.
         (d)   Development standards. Building Height regulations, lot area,
frontage, setbacks, yard requirements, loading and area per building. (See §
94-33(A) through (Q) of this chapter, Table 2b and 2c and Table 3b and § 94-35
of this chapter.)
      (2)   I2 - Medium Industrial.
         (a)   General. This district is designed and located in areas that
generate a high volume of traffic, need 24-hours of operation and which,
because of their nature, require additional buffering from residential uses.
         (b)   Permitted uses. All uses that fit within the above definition.
         (c)   Special exceptions. See use listings, Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions. All outside storage must be fenced. Any business
that stores, creates or uses any types of hazardous materials requiring
evacuation in the event of an accident (as set by State Hazards Waste Standards
of the state’s Department of Environmental Management).
         (e)   Development standards. Building height regulations, lot area,
frontage, setbacks, yard requirements, loading and area per building. (See
Table 2b and 2c, Table 3b and §§ 94-33(A) through (Q) and 94-35 of this
chapter.)
      (3)   I3 - Heavy Industrial.
         (a)   General. This district is designed for industrial uses that are
not confined to a building but use hazardous materials that create water
pollution, noise pollution or air pollution, which require on-site treatment,
that need unlimited outside storage and unlimited hours of operation. This zone
should be located where significant buffering from non-industrial land uses can
be provided to protect the health, safety and values of neighboring properties.
         (b)   Proposed uses. All uses which fit within the above definition.
         (c)   Special exceptions. See use listings, Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions. Minimum lot size of five acres. All the uses under
subsections (G)(3)(a) through (G)(3)(c) above shall have a minimum fence of
five feet (monitored gates not required) surrounding the actual use. All
outside storage shall be fenced and secured separately, and any business that
stores, creates or uses any types of hazardous materials requiring evacuation
in the event of an accident (as set by State Hazards Waste Standards) shall be
fenced and secured.
         (e)   Development standards. Building height regulations, lot area,
frontage, setbacks, yard requirements, loading and area per building. (See
Table 2b and 2c, Table 3b and §§ 94-33(A) through (Q) and 94-35 of this
chapter.)
      (4)   I4 - Special Industrial.
         (a)   General. This district is to be used for hazardous industrial
uses that should be located in areas where extensive buffering and special
access can be provided and would be required to protect, not only immediately
adjacent land uses, but also the community in general.
         (b)   Representative uses. All uses that would fall under the above
definition. For example, laboratories that use gene-splicing techniques,
industries using or manufacturing nuclear materials, excepting limited uses by
medical facilities.
         (c)   Special exceptions. See use listings, Table 1.
         (d)   Restrictions. No use to be conducted within 1,000 feet from any
area zoned floodplain, agricultural, residential or business use. The use areas
must be secured by fence no less than six feet in height and surrounding the
entire use area with monitored gates at all access points. All outside storage
shall be fenced. All state standards shall be met regarding air, water, noise
and other waste pollution.
         (e)   Development standards. Building height regulations, lot area,
frontage, setbacks, yard requirements, loading and area per building. (See
Table 2b and 2c, Table 3b and §§ 94-33(A) through (Q) and 94-35 of this
chapter.)
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-17  WELLHEAD PROTECTION.
   (A)   Because of the risk that certain chemicals pose to ground water
quality, it is recognized that further regulation of use and storage of
chemicals related to land use activities is essential in order to preserve
public health, welfare and economic vitality of the city’s planning area. Areas
near wellfields used to supply water for public purposes wherein certain
potentially hazardous land uses near such wellfield areas shall be regulated
and restricted to a greater extent than the underlying zoning.
   (B)   Therefore, the following regulations shall apply to all land within
the Wellfield Protection Overlay Districts, with exceptions of single and
multi-family residential land uses.
      (1)   Applicability of regulation. No building, structure, premises or
part thereof shall be constructed, erected, enlarged, extended or relocated
except in conformity with these regulations and for uses permitted herein and
until a proposed site and development plan has been filed and the City
Superintendent has issued an improvement location permit.
      (2)   Exemption to development and site plan requirements. In W1 and W5
Overlay Districts, a site and development plan is not required if the existing
or proposed use is entirely:
         (a)   For single- or multi-family residential use (R1, R2 and R3);
         (b)   For professional business offices (B1); and
         (c)   Other business uses where, in their normal course of business
the threshold amounts of substances hazardous to drinking water as determined
by EPA or IDEM are: in Overlay District W1, less than one gallon of liquids in
the aggregate or six pounds of water soluble solids in the aggregate and in
overlay district W5 less than 100 gallons of liquids in the aggregate or 600
pounds of water soluble solids in the aggregate, are stored or used on site at
any one time.
      (3)   Exemptions. In determining the threshold amount of hazardous
substances, the following are exempt:
         (a)   Liquids required for normal operation of a motor vehicle in use
in that vehicle;
         (b)   Reasonable quantities of substances, stored in their original
container, used for routine building and yard maintenance stored inside a
facility;
         (c)   Substances contained within vehicles for bulk deliveries to the
site;
         (d)   Beverages and food use at restaurants, supermarkets, convenience
stores and other retail food establishments;
         (e)   Discharge of uncontaminated public water supply water, ground
water and/or surface water;
         (f)   Substances, which are packaged in pre-sealed containers, sold at
retail establishments;
         (g)   Substances utilized for the production and treatment of public
water supply; and
         (h)   Substances, which because of their inherent properties are
determined from time to time by the City Superintendent to pose no significant
threat to ground water.
      (4)   Application required. In addition to a site and development plan
the following uses require application to the Plan Commission, in compliance
with Art. X of this chapter and a specific finding by an affirmative vote of
the Plan Commission that the proposed use would not be detrimental to the
public water supply within wellhead protection overlay areas regardless of the
underlying zoning:
         (a)   All business, industrial or commercial uses that do not meet the
requirements of subsection (B)(3) above and the hazardous substances are not
exempt under subsection (B)(3) above;
         (b)   Any proposed use that requires the installation of an
underground storage tank, holding tank, septic tank, grease trap or any other
similar underground facility;
         (c)   Car, truck or vehicles wash;
         (d)   Animal feedlots, confinement areas and stockyards or
slaughterhouse, including meatpacking;
         (e)   Mineral, aggregate, metals, clays or any other type of mining.
Any type of mineral extraction associated with the removal of sand and gravel
shall meet the following requirements.
            1.   Removal of sand and gravel material below the normal ground
water level shall be accomplished using dragline, floating dredge or an
alternative net excavation method.
            2.   There shall be no de-watering of sand and gravel mining sites.
            3.   No form of solid waste, sludge or any other form of waste
material of any kind, including, but not limited to, construction/demolition
including milled or broken asphalt and concrete pavement, debris, shall be
used, stockpiled, stored or kept on the site. Clean natural earth fill
materials may be used without restriction.
            4.   All fuels, oils, lubricants, hydraulic fluids, petroleum
products or similar materials on the site must be stored using secondary
containment facilities.
         (f)   Wastewater treatment facilities; and
         (g)   Solid waste storage, disposal or transfer stations.
      (5)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within the
wellhead protection overlay areas W1 and W5:
         (a)   Open storage of salts, tars and petroleum products, wood treated
with preservatives, pesticides, fertilizers, appliances or any other items or
product where rain or other environmental action would wash a hazardous
substance on or into the soil;
         (b)   Junk or salvage yards;
         (c)   Hazardous chemical transfer or transport stations, other than
bulk deliveries to retail or industrial facilities;
         (d)   Warehousing of hazardous chemicals or substances where the
warehoused materials exceed in Overlay District W1, more than one gallon of
liquids in the aggregate or six pounds of water soluble solids in the aggregate
and in overlay district W5 more than 100 gallons of liquids in the aggregate or
600 pounds of water soluble solids in the aggregate, are warehoused at any one
time unless the hazardous chemicals or substances are stored in an area that
has secondary containment capable of containing 110% of the aggregate amounts
of liquid and solid hazardous substances;
         (e)   Explosives of any kind;
         (f)   De-watering of sites except for: prevention of damage to
structures; to protect ground water quality; and the temporary de-watering for
the construction of sewers and other underground facilities, including
foundations; and
         (g)   Injection wells of any kind except for the following: non-
contact air conditioning (heating and cooling) return flow wells; non-contact
cooling water return flow wells; barrier recharge wells used to replenish the
water in an aquifer or to improve ground water quality provided the injected
fluid does not contain potential ground water contaminants; and non-contact
wells associated with recovery of geothermal energy, aquaculture and production
of electric power.
      (6)   Existing use expansion. Where an existing use is being expanded,
the site and development plan shall generally describe the entire site but only
the expansion development will be subject to regulation.
      (7)   Commitments. The Plan Commission may permit or require commitments
as a requirement for approval of any development listed in subsection (B)(4)
above.
      (8)   Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the applicable underlying
zoning district, subject to the requirement, restrictions, limitations and
prohibitions given in subsections (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5) and
(B)(6) above shall be those allowed in W1 and W2 Overlay Districts.
      (9)   Site and development plan requirements and supporting information.
         (a)   The site and development plan submitted to the City
Superintendent for issuance of a improvement location permit and/or to the Plan
Commission in support of a proposed use listed in subsection (B)(4) above shall
include the following:
            1.   Any existing uses;
            2.   Setbacks;
            3.   Landscaping, screens, walls, fences;
            4.   Wastewater disposal facilities;
            5.   Vicinity Map (U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute quadrangle preferred);
            6.   Brief history of site of new building, addition or other
structures and improvements (usage, historical environmental concerns,
abandoned wells, underground storage tanks, septic tanks, holding tanks);
            7.   Site map (drawn to scale not to exceed one inch equals 100
feet) to include:
               a.   All existing and proposed structures;
               b.   Paved and non-paved areas;
               c.   Utility lines (inside and outside structures) including
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, storm retention/detention basins/ditches/french
drains/dry wells and the like (both existing and proposed);
               d.   Floor drain locations and outlets;
               e.   Chemical/product storage locations;
               f.   Waste storage areas;
               g.   Liquid transfer areas;
               h.   Site surface water bodies (streams, rivers, lakes, ponds
ditches);
               i.   Underground storage tanks (existing and proposed); and
               j.   Aboveground storage tanks (existing and proposed), if
applicable.
            8.   Description of proposed operations, including chemicals/
products used or generated, chemical/product storage area descriptions, waste
generation quantities, equipment cleaning/ maintenance procedures, heating
source (oil/gas/electric), liquid transfer/loading areas;
            9.   Methods and locations of receiving, handling, storing and
shipping chemicals/products and waste;
            10.   Response measures and reporting;
            11.   Description of slopes near containment vessels and waste
storage areas; and
            12.   Site and development plans must be certified by a technically
qualified person competent to evaluate environmental containment facilities and
contamination risk to ground water quality. Examples of technically qualified
person include professional engineers, certified professional geologists and
environmental scientists with specialized training and experience in
hydrogeology, contaminant transport and hazardous materials management provided
the technically qualified person is licensed by the state in the case of
professional engineers and geologists and by a nationally recognized certifying
body or federal agency in the case of environmental scientists. Certification
shall be to the city and shall state that the site and development plan meets
the requirements of this chapter and that the facilities when properly
constructed and maintained will meet EPA and IDEM guidelines of containment of
hazardous substances and that the risk to ground water contamination is within
established EPA and IDEM guidelines.
         (b)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not approve any petition that
amends, abrogates or alters the requirements, standards or uses contained in
Wellhead Protection Overlay Areas W1 and W5.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-18  ZONING MAPS.
   (A)   The zoning maps, as adopted by the City Council, dated 5-7-2001, and
as might be amended or revised from time to time, are hereby declared to be a
part of these regulations, which show the boundaries of, and the area covered
by the districts. Notations, reference, indications and other matters shown on
the zoning maps are as much a part hereof as if they were fully described
herein, said zoning map shall be on display in City Hall for viewing by the
general public.
   (B)   Boundaries of the district established by this section are as shown on
the zoning maps, which are a part of this chapter.
   (C)   When the exact boundaries of a district are uncertain, they shall be
determined by use of the scale of the zoning map.
   (D)   When a right-of-way is vacated, the districts adjoining each side are
respectively extended to the center of the area so vacated.
   (E)   In the case of further uncertainty, the Board shall interpret the
intent of the zoning maps as to the location of the boundary in question.
   (F)   In the event of annexation of lands to the town, the zoning
classification existing at the time of annexation shall remain until changed by
amendment procedures.
   (G)   Any request for zoning map revisions of amendments (rezoning) shall be
by application to the Plan Commission under the provisions of Art. X of this
chapter. The application shall be specific as to the current zoning district
and the proposed zoning district together with any commitments.
   (H)   Application for zoning map revisions of amendments (rezoning) can only
be made for parcels of record in their entirety, unless the portion to be
rezoned and the remaining portion of the record parcel are both 20 acres or
greater in area. If either the portion to be rezoned or the remaining portion
of the record parcel is less than 20 acres, then, prior to rezoning, successful
subdivision of the land is required in accordance with Art. XIV of this
chapter.
   (I)   Where the zoning district of a parcel is not shown on the zoning map,
the City Superintendent shall determine the appropriate district from
documentation of a previously approved zoning change by the city or the
county’s Plan Commission as converted to current districts in accordance with §
94-19 of this chapter. Where no documentation can be produced, the city’s Plan
Commission may establish an appropriate district based upon use of a parcel or
portions of a parcel on the date the parcel was included in the buffer zone. If
the zoning district cannot be determined under the above-cited conditions the
land shall be considered to be in an Agricultural (AG) District until changed
through petition to the Plan Commission by the owner.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2009-1630, passed - -2009; Ord. 2013-
1678, passed 6-17-2013)
§ 94-19  CONVERSION OF FORMER DISTRICTS.
   This table shall be used to convert former zoning districts to current
zoning districts. A landowner whose land was zoned under the former ordinance
who disagrees with this conversion may appeal to the city’s Board of Zoning
Appeals. The Board may change the former district to any appropriate district
in this chapter and may impose additional restrictions of use and development
standards as necessary to assure compatibility with existing area conditions
and/or future development. Use of this table is restricted to the determination
of the zoning district of a lot or parcel that has not been previously changed
by a zoning map amendment. Existing use of a parcel that is not a permitted use
within the converted zoning district is considered non-conforming and will
require application to the Plan Commission for consideration of the appropriate
zoning district. Further, any improvement to land or buildings must comply with
all provision of this chapter.
 
District Designation Former District
FP - Floodplain Overlay               F-1 - Floodplain
AG - Agricultural/Residential         A-1 - Agricultural
OS - Open Space                       C-1 - Conservation
                                      R-1 - One-Family Residence; R-5 - Rural
R1 - Residential Single-Family Low    One- and Two- Family where existing lots
Density R1(a), R1(b), R1(c) and R1(d) are less than 40,000 sqft on septic and
                                      22,500 sqft on sanitary sewers
                                      R-2 - One- and Two-Family Residence; R-
R2 - Medium Density Residential (2    5 - Rural One- and Two-Family where
dwelling units per lot)               existing lots are 40,000 sqft or more, on
                                      septic and 22,500 sqft, or more, on
                                      sanitary sewers
                                      R-3 - One- to Six-Family Residence; R-4 -
R3 - High Density Residential         Multi-Family Residence; R-6 Rural Multi-
                                      Family Residence
B1 - Professional Business            B-1 - Retail Business; where use at time
                                      of adoption is for professional business
                                      B-1 and B-2 - Retail and General
                                      Business; where area of existing retail
B2 - Local Business                   building is 9,000 sqft or less; except
                                      where use at time of adoption is for
                                      professional business
                                      B-2 - General Business; where area of
B3 - General Business                 existing retail building is greater than
                                      9,000 sqft; except professional uses
B4 - Heavy Business                   B-3 - Interchange Business
I1 - Light Industrial                 I-1 - Light Industrial
I2 - Medium Industrial                I-2 - Medium Industrial
I3 - Heavy Industrial                 I-2 - Medium Industrial
I4 - Special Industrial               No district
PUD - Planned Unit Development        PUD Planned Unit Development and R-
                                      7 Mobile Home
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-20 — 94-29  RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: AUTHORIZED USES AND REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
94-30.   Table 1, Primary Authorized Uses by Zoning District
   
94-31.   Residential uses and requirements
   
94-32.   Business and industrial requirements
   
94-33.   Property development standards
   
94-34.   Improvements on public right-of-way
   
94-35.   Additional business and industrial use requirements
   
94-36.   Manufactured homes
   
94-37.   Signs and advertising structures
   
94-38.   Buffer requirements
   
94-39.   Screening, fencing and outside storage
   
94-40.   Outside trash and debris prohibited
   
94-41.   Storm water and erosion control
   
94-42.   Cell, microwave and communication towers
   
94-43.   Demolition of structures
   94-44. — 94-54.   Reserved
§ 94-30  TABLE 1, PRIMARY AUTHORIZED USES BY ZONING DISTRICT.
   This table is subject to definitions of § 94-5 of this chapter, which
outlines zoning districts. (An “S” where shown in these tables indicates that
the proposed use is only allowed with the granting of a “special exception” per
§ 94-70 of this chapter.)
   (A)   Residential uses.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Boarding or lodging
Customary home occupation
Day care center and day nursery    S   S
Home day care or home nursery
Mobile home park
Multi-family dwelling                     S
Nursing home                           S
Orphanage
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
 
   (B)   Retail trade - general.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Department store
Electrical supply store
Farm implements and equipment                           S
General Merchandise and Connivance Stores
Hardware store
Lumber and building materials dealer                  S
Paint, glass and wallpaper store
Plumbing, heating and air-conditioning dealer
Variety stores
 
   (C)   Retail trade - food stores under 9,000 square feet.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Bakeries
Candy, nut and confectionery
Dairy products
Delicatessen
Fruits and vegetables
Grocery
Health foods
Ice cream
Meat and fish
 
   (D)   Retail trade - food stores over 9,000 square feet.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Bakeries
Dairy products
Delicatessen
Fruits and vegetables
Grocery
Health foods
Ice cream
Meat and fish
 
   (E)   Retail trade - apparel.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Apparel shop
Children’s wear
Custom tailoring
Family clothing
Furriers
Men’s clothing
Shoes
Women’s clothing
 
   (F)   Retail trade - furniture.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
China, glassware and metal ware
Drapery, curtains and upholstery
Floor coverings
Furniture
Household appliances
Music and records
Radio and television shop
 
   (G)   Retail trade - eating places.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Cafeteria
Carry out restaurant
Dinner theater
Drive-in restaurant                            S
Lunch room
Night club
Restaurant
Tavern-bar (primary sales in NOT food)
 
   (H)   Automotive services.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Automatic car wash
Automotive parts supply
Automobile repair                                     S
Automobile sales                                      S
Automobile service station
Body and painting shop                                S
Mobile home, travel trailer and camper sales          S
Motorcycle and motor bike sales                       S
Parking garage
Parking lot
Passenger car rental                                  S
Storage and dismantling of disabled vehicles
Tire, battery and accessory dealers
Truck rental and leasing                              S
Truck repair                                          S
Truck sales                                           S
Truck service center
 
   (I)   Store.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Antique store                          S
Bait store
Bicycle shops
Boat sales
Book and stationary store
Camera and photographic supply
Drug store
Farm and garden supply                   S
Florist                                S
Gift, novelty and souvenir shop
Hobby, toy and game store
Jewelry store
Liquor store
Monument sales
News dealer
Pet shop
Pharmacy
Sporting goods
Studio business
Tobacco store
Trading stamp store
 
   (J)   Finance and insurance.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Agricultural credit institution
Banks and branch banks
Bond and mortgage companies
Installment sales and finance companies
Insurance agents, brokers and service          S
Personal finance companies
Savings and loan associations
Stock brokers and dealers                      S
 
   (K)   Miscellaneous repair.
 
                                FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Electrical repair shop
Re-upholstery and furniture
Small engine, lawn mower and
appliance repair and sales
Watch, clock and jewelry repair
 
   (L)   Miscellaneous service.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Advertising agencies
Blueprinting and photocopying
Commercial testing laboratories                         S S S
Detective agency and protective service          S
Dog and cat grooming                     S
Kennel                                             S S
Private employment agencies
Sign manufacturing and installation
Stenographic service
Temporary help service                           S
Veterinary clinic                        S  S
 
   (M)   Personal services.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Auto license bureau
Barber shop
Beauty shop
Clothing rental
Coin operated laundry and dry cleaning
Diaper service
Dressmaker                                    S
Mortuary
Photographic studio
Reducing and health salon
Shoe repair
Tailoring and pressing shop
 
   (N)   Medical services.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Blood banks
Clinic
Convalescent homes
Hospitals
Medical and dental laboratories
Medical and dental office              S
Optometrist                            S
 
   (O)   Legal services.
 
             FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Attorney
Legal clinic
 
   (P)   Amusement and recreation services.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Amusement arcade
Auto race track
Billiard and pool establishment
Bowling lanes
Dance halt, studio and school
Fairgrounds
Golf and country club                               S
Horse race track and indoor commercial recreational
enterprise
Lodge or private club                                 S
Motion picture theater                                         S
Museum and art gallery                                         S
Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise            S S
Outdoor theater                                       S
Public camp ground or travel trailer park             S S
Public golf course                                    S
Riding stable                                       S
Seasonal hunting and fishing lodge                    S
Shooting range                                      S
Skating rink                                          S
Stadium, coliseum or athletic field                 S S S
Tennis club                                           S S
 
   (Q)   Educational services.
 
                                 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Art and music schools               S
Colleges and universities           S
Elementary and secondary schools    S
Junior colleges and technical       S                    S
schools
Library and information center
Trade or business school
 
   (R)   Government.
 
                                  FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Municipal or government building
Penal or correctional institution
Police or fire station
Postal station
Public owned park or recreational          S
facility
   
   (S)   Transportation, communication and utilities.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Airport or heliport
Cellular (analog or digital) or Microwave tower    S S              S S S S S S
Public water well, water station filtration plant,                S S
reservoir and storage tanks
Radio or television station or studio
Radio or television tower                          S S              S S S S S S
Mass transit station
Telegraph office
Telephone exchange or public utility station
Transmission lines for utilities                       S  S S S S S S S S S
 
   (T)   Non-profit membership organization.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Business association
Charitable institution                              S          S
Church, synagogue or temple, w/o a school (see Ed.  S  S S S S S    S
Services for Schools)
Civic, social and fraternal organization                       S
Labor union                                                    S
Political organization                                         S
Religious organization                              S          S S
 
   (U)   Miscellaneous personal services.
 
                              FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Accounting, auditing and
bookkeeping
Engineering and architectural                      S
services
Real estate service
 
   (V)   Uses not elsewhere listed.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Cemetery                                                 S
Crematory                                              S
Home professional office                                         S
Hotel or motel
Newspaper publishing
Shopping center, shopping mall, strip business center
Tourist home                                           S     S S S S
Veterinary hospital                                    S
 
   (W)   Industrial uses.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Anhydrous ammonia or similar liquefied fertilizer,
storage and distribution
Auction sales yard (excluding livestock)
Commercial facility for breeding non-farm fowl and   S
animals
Commercial slaughter house
Contractors storage
Fuel dealers
Grain elevator                                                 S S
Industrial park
Junkyard
Linen supply                                                   S
Liquefied petroleum gas and bottled gas dealers
Manufacturing, use or storage of explosives
Material storage (open)
Mineral extraction                                 S S               S
Mini warehouse                                               S
Petroleum tank farm                                                    S
Public or private sanitary landfill
Truck freight terminal                                             S
Warehouse                                                      S S
Wholesale business                                             S
Wholesale produce terminal
 
   (X)   Agricultural uses.
 
 FP AG OS RR R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Commercial greenhouse                                             S
Farm, confinement feeding                                      S
Farm, general
Hay, grain and feed store
Plant nursery                                                     S
Roadside produce stand
Storage building for Agricultural Products. Retail sale in B3            S
& B4
Sale barn for livestock                                        S
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-31  RESIDENTIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Residential and related uses are permitted in the districts indicated in §
94-33, Table 1, of this chapter when complying with the requirements of Table
2a, and the provisions and exceptions of § 94-33 of this chapter; or when in an
approved planned development under Art. VI of this chapter. Use of any
structure, travel trailer, camper, tent, garage or similar structures as a
dwelling or residence, or is intended to be used as such, for a period of more
than 14 days in any calendar year is prohibited unless it is in a district
where such use is specifically permitted. Further, occupancy of any single
dwelling unit by more than four unrelated adults, as their place of residence,
at any time is prohibited. The relationship of any adult to the principal owner
or occupant other than the following is considered unrelated: husband; wife;
son; daughter; stepson; stepdaughter; mother; father; grandmother; or
grandfather.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 94-32  BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The business, industrial and commercial uses listed in Table 1 are permitted
in the districts indicated in § 94-33 of this chapter when complying with the
requirements of Tables 2b and 2c together with the provisions and exceptions of
§§ 94-33 and 94-34 of this chapter; or when in an approved plan development
under Art. VI of this chapter and when complying with all construction safety
regulations of the state.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-33  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Use. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected, reconstructed or structurally altered which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and
specified in a district in which such building or land is located.
   (B)   Accessory buildings and uses.
      (1)   Accessory uses as listed below are permitted in all districts and
may be installed in any required yard; provided, they otherwise comply with all
other requirements of this chapter:
         (a)   Bird baths and bird houses;
         (b)   Curbs;
         (c)   Fences and hedges;
         (d)   Lampposts;
         (e)   Mailboxes;
         (f)   Name plates;
         (g)   Parking spaces;
         (h)   Retaining walls;
         (i)   Trees, shrubs and the like;
         (j)   Utility installations for local service, except, substations,
regulators, booster stations, lift stations or any other utility facility that
requires an area, above ground, that exceeds 150 square feet shall be submitted
for approval per this chapter. However a transportation, transmission, storage
and distribution facility of any utility that is regulated by the Indiana
Utility Regulatory Commission (IURC) is exempt from this section under state
law; and
         (k)   Walks.
      (2)   Accessory buildings shall not be erected prior to the principal
building, except buildings used for farming purposes or where there is common
ownership with adjoining lot which has a principle building already constructed
on the one lot.
      (3)   All accessory buildings located on a lot or parcel of land shall
conform to the setback requirements for that district listed in this section,
Tables 2a and 2b, depending upon the primary use of the lot or parcel of land
concerning which section shall be applicable.
      (4)   In residential districts and B1 Zoning Districts, no accessory
building shall be located in front of the primary structure.
      (5)   In all residential and B1 Zoning Districts, accessory buildings
shall not exceed 12 feet in height above ground at the lowest eave. Accessory
buildings area shall be restricted to the maximum lot coverage per Table 2a-1.
Only one accessory building per lot is allowed in residential and B1 Zoning
Districts. Further, a garage or other accessory building that is not an
integral part of the principal building and is only attached to the principal
building by a breezeway, porch, patio or other similar construction shall be
considered a separate accessory building and shall conform to all provisions,
restriction and limitations for said buildings.
      (6)   Non-permanent building/carport: in all residential and B1 Zoning
Districts only one mini- barn type storage building and one open sided carport
structure, not constructed on a permanent foundation, is allowed per lot (these
structures are considered non-permanent and, therefore, not accessory
buildings). The maximum area for a mini-barn type storage structure and carport
is 200 square feet. All such structures shall meet the setback requirements for
accessory buildings in the respective district. Any structure/building
exceeding 200 square feet in ground coverage shall be placed on a permanent
foundation and are accessory buildings and shall conform to the requirements
for accessory buildings. Total area of all accessory buildings, and non-
permanent structures/buildings, are subject to the area restriction of lot
coverage per Table 2a-1.
      (7)   No permits are required for structures 200 square feet or less not
placed on a permanent foundation. Any structure larger than 200 square feet
shall be constructed on a permanent foundation and the necessary permits shall
be obtained. However, all structures must meet the setback requirements of the
zoning district in which they are located.
   (C)   Building on street or easement. Every primary building hereafter
erected shall be located on an individual lot which fronts on a public street,
or private access easement not less than 30 feet in width, unless the easement
was created prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (D)   Minimum lot area. Except as hereafter provided, no building or
structure shall be erected or located on a lot unless such lot conforms with
the lot area regulations of the district in which it is located; except that,
lots of record or individually held prior to the passage of this chapter may be
smaller in area than the figure prescribed. For the purpose of this chapter,
the area of a lot that borders an access (ingress/egress) easement shall be the
net area of the lot, which is the gross area less that portion lying within the
access easement or easements in the case of a corner lot.
   (E)   Minimum lot width. A minimum lot width of 65 feet is required at the
front building line in all residential districts. In business and industrial
districts the minimum lot width, per Table 2b, shall be measured along the arc
of the front lot line. In no case shall the front width of a lot be less than
30 feet at the right-of-way line, access easement line or street line.
   (F)   Ground floor area. The ground floor area requirements for dwellings,
as set forth in the districts shall apply. Dwellings shall not be changed
except in conformity with these regulations. See subsection (B) above for
accessory building floor area.
   (G)   Building height. All buildings hereafter designed or erected and
existing buildings that may be reconstructed, altered, moved or enlarged shall
comply with the height regulations and exceptions of the district in which it
is located. See subsection (B) above for accessory building height.
   (H)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   In measuring a front yard or side yard adjoining a street, it shall
be the perpendicular distance between the right-of-way line of said street and
a line through the corner or face of the building closest to and drawn parallel
with the right-of-way line excluding any architectural features.
      (2)   Architectural features (cornices, chimneys, eaves, sills, canopies
or other similar features) may extend into the required side yard not more than
two feet; provided that, the width of said yard is not reduced to less than
five feet and may project into a required front or rear yard not more than
three feet.
      (3)   An open platform, porch or landing which does not extend above the
level of first floor of the building may extend or project into any required
yard not more than four feet.
      (4)   Where 50% or more of the lots in a one block area are occupied by
buildings, the average setbacks of such buildings (including front, side and
rear setbacks) determines the dimensions of the setbacks in the lot; provided
that, if there are no other buildings within 330 feet of the proposed building
in either direction, then the standard setback lines for the district shall
apply. Where 50% or more of the lots in a one block area are occupied by
accessory buildings, the average setbacks of such buildings determines the
dimensions of the setbacks for the accessory buildings in that block; provided
that, if there are not other buildings within one block or 330 feet of the
proposed building in either direction, then the standard setback lines for the
district shall apply.
      (5)   Front yard or building setback lines in subdivisions recorded prior
to the adoption of this chapter establish the front setback provided the line
is clearly shown or there is a written statement on the plat giving the
setback. After the adoption of this chapter, no subdivision shall be platted
with a front setback distance less than the required front yard of the district
in which it is located. Where there is not a platted subdivision of record the
minimum setback in all districts, as measured from the physical centerline of
existing public streets, roads or highways shall be 65 feet. However, where the
street, road or highway has a right-of-way that was established by dedication,
deed or easement, the minimum setback shall be 40 feet from the right-of-way
line. This subsection (H)(5) does not apply to subdivision plats where a
different setback is clearly shown provided the Commission has approved the
subdivision. The minimum 40-foot setback may be reduced in accordance with the
provisions of subsection (H)(4) above.
      (6)   Any building, which is reconstructed upon the same site of a prior
structure within 12 months from the removal of the prior structure, shall not
require a variance as to the development standards of this chapter regarding
setback.
      (7)   Any new structure which meets the setback standards of 50% of the
existing structures in the adjoining area, that being one block each side or
330 feet each side of said structure, shall not require a variance of the
setback development standards of this chapter. Except, the Plan Commission may
require division of land platted under Art. XIV of this chapter to have
setbacks in compliance with Tables 2a through 2c.
      (8)   Side yard setback shall be as shown in Tables 2a and 2b. The
minimum distance between primary structures in R1 and R2 Districts is 12 feet.
The minimum side yard distance between primary structures, located on one lot,
in all other districts is 20 feet. However, where Building Codes require a
greater distance the greater distance shall apply.
      (9)   Rear yard setback shall be as shown in Tables 2a and 2b. The
minimum rear yard distance between primary structures in R1 and R2 Districts is
60 feet. The minimum rear yard distance between primary structures, located on
one lot, in all other districts is 40 feet. However, where Building Codes
require a greater distance the greater distance shall apply.
      (10)   In all districts, except residential and B1, the minimum distance
between accessory structures, located on one lot, is 20 feet. However, where
building codes require a greater distance the greater distance shall apply. See
subsection (B)(5) above for residential and B1 restrictions.
   (I)   Existing structures destroyed. When an existing building does not meet
the development standards, for the district in which it is located, is damaged
or destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or other catastrophic or accidental
circumstances it may be restored or reconstructed; provided that, the ground
floor area does not exceed that of the original structure and further that all
development standards of this chapter shall be met to the maximum extent
possible, but in no case shall the deviation be less than was required by the
original structure. The City Superintendent shall determine what is the maximum
extent to which the development standards can be met. Structures that were
located in a floodplain may only be reconstructed as provided under the Flood
Hazard Ordinance.
   (J)   Cul-de-sacs; lot width and setbacks. On a cul-de-sac in residential
districts, the lot width shall be measured along the line of an arc parallel
with the lot line at the prescribed front setback; provided, the lot width
along the arc is a minimum of 65 feet and further that the front setback is not
less than 30 feet. In business and industrial districts, the measured length
along the arc of the front lot line shall determine the minimum lot width
required in Table 2b.
   (K)   Lot coverage and green space.
      (1)   All buildings hereafter erected and existing buildings that may be
reconstructed altered, moved or enlarged shall not exceed the maximum
percentage of lot coverage allow by this chapter for the district in which the
buildings are located.
      (2)   In business and industrial districts, a landscape strip of grass,
trees and shrubs, not less than five feet in width for lots up to one and one-
half acres in area and ten feet in width for lots one and one- half acres or
larger in area shall be maintained between the property line and the nearest
impervious surface (curb, parking lot, buildings, private sidewalk and the
like) around the entire perimeter of the parcel, except where access drives are
located.
   (L)   Restrictions along streams.
      (1)   No permanent structures may be erected and, if erected in violation
of this section, no such structures may be used if the location is within 75
feet of the centerline of any legal tile ditch, or within 75 feet of the
existing top edge of any legal open ditch as determined by the Morgan County
Drainage Board.
      (2)   No authorization of use, under this chapter, includes the authority
to discharge liquid or solid wastes into public waters except as permitted
under the Stream Pollution Control Law of the state. Stream Pollution Control
Board of the state must approve plans and specifications for proposed public or
district sewage or other waste treatment and disposal facilities, except when
connecting to city sewers.
   (M)   Vision clearance. Every property owner shall maintain a triangular
space at each corner of their land where streets, roads, alleys or access
easements used by vehicles or pedestrians intersect that is free from any kind
of obstruction to vision between the heights of three and 12 feet above
established street grade, as determined by a diagonal line, connecting two
points measured 25 feet equidistant from the right-of-way or easement corner
along each right-of-way or easement line. Further, no structure, landscaping or
fence shall be erected or maintained that, in the opinion of the City Engineer,
would restrict sight distance at an intersection such that there would be a
danger to vehicles or pedestrians using the streets, roads, alleys or access
easements that adjoin the property. Further, in no case shall a fence, wall,
barrier or other obstruction, with the exception of mailboxes with breakaway
post, be placed within five feet of the edge of pavement of any public street,
road or alley. The preceding provisions shall also apply to private access
easement(s), created by description or platting, which is used to provided
ingress and egress to two or more parcels or lots.
   (N)   Sidewalks. The improvement of any lot, by the construction of
buildings or parking lot(s), shall include construction of sidewalks and curbs
in accordance with Art. XIV and § 94-240 of this chapter. Sidewalks shall be
placed the entire length of the lot on each street side. The City
Superintendent or City Engineer will direct where the sidewalk(s) and curb are
to be placed.
   (O)   Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting, whether for area lighting,
security or signage, shall be hooded, screened or otherwise shielded and
arranged such that it does not directly pose a hazard or nuisance to traffic on
adjacent streets. Further no exterior lighting shall be used that will produce
a direct glare or concentrate light onto adjacent property or be a nuisance to
adjoining residential uses. The City Superintendent or his or her appointed
agent shall be the sole determiner of what constitutes unacceptable glare,
concentrated light or a lighting nuisance.
   (P)   Off-street parking. To reduce traffic problems and hazards by
eliminating unnecessary on-street parking, every use of land must include on-
premises parking sufficient for the needs normally generated by the use, as
provided by this section. Parking spaces or bays contiguous to the street or
within street right-of-way, required by Art. XIV of this chapter or other
ordinances, are in addition to the spaces herein required.
      (1)   As used in this section, the term PARKING SPACE means an area, not
including any part of a street or alley, designed or used for the temporary
parking of motor vehicles. The term PARKING AREA means a group of parking
spaces, or an open area, not including any part of a street or alley, designed
or used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles.
      (2)   Parking spaces shall be as provided in Table 3.
      (3)   Each of the parking spaces required by this section must be at
least nine feet wide and 20 feet long, exclusive of pedestrian passageways.
      (4)   The parking spaces prescribed by this section for a business or an
industrial use must be located on the premises. Open parking areas for
business, industrial or commercial uses must be paved with a hard or dust-proof
surface.
      (5)   A group of business or industrial uses may provide a joint parking
area if the number of spaces in the area at least equals the aggregate of the
spaces required for the several uses.
      (6)   All areas shall be surfaced, striped and channelized as required by
the Commission and shall be maintained in good condition. Parking stalls shall
be marked and the access lanes shall be clearly defined, including directional
arrows to guide internal movements. All parking lots and loading areas shall be
suitably graded, surfaced and drained in accordance with the standards approved
by the Commission. Wheel stops, marked off spaces and directional signs, where
necessary, shall be required. Adequate fire lanes and emergency access shall be
provided.
      (7)   Where parking areas abut another property, public right-of-way or
access easement, there shall be a concrete curb or barrier, not less than six
inches in height, securely installed and maintained to prevent any portion of a
vehicle from extending past the edge of pavement. In all districts, no pavement
for parking areas, streets or driveways shall be constructed closer than five
feet to any property line, except for the access drive(s) to the property.
      (8)   Where such parking area abuts a residential district, there shall
be a border of appropriate landscaping, including fencing, not less than five
feet in height along the residential boundary. Such landscaping shall be
maintained in good condition. Landscaping shall be designed to prevent nuisance
from lights or noise to abutting properties and shall be approved by the
Commission.
      (9)   Lighting, where provided to illuminate parking areas, shall conform
to subsection (O) above.
      (10)   In no case shall parking spaces be so arranged that ingress and
egress from a parking space require backing into a public or private pedestrian
access way or backing out of a public alley.
      (11)   In no case shall any property owner cause a condition to exist due
to the use of his or her property that will create a traffic condition to occur
that will be dangerous to the public safety within the public rights-of-way or
interfere with the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties.
      (12)   In a platted residential subdivision recorded in the office of the
County Recorder, or in a multi-family apartment development, parking of
commercial vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of more than 9,000 pounds is
prohibited.
      (13)   In business and industrial districts when parking areas are
constructed or enlarged, sidewalks shall be installed along the public street
sides of the lot or parcel in accordance with Art. XIV and § 94-240 of this
chapter.
 
Table 2a, Agricultural and Residential Districts - Development
Standards
Zoning District AG RR(a) RR(b) RR(c) R1(a) R1(b) R1(c) R1(d) R2 R3
                                                                          16,000 13,000 10,000 8,000 10,000 10,000
Min. lot area with sanitary sewer                20 Ac 10 Ac 5 Ac  1 Ac   sqft   sqft   sqft   sqft  sqft   sqft
                                                                                                            (1)
Min. lot area without sanitary sewer             20 Ac 10 Ac 5 Ac  2 Ac   2 Ac   2 Ac   2 Ac   2 Ac  2 Ac   NA
Max. lot depth to width ratio (2)                8     6     6     4      3      3      3      3     3      2
Max. dwelling units per lot                      1     1     1     1      1      1      1      1     2      3+
Max. building height in feet                     50    40    30    30     30     30     30     30    30     30
Max. lot coverage “primary building” %/sqft  NA    NA    NA    15%    30%    30%    30%    30%   35%    NA(3)
                                                                   6,500  4,800  3,900  3,000  2,400 3,500
Max. lot coverage “all buildings” %/sqft (4) NA    NA    NA    30%    40%    40%    45%    45%   4,500  NA (3)
                                                                   13,000 6,400  5,200  4,500  3,600
Max. percent lot coverage “all improvements” NA)   NA    20    30     60     60     60     60    60     70
Min. living area, ground floor- single-story     1,600 1,600 1,600 1,600  1,600  1,400  1,200  1,000 540    540
sqft (6)
Min. living area, ground floor - multi-story     1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000  1,000  1,000  1,000  900   450    450
sqft (6)
Min. lot width at front lot line in feet         250   200   150   100    65     65     65 (7) 65    65 (8) 65 (8)
                                                                                               (7)
Min. lot width at front setback line in feet     330   250   200   150    90     80     70     65    80     90
Front setback - primary building in feet (9)     95/70 95/70 85/60 75/50  65/40  65/40  65/30  65/30 65/40  65/40
                                                                          (10)   (10)
Rear setback - primary building in feet          100   90    80    70     40     40     30     30    30     30
Side setback - primary building in feet          50    40    30    20     10     10     6      6     10     10
Max. number of accessory building(s)             NA    3     2     1      1      1      1      1     1      NA
                                                                                                            (11)
Max. size accessory building(s) sqft (12)        NA    3,000 2,500 2,000  1,000  1,000  800    600   800    NA
                                                                                                            (11)
Max. height accessory building in feet (13)      NA    40    30    16     10     10     10     10    10     10
                                                 In all districts, no portion of an accessory building shall be
Front setback - accessory building               closer to the front lot line than the front of the primary
                                                 structure
Rear and side setback - accessory building in    50    40    30    20     10     10     6      6     6      20
feet
Max. animal unit equiv. (AUE) per acre (see AUE  NA    1.0   1.0   0.5    (15)   (15)   (15)   (15)  (15)   (15)
table for additional restrictions)                           (14)  (14)
NOTES TO TABLE:
1) The minimum lot area shall be 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit but not less than 10,000 sqft per lot.
2) Upon findings of the Plan Commission, width to depth ratio may be exceeded for reasons of topography, retention
ponds, ravines or other natural features. However, in all such cases the rear setback line shall be measured from
the inside edge of any easement at the rear of the lot.
3) In R3 Districts, there may be several multi-unit dwelling buildings, however the R3 lot must contain a minimum
of 3,000 sqft of area for each dwelling unit. Also, 3,000 sft of lot area shall be included for each additional
non-dwelling building, for example clubhouse, activities building or maintenance building.
4) “All buildings” includes primary building, accessory buildings and non-permanent buildings such as mini-barns
and metal carports.
5) “All improvements” includes permanent structures, primary buildings, accessory buildings and non-permanent
buildings such as mini-barns and metal carports. Also, any impervious surface, including, but not limited to:
paved, gravel or crushed stone driveways and parking areas; sidewalks, patios, decks, swimming pools and similar
improvements.
6) “Ground floor living area” shall not include garage, basement, decks, patios or porches. Further, the average
width (defined as: total ground floor area, exclusive of garage, decks patios or decks, divided by the overall
length of the longest side of the dwelling) of any structure to be used as a residential dwelling shall be not
less than 18 feet. This provision does not apply to mobile or manufactured homes within a mobile home park or
planned unit development (PUD) approved for mobile or manufactured homes.
7) If lot fronts on a cul-de-sac, the minimum lot width at the front lot line may be reduced to 40 feet.
8) If lot fronts on a cul-de-sac, the minimum lot width at the front lot line may be reduced to 50 feet.
9) The first number is the front setback distance, in feet, as measured from the pavement centerline of the road,
street or access easement on which the lot fronts. The second number is the front setback distance, in feet, as
measured from the right-of-way line of a road, street or access easement that has been established by a recorded
plat or the action of state or local government. The distance that places the primary structure the greatest
distance from the centerline of the road, street or access easement shall control.
10) Front setback may be reduced to 30 feet if a 32-foot wide street pavement is provided.
11) For R3 Districts, additional non-dwelling buildings, for example clubhouse, activities building or maintenance
building may be allowed provided the lot area requirements are met per Note 3 above.
12) The size shown is for one accessory building. If more than one accessory building is allowed, then the total
area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed the maximum size of a single building multiplied by the number of
accessory buildings allowed. For example, District RR(a) allows 3 accessory buildings, of 3,000 square feet for a
total of 9,000 square feet. The owner may elect to construct one building of that size or another option would be
to construct one at 2,000 square feet and another of 7,000 square feet which is permitted as the total area of
accessory buildings did not exceed 9,000 square feet.
13) Height of accessory building shall be measured from the finished floor elevation of the ground floor to bottom
of the ceiling joist of the highest story or bottom of the lowest chord of a truss roof.
14) Swine of any type are prohibited. Also, see AUE Table for the maximum number of each type of animal allowed
per acre.
15) All animals, except household pets, are prohibited. See zoning ordinance for definitions and other
restrictions.
 
(THIS TABLE REPLACES “TABLE 2a” IN THE PREVIOUS ZONING ORDINANCE AND THE AG, RI, R2 AND R3 DISTRICTS OF “TABLE 2a-
1” OF ORD. 2011-1655. ALSO SEE § 94-33(A) THROUGH (P) OF THIS ARTICLE, OF REVISED ZONING ORD. 2004-1530 FOR
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.)
 
 
Table AUE (Animal Unit Equivalent)
               Animal Unit       Number of Animals      Maximum Number
Type of Animal Equivalents (AUE) Equivalent to 1 Animal Permitted per Acre
                                 Unit
Animal not listed                 Average weight of the animal in
                                  pounds divided by 1,000 pounds
Calf                              0.20                            5.0  5
Chickens/turkeys/ducks            0.03                            33.0 25
Heifer                            0.70                            1.0  3
Horse/mule                        1.00                            1.0  2
Mature cow                        1.00                            1.0  2
Pony                              0.70                            1.0  3
Rabbits                           0.02                            50.0 40
Sheep/goats and lambs             0.10                            10.0 5
Swine (between 55 and 300 pounds) 0.30                            3.0  2
Swine (over 300 pounds)           0.40                            2.0  1
Swine (under 55 pounds)           0.05                            20.0 4
NOTES TO TABLE:
In calculating the number of animals permitted, the number shall be round
down to the nearest whole number.
 
 
Examples of How to Calculate the Maximum Number of Animals Permitted in a Rural
Residential Zoning District:
Example 1: A 7-acre lot is located in an RR(b) Zoning District and the owner
wants to have some cows, but he or she also has 3 horses and 40 chickens. How
many cows can he or she have and still have the 3 horses and 40 chickens?
 
From Table 2a, the maximum AUE per acre for the RR(b) District is 1.00. Since
there is 7 acres, the total allowable AUE for the lot is (1.00 x 7.00) = 7.00
AUE.
 
The AUE Table shows that each horse and cow has an AUE of 1.00 and chickens
have an AUE of 0.03. Calculate the total AUE for 40 chickens (40 x 0.03) = 1.2;
calculate the total AUE for 3 horses (3 x 1.00) = 3.00. Total AUE for the
chickens and horses is (1.20 + 3,00) = 4.20. The remaining AUE that can be used
for additional animals is (7.00 - 4.20) = 2.80. A mature cow has an AUE of
1.00; therefore, the number of mature cows allowed is (2.80 /1.0) = 2.80.
Rounding to the next lower whole number the maximum number of cows allowed is
2.
Example 2: A 1.60-acre lot is located in an RR(c) Zoning District and the owner
wants to have 50 chickens and some sheep. If he or she has 50 chickens how many
sheep can he or she have?
 
From Table 2a, the maximum AUE per acre for the RR(c) District is 0.50 and
given a lot size of 1.60 acres the total AUE permitted on the lot is (0.50 x
1.60) = 0.80 AUE.
 
The AUE Table shows that the AUE for one chicken is 0.03. Since the owner wants
50 chickens, the total AUE is (0.03 x 50) = 1.50, which exceeds the allowable
AUE of 0.80 for the 1.60 acre lot. Therefore, 50 chickens are not allowable.
 
How many chickens are allowed? The number of allowed chickens is (0.80/0.03) =
26.67. Rounding to the next lower whole number shows that 26 chickens are
allowed.
 
The owner now wants to have 1 sheep and reduce the number of chickens. One
sheep has an AUE of 0.10 so the AUE available for chickens is (0.80 - 0.10) =
0.70. The number of permitted chickens is calculated as (0.70/0.03) = 23.2.
Rounding to the next lower whole number shows that 23 chickens are allowed.
Example 3: A 14.50-acre lot is zoned RR(a). Husband and wife owners want to
raise heifer cattle, hogs and chickens, but primarily heifers. The wife needs
to have a minimum of 100 laying hens. They both agree that they want 2 hogs to
butcher. How many heifers are permitted on the 14.50 acres?
 
From Table 2a, the maximum AUE per acre for the RR(a) District is 1.00 and
given the lot size of 14.50 acres, the total AUE permitted is (14.50 x 1.0) =
14.50 AUE.
 
The AUE Table shows the AUE for 1 chicken is 0.03 and for 1 hog (55 lbs to 300
lbs) is 0.30. Therefore, for 100 chickens and 2 hogs the total AUE is (100 x
0.03) + (2 x 0.30) = 3.60 AUE. Given a total AUE for the lot is 14.50, then the
balance that can be used for heifers is (14.50 - 3.60) = 10.90 AUE. Heifers
have an AUE of 0.70; therefore, the number of heifers allowed is (10.90/0.70) =
15.57. Rounding to the next lower whole number shows that 15 heifer cattle are
allowed.
 
 
Table 2a-1, Description of Restriction
(Excludes                            B1 lot     B1 lot                 B1 lot
downtown                  B1 lot     size       size                   size
district and              size       10,001     20,001                 greater
existing                  10,000     sqft to    sqft to                than
improvements              sqft or    20,000     30,000                 30,001
as of 6-6-                less       sqft       sqft                   sqft
2011)
Lot coverage                         30% (3,000 30% with a
by primary                30% (3,000 to 6,000   maximum of             40%
structure                 sqft max.) sqft)      8,000 sqft             maximum
(building)
Lot coverage
by accessory
buildings
including                            10% with   10% with
non-                      10% (1,000 1,500 sqft 2,500 sqft             10%
permanent                 sqft max.) max.       max.                   maximum
storage
buildings
(mini-barns)                                               This column
and carports This column                                   applied to
Lot coverage applied to                                    Residential
by all       Agricultural                                  Zoning
improvements (AG) Zoning                                   Districts 2
including,   District and                                  and 3 (R2
permanent    has been                                      and R3) and
structures,  replaced by                                   have been
accessory    Table 2a of                                   replaced by
buildings    Ord. 2013-                                    Table 2a of
and non-     1685                                          Ord. 2013-
permanent                                                 1685
storage                                                     
buildings
(mini-
barns)/                                         60%
carports.                 60% (6,000 60% (6,000 (12,000 to             80%
Also,                     sqft max.) to 12,000  18,000                 maximum
impervious                           sqft)      sqft)
surfaces,
including,
but not
limited to:
driveways;
patios;
decks;
sidewalks;
swimming
pools;
parking
areas; and
similar
improvements
 
 
Table 2b, Business - Industrial Setback, Height and Coverage
Requirements
(Also see §
94-33(A) through (Q) of this article for additional requirements)
District in Which Use Is Permitted B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
Minimum lot width at street line           50505050’5050’50’50’
Maximum building height (see definitions)  30404050’4050’75’75’*
Minimum front yard abutting
   Arterial street                      40404040’4040’40’40’
   Feeder street                        40404040’4040’40’40’
   Residential street                   40404040’4040’40’40’
Minimum side and rear yard
   When adjoining a residential district20202030’4050’100200’
   When not adjoining residential distri20202020’2020’20’50’
Maximum percent lot coverage, all          70  SO  90  90   90  90   90   90
improvements
NOTES TO TABLE:
*The setback requirements shall be not less than 1 foot of setback for every
foot of building height over 50 feet, not to exceed 75 feet. These
specifications are subject to all other standards required in other sections
of this chapter that may be greater.
 
 
Business - Industrial, Lot Area, Width/Depth and Building Coverage
(Also see §
94-33(A) through (Q) of this article for additional requirements)
District in Which Use Is Permitted B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 and I2 I3 and I4
Minimum lot area with sanitary    10,000 10,000 14,000 16,000 24,000 5 acres
sewers (see Note 1 below)
Minimum lot area without sanitary 43,560 43,560 43,560 43,560 43,560 5 acres
sewers (see Note 1 below)
NOTE 1: Minimum lot area - lot must be of sufficient area to meet off street
parking requirements and meet all other requirements
Maximum lot depth to width ratio  3.0/1  2.0/1  2.0/1  2.0/1  2.0/1  2.0/1
Minimum ground floor area
   One-story                   1,200  1,200  1,200  1.600  2000   5000
   Two-story                   800    800    800    1.000  2000   5000
Maximum percentage of lot coverage by all buildings
   With sanitary sewer         25     35     40     40     50     50
   Without sanitary sewer      15     25     25     25     25     25
 
 
Table 2c, Industrial Uses - Minimum Area per Building
District Which Use Is Permitted                      I1    I2    I3     I4
Minimum lot area for each building (in square feet)
(double required area if buildings are not connected 6,000 6,000 20,000 30,000
to sanitary sewers)
 
 
Table 3a, Residential Parking Requirements per Dwelling Unit
R1 and R2 uses 2 parking places for the first bedroom and an additional parking
               place for each additional bedroom
R3             2 parking places for the first bedroom and an additional parking
               space for each additional 2 bedrooms
 
 
Table 3b, Business, Industrial and Non-Residential Parking Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Airport or heliport                     1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per 4 public
                                        seats
Artificial lake of 3 acres or more or
private swimming pool (not private      1 per 2 users
residential)
Automobile or trailer sales area        1 per 4,000 sqft used for retailing
Automobile sales and repair (indoor)    1 per 200 sqft of floor area
Banks, business office, professional
offices, similar business uses, postal  The greater of 1 per work station, plus
stations, telegraph offices and similar 1 per 300 sqft of floor area
service uses
Boarding or lodging house or
fraternity, sorority, or student        1 per each rental unit
cooperative house
Bowling lanes                           3 per lane, plus 1 per 6 spectator
                                        seats
Business uses not otherwise listed      As determined by the Board 1 per 2
                                        employees, plus 1 per 4 seats
Church or temple                        1 per 4 seats in the main auditorium
Clinic                                  1 per employee, plus 5 per doctor
College, university, trade or business  As determined by the Board
school
Confinement feeding operation           1 per employee
Country Club of golf course             1 per employee, plus 3 per golf hole
Dancing academy                         1 per 200 sqft of floor area
Fairgrounds                             As determined by the Board
Greenhouse or nursery                   1 per 300 sqft of floor area
Facilities for raising or breeding non- 1 per employee, plus 2
farm fowl or animals (commercial)
Sale bam for livestock resale           1 per employee, plus 1 per 125 sqft of
                                        sales area
Home professional office                2 in addition to residence requirements
                                        1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per doctor, plus 1
Hospital                                per employee, plus 1 per hospital
                                        vehicle
Industrial park                         1 per employee on largest shift
Industrial uses generally               1 per employee
Junkyard                                1 per employee, plus 1 per 300 sqft of
                                        floor area
Kindergarten or day nursery             1 per employee, plus 1 per 5 children
Mortuary                                1 per 4 seats in the main auditorium
Motel                                   1 per sleeping room, plus 1 per
                                        employee
Nursing home or home for the age member 1 per employee or staff
Large indoor or outdoor coram,          1 per employee, plus 1 per 500 sqft of
recreational facility                   area
Penal or correctional institution       1 per employee, plus 1 per 10 inmates
Police station or fire station          1 per employee on shift, plus 5
Private club or lodge                   As determined by Board
Private recreational development        1 per 2 customers or members, plus 1
                                        per employee
Public camp                             1 per camp site, plus 1 per cabin
Public library, museum, or municipal or 1 per 300 sqft of floor area
government building
Radio or TV tower or station            1 per employee per shift, plus 5
Railroad operation use                  1 per employee where headquartered,
                                        plus 5
Railway station or motor bus station    1 per 5 seats in waiting room, plus 1
                                        per employee of connected retail use
Retail stores generating light auto
traffic including but not limited to,
the following: apparel shop, flower
shop, hardware store, stationer, news
dealer, record shop, photo studio, cold 1 per 300 sqft of floor area open to
storage locker service, roadside sales  the public
stand, electrical appliance shop, radio
or television shop, dressmaker,
milliner, tailor and pressing shop,
shoe repair, dry cleaning shop, laundry
agency and similar uses
Retail stores generating heavy auto
traffic including, but not limited to,
the following: department store, retail
showroom, drugstore, barber shop,       1 per 150 sqft of floor area open to
beauty shop, reducing salon,            the public
restaurant, deli, bakery, meat market,
supermarket, self service laundry,
billiard room, tavern, night club and
similar uses
Riding stable                           1 per 5,000 sqft of lot area
School                                  1 per staff member, plus 1 per
                                        auditorium seats
Shopping center                         1 per 200 sqft of floor area open to
                                        the public
Slaughter house                         1 per employee, plus 5
Stadium or coliseum                     1 per employee, plus 1 per 2 seats
Telephone exchange or public utility    1 per employee at or working out of the
substation                              site
Theater (indoor)                        1 per 2 seats
Theater (outdoor)                       1 per employee
Tourist home                            I per employee, plus 1 per sleeping
                                        accommodation
Travel trailer park                     1 per employee, plus 2 per travel
                                        trailer stand
Truck freight terminal                  1 per employee, plus 5
Veterinary hospital for small animals   1 per seat, plus 1 per employee
or kennel
Warehouse or grain elevator             1 per employee, plus 5
Wholesale produce terminal              1 per employee, plus 5
 
   (Q)   Loading area (docks).
      (1)   Business uses, except those that do not receive or transport goods
in quantity by truck delivery, shall be provided with loading berths (which, if
open, shall be paved with a hard or dust-proof surface) as shown on the
following table:
 
Use Gross Floor Area (sqft) Number of Docks
Commercial facility for breeding  All                           1
non-farm fowl or animals
Commercial greenhouse             Under 15,000                  1
                                  Over 15,000                   2
Hospital                          All                           1
                                  Under 15,000                  1
Industrial uses                   15,000 to 40,000              2
                                  40,000 to 100,000             3
                                  Each additional 40,000        1 additional
                                  25,000 to 100,000             1
Office building                   100,000 to 350,000            2
                                  Each 200,000 or fraction over 1 additional
                                  35,000
Retail stores, department stores, 3,000 to 15,000               1
wholesale establishments,         Each additional 15,000 or
storage, warehousing and other    fraction                      1 additional
business uses
Stadium or coliseum               All                           2
 
      (2)   For the following uses, any loading berths that are provided must
be at least 200 feet from the nearest residential use:
         (a)   Airport;
         (b)   Mineral extraction or borrow pit;
         (c)   Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise;
         (d)   Penal institution;
         (e)   Livestock sale barn;
         (f)   Truck freight terminal; and
         (g)   Warehouse or grain elevator.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011)
94-34  IMPROVEMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No improvements or construction of any kind or nature shall be performed on
public right-of-way in the city or county, without the proper permits and the
express approval of the City Superintendent, City Engineer or County Engineer.
All improvements or construction on public right-of-way must meet the standards
of design and material quality approved by the city or county. In the city, all
improvements constructed on city right-of-way must meet the standards and
specifications for design and materials adopted by the city’s Board of Public
Works and Safety. Any landowner, person, corporation or other legal entity that
places, or causes to be placed, improvements on public right-of-way without
proper permits and approvals, or does not construct the improvements in
accordance with approved design standards and material quality shall be a
violation of this chapter and will subject the landowner and/or offending party
to the remedies and penalties provisions of Art. XII of this chapter. Any
improvements constructed in violation of this chapter shall be completely
removed from the public right-of-way and any disturbed areas restored to their
original condition. The landowner and/or person causing the violation shall pay
all cost of removal and restoration.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-35  ADDITIONAL BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL USE REQUIREMENTS.
   The following performance standards shall apply to all business and
industrial uses, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Odor. No business or industrial use in any district may release an
objectionable or offensive odor that is detectable at the property line.
   (B)   Toxic materials. No materials toxic to persons or injurious to
property shall be permitted to escape beyond the building in which it occurs.
   (C)   Lighting and heat. No business or industrial use may cause heat at the
property line so intense as to be a public nuisance or hazard. Lighting and
glare, regardless or the source, shall meet the requirements of § 94-33(O) of
this chapter.
   (D)   Vibration. At no time shall vibration, shaking or tremors produced by
equipment or processes from any industrial use or source become detectable at
the property line. (Excluded are background vibrations produced by sources not
under the control of this chapter such as the operation of motor vehicles or
temporary construction activity.)
   (E)   Noise and sound. At no property line of any business or industrial use
may the sound level of any business or industrial use (excluding background
noises produced by sources not under the control of this chapter such as the
operation of motor vehicles) exceed 70 decibels. Noise is to be muffled as not
to be objectionable due to intermittence, frequency or shrillness.
   (F)   Exceptions. Subsections (A) to (E) above do not apply to:
      (1)   Site preparation or construction, maintenance, repair, alteration
or improvement of buildings, structures, equipment or other improvements on or
within the lot lines;
      (2)   The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for the
transportation of personnel, materials or products; and
      (3)   Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the
protection of life, limb or property.
   (G)   Special restrictions.
      (1)   Any business or industrial operation or activity must, in addition
to the above, conform to the state’s Air Pollution Control Law and any
applicable acts of the federal government. Where the requirements of this
chapter are more restrictive, they shall take precedence.
      (2)   A letter of approval is required from the state’s Administration
Building Council stating that construction plans for a proposed building or
structure to be used for business or industrial use meets all required
Construction Codes and Safety Codes of the state shall be submitted with the
application for an improvement location permit.
   (H)   Violation. Failure to comply with this section shall result in a fine
in accordance with § 94-241 of this chapter with violations to be filed by the
City Superintendent in the City Court. Violations may also be treated the same
as any other violation of this chapter and can be enforced at the discretion of
the Plan Commission. All other legal remedies provided by law shall also be
available to the Plan Commission and the city.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-36  MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit, designed and built in a factory,
which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards Law of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§
5401 et seq.).
      MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure larger than 320 square feet
designed for use as a year-round residential dwelling.
      OCCUPIED SPACE. The total area of earth horizontally covered by the
structure, excluding accessory structure such as, but not limited to, garages,
patios and porches.
      UNDERLYING FLOOR SPACE. The space between the bottom of the floor joist
and the earth.
   (B)   Manufactured home provisions. In accordance with the provisions of
I.C. 36-7-4-1106, the establishment, location and use of manufactured homes as
permanent residences shall be permitted in any zone permitting installation of
a dwelling unit, subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to
such residential use in the district; and, provided, such homes shall meet the
following requirements and limitations.
      (1)   The homes shall meet all requirements applicable to single-family
dwellings and posses all necessary improvement location, building and occupancy
permits and other requirements of this chapter that apply to single-family
dwelling structures.
      (2)   The homes shall contain not less than 1,000) square feet of
occupied space, be manufactured after 1-1-1981 and the average width (defined
as: total ground floor area, exclusive of garage, patio, porch or deck, divided
by the overall length of longest side of the dwelling) shall be not less than
18 feet. The manufactured home will be attached to the ground with a tie down
system as shown in accordance with the manufacturer’s manufactured home
foundation plan or in compliance with the design of a state registered
professional engineer; however, in no case shall the tie down system be less
than that required by the manufacture.
      (3)   The manufactured home will be placed on a permanent foundation,
including concrete footings at least 30 inches in depth below grade. Piers must
be of permanent concrete construction.
      (4)   The manufactured home will be permanently skirted with masonry
material or commercial skirting designed for that purpose.
      (5)   Wheels, axles and tongues shall be removed.
      (6)   The home shall be connected to sanitary sewers or to an on site
waste water disposal system approved by the county’s Board of Health. Proof
that an on site waste water disposal system will be approved or sanitary sewers
are available shall be submitted to the City Superintendent prior to the
granting of a building permit.
      (7)   The home shall have a roof composed of a material customarily used
on site-built residential dwellings, such as asbestos, fiberglass, shake,
asphalt or tile, which shall be installed upon a surface appropriately pitched
for the materials used.
      (8)   The manufactured home shall have siding materials meeting one of
the following standards:
         (a)   Residential horizontal aluminum lap siding;
         (b)   Residential horizontal vinyl lap siding;
         (c)   Cedar or other wood siding; and
         (d)   Any other approved siding materials that are aesthetically
compatible to the area and proper building standards so as not to be
detrimental to adjacent property values.
   (C)   Mobile homes (permanent occupancy - park site). Mobile homes or
manufactured homes may be permanently occupied when located in a mobile home
park developed in accordance with Art. VI of this chapter with the exception
that all specific development standards set out under § 94-33 of this chapter
shall be met and where the standards set out in Art. VI of this chapter are in
conflict with § 94-33 of this chapter, the standards set out in § 94-33 of this
chapter shall prevail as to the required standards of the ordinance with the
exception of lot size which shall be controlled by subsection (D) below.
   (D)   Minimum lot area.
      (1)   Mobile home parks of manufactured housing parks shall have
sufficient room for 50 units with initial development of ten acres.
      (2)   An individual home lot within a mobile home park established under
the provisions of this section shall be not less than 5,000 square feet for a
single width structure (14 feet or less) and 7,000 square feet for a double
width structure (over 14 feet) exclusive of thoroughfares and walkways.
   (E)   Ground floor area. No mobile home shall be established, altered or
erected so that its ground floor area is less than 950 square feet excluding
all porches, canopies and storage areas.
   (F)   Building height. No building or structure may be established, altered
or erected so as to have a height greater than 30 feet. No accessory building
shall exceed 16 feet in height or 1,200 square feet in ground floor area.
   (G)   General requirements.
      (1)   Yards and distances between structures.
         (a)   The minimum distance between mobile home stands on opposite
sides of a street shall be 60 feet.
         (b)   The minimum distance between a mobile home stand and a street
pavement, common parking area, a common walk or other common area or another
mobile home shall be eight feet.
         (c)   The minimum distance between a mobile home stand and the:
            1.   Side and rear property line of the mobile home park: 25 feet;
and
            2.   Front street right-of-way line or easement line when abutting:
               a.   Arterial street: 60 feet;
               b.   Feeder street: 50 feet; and
               c.   Residential street: 40 feet.
      (2)   Streets.
         (a)   Streets shall be provided on the site where necessary to furnish
principal traffic ways for convenient access to the mobile home stands and
other important facilities on the property. Streets shall be privately owned
and maintained.
         (b)   The street system shall provide convenient circulation by means
of minor streets and properly located collector streets. Closed end or dead end
streets shall be provided with adequate paved vehicular turning or backing
space. A turning circle shall have a paved surface of at least 84 feet in
diameter, exclusive of curbs. Dead end streets shall not exceed 500 feet in
length measured from the center point of the turning circle to the intersection
of the centerline of a dead end and a through street.
         (c)   Pavements shall be of adequate width to accommodate the expected
parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street with 12 feet
minimum moving lane widths and eight feet minimum lane widths for parallel
parking.
         (d)   One-lane minor streets are prohibited.
         (e)   Streets shall be adapted to the topography and shall have
suitable alignment and gradient for safety of traffic in accordance with § 94-
202(B) of this chapter. Storm water system shall be designed in accordance with
the city or county Storm Water and Erosion Control Management Plan Ordinance
and Design Manual. Each home shall be connected to sanitary sewers.
         (f)   Street intersections shall generally be at right angles. Offsets
at intersections and intersections of more than two streets at one point shall
be avoided.
         (g)   The street improvements shall extend continuously from the
existing improved street system to provide suitable access to the mobile home
stands and other important facilities on the property, to provide adequate
connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the property and
to provide convenient circulation of vehicles.
         (h)   Curbs and gutters along all streets are required.
         (i)   Street base and pavement shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards established for residential streets in § 94-203(C) of this
chapter.
         (j)   Buffering will be provided as required by the Commission and per
§ 94-203 of this chapter, but not less than 50 feet from any existing R1 or I
use.
      (3)   Driveways.
         (a)   Driveway shall be provided on the site where necessary for
convenient access to service entrances of buildings, to delivery and collection
points for refuse and other material and elsewhere as needed.
         (b)   Four parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home
stand. The spaces shall be provided either in common facility within 100 feet
of the stand, in a parking lane along the abutting interior access street or
within the stand. Street parking shall count as two spaces per stand fronting
on the parking lane.
      (4)   Walk.
         (a)   Paved pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided in a continuous
arrangement, throughout the park. Where possible, walks leading to frequently
use public facilities should be through interior areas removed from the
vicinity of streets. Public pedestrian sidewalks shall be constructed of
concrete at least five feet in width and four inches in thickness.
         (b)   Individual walks shall be provided from a public walk, street or
parking area to the individual mobile home stands. These walks shall be at
least three feet in width and should be paved with a suitable material for use
in all weather conditions.
      (5)   Screen planting and fences.
         (a)   Fences or free standing walls shall be installed where necessary
around laundry areas, refuse collection points, sanitary facilities, sewage
disposal facilities and playgrounds for screening and protection of the
residents.
         (b)   Screening, fencing and walls shall be set back from sidewalks
and streets so as not to interfere with convenient and safe use of these
facilities. Vision clearance at street intersections shall be maintained.
      (6)   Sanitary and trash facilities. The mobile home park shall be
provided with a complete sanitary sewer system, which shall connect with an
existing approved sanitary sewer outlet or shall be provided with a separate
treatment plant to be provided by the developer in accordance with and approved
by the state’s Board of Health (see regulation HSE 14, State Board of Health).
Further, the park developer shall provide enclosed and screened containers or
dumpsters for solid waste in accordance with the state’s Board of Health rules
and § 94-40 of this chapter.
   (H)   Other permitted uses.
      (1)   Non-residential occupancy, mobile homes, trailers or vans may be
utilized as contractors’ offices, watchmen’s shelters or tool and equipment
storage only on construction sites and only during the period of active
construction on the project. Persons seeking such uses shall notify the City
Superintendent, in writing, of the location and anticipated duration of use.
Such use shall not exceed a period of 18 months without the express written
approval of the City Superintendent.
      (2)   Other use of mobile home and manufactured housing not meeting the
requirements set out above shall be permitted only upon the granting of a
special exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided for in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-37  SIGNS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. See § 94-5 of this chapter.
      SIGN. See § 94-5 of this chapter.
      SIGN, FREESTANDING. See § 94-5 of this chapter.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The city recognizes that signs are a major means
of outdoor advertising for local businesses and provide directions and other
information for drivers and pedestrians. The city also recognizes that signage
significantly affects the quality of our visual environment. The goals of this
section are, therefore, to:
      (1)   Promote conscientious use of signs by local businesses, government
bodies and other entities to permit maximum legibility and effectiveness of
signs; and
      (2)   Prevent over-concentration, excessive size and improper placement
of signs in order to promote an atmosphere of small town charm with positive
esthetics.
   (C)   General provisions.
      (1)   Signs and advertising structures may be maintained in the districts
where such uses are permitted after having secured an improvement location
permit approving the location, size and design of said sign or advertising
structure, except in the case where said sign or advertising structure is
specifically excluded from the requirements of an improvement location permit
by the provisions of this section, subject to the following general
requirements.
         (a)   Signs and advertising structures shall conform to the
regulations for this district in which they are located, as established by this
section.
         (b)   The area of a sign or advertising structure shall be calculated
by multiplying its maximum vertical and horizontal dimensions, excluding
support structure.
         (c)   No sign or advertising structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any streets in such a manner so as to obstruct free and clear
vision of operators of motor vehicles, or at a location where, by reason of its
position, shape or color, it may interfere with or obstruct the vision of, or
be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or make use of
any word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with or
confuse traffic.
         (d)   Lights used to illuminate signs or advertising structures shall
be so installed so as to concentrate the illumination on the sign or
advertising structure and so as to minimize glare upon a public street or
adjacent property. Signs and advertising structures are also subject to the
requirements of the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1967, as amended. All
signs and advertising structures shall conform to the provisions of said Act.
If this section and the Act are in conflict, the requirements of the more
restrictive shall apply.
      (2)   The following types of signs shall be exempted from requirements of
this section:
         (a)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers and names of occupants of premises;
         (b)   Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion;
         (c)   Legal notices, identification information or directional signs
erected by or at the direction of governmental bodies;
         (d)   An integral decoration or architectural feature of a building,
except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights;
         (e)   Signs directing and guiding traffic in parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter or logos;
         (f)   Permanent entrance signs to residential subdivisions or PUDs
when the Commission, as part of plat approval for the development, approves the
sign; and
         (g)   Signs that identify a family farm, family farming operation or
advertising farm products for sale on the farm are exempt; provided, the total
area of sign(s) do not exceed 64 square feet.
   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted in all districts subject to the
restrictions of the district in which the sign is located as established by
this section, plus the following general requirements that shall also apply to
all signs.
      (1)   (a)   Whenever this section limits the area of any sign, a double-
faced sign may be erected having the allowed sign area on each side of the
structure; provided that, the maximum dimensions between the two faces of the
sign shall not exceed two feet.
         (b)   No sign shall be located closer than 30 feet from an abutting
residential use.
      (2)   Signs may be placed on the surface of a building provided the area
in square feet does not exceed three times the length of the wall (e.g., wall
length is 60 feet maximum sign area is 180 square feet). Total area of signs on
buildings may not exceed that allowed in the district in which the building is
located. Any sign that is proposed for a wall that faces and is within 200 feet
of a residential use shall required application be made to the Board of Zoning
Appeals for approval of the sign or signs and method of lighting.
      (3)   No part of any sign, whether freestanding or attached to a
building, shall exceed the height requirements of the district as established
in Art. III of this chapter or 40 feet whichever is less.
      (4)   (a)   Any projecting wall sign with its advertising surface at an
angle to a wall facing a street shall be deemed to be a freestanding sign.
         (b)   No such sign shall project beyond the right-of-way line of any
adjacent street.
         (c)   Said signs shall have at least eight feet of clearance above the
ground.
      (5)   The minimum setback of freestanding signs from street rights-of-way
shall be not less than those given in the following table as measured to the
nearest edge of the sign:
 
Area of Sign per Face                                           Minimum Setback
12 square feet or less                                          5 feet
12.1 to 50 square feet                                          10 feet
50.1 to 128 square feet                                         20 feet
128.1 to 256 square feet and shopping center signs              50 feet
Over 256 square feet are prohibited, except for shopping center Prohibited
signs
 
      (6)   No freestanding sign shall be erected or maintained on or within
any easement or right-of- way, whether public or private, without the express
written approval from the person or agency empowered to grant such approval.
      (7)   Where a use has been permitted in a district by special exception,
the sign requirements for the district in which it has been allowed to be
located shall determine the requirements for size, location, placement and
erection of signs for the special exception use.
      (8)   No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where, by
reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color, it may
obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic-control sign, signal or devise.
      (9)   No sign shall contain or make use of any phrase, symbol, shape,
form or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
moving traffic.
      (10)   No exterior sign shall be permitted to display flashing,
intermittent, revolving or animated lighting or illumination, or any
illumination that simulates or displays motion. LED signs, and similar
electronic displays, are permitted; provided, the display does not flash, show
animation or change screen message less than eight second intervals. LED signs
and electronic displays are not allowed on advertising structures.
      (11)   All signs not expressly exempted or permitted by this chapter are
prohibited. Also, prohibited are off premises signs of any type or size that
are attached to utility poles, fence post, trees, light post, traffic signal
post or poles or any structure within public right of way.
      (12)   No part of any sign that is attached to the exterior wall of a
building shall be erected to a height in excess of six feet above the roof or
parapet line of such building.
      (13)   No illuminated sign shall be permitted within 50 feet of any
residential district unless the illumination of such sign is so designed that
it does not reflect or shine light onto such property.
      (14)   No part of any freestanding sign shall be erected to a height
greater than that specified for other structures in the district in which the
sign is located; roof top sign structures shall not exceed more than six feet
above the roof line, nor shall such sign structures extend beyond or overhang
any exterior wall of the building upon which they are secured.
      (15)   A minimum setback of freestanding signs from street rights-of-way
shall not be less than those given in the table in subsection (D)(5) above.
   (E)   Advertising structures. Advertising structures are permitted only in
B3, B4 and Industrial Districts, subject to the restrictions of that district
as established by this section, plus the following general requirements that
shall apply to all advertising structures.
      (1)   No advertising structure shall be located closer than 1,000 feet in
any direction from any other advertising structure on the same side of the
road, street or highway.
      (2)   No advertising structure shall be located closer than 500 feet to
any access ramp of a limited access highway, nor closer than 500 feet to the
intersection of two or more state highways. The distance to the access ramp
shall be measured from the point where the pavement widening begins.
      (3)   No advertising structure shall be placed within 500 feet of any
dwelling or land platted and recorded for residential use, or any school,
church, place of public assembly or park unless the property owner waives this
requirement as it applies to his or her property.
      (4)   An advertising structure may contain no more than two displays per
facing, the maximum combined area of which shall not exceed 512 square feet. No
advertising structure, excluding supports and frames, shall exceed 16 feet in
height or 32 feet in length.
      (5)   The height of any advertising structure, including supports and
frame, shall not exceed 40 feet measured from either the ground elevation at
its base or from the elevation of an adjacent road, street or highway whichever
is higher. A minimum of eight feet of open space between the bottom of the
display and the ground directly below the display is required.
      (6)   Each advertising structure shall be set back at least 50 feet
beyond the street or highway right-of-way, measured from the closest edge of
the advertising structure.
      (7)   No advertising structure shall be erected or maintained on or
within an easement or right-of-way, public or private, without the express
written approval from the person or agency empowered to grant such approval.
      (8)   An improvement location permit shall be required for the erection
of an advertising structure. The application for the improvement location
permit shall include a plot plan certified by a registered land surveyor,
showing the exact location of the proposed advertising structures,
intersections, residences and the like that are affected by the proposed
structure and regulated by this section. The application for an improvement
location permit shall include a notarized statement to be submitted to the
County Assessor showing the party responsible for future tax assessments due on
the advertising structure.
   (F)   Specific sign regulations by district.
      (1)   FP, AG, R1, R2, R3 and B1 Districts.
         (a)   Signs shall be permitted in these districts subject to the
conditions of subsections (C) and (D) above. In addition, the following
conditions shall apply.
            1.   One non-lighted, ground mounted, sign for each street frontage
shall be permitted.
Maximum area per sign shall be 12 square feet. Maximum height of sign is six
feet. Signs shall pertain only to products for sale, events occurring or
services rendered upon the premises. Except, freestanding signs are prohibited
in R1 and R2 Districts.
            2.   Signs mounted or attached to the building are permitted as
provided in subsection (F)(1)(a)3. below.
            3.   One non-lighted nameplate for each street frontage shall be
permitted. Maximum area per nameplate shall be six square feet. Nameplates
shall display only the name of the property owner or lessee, the name of the
property and the address of the property. Free standing name plates shall be
set back a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way line of any adjacent
street.
            4.   “For Rent” and “For Sale” signs shall be permitted. Not more
than two such signs not exceeding six square feet per sign shall be permitted
on any lot or parcel.
            5.   Total area of signs freestanding and attached or mounted on
buildings shall not exceed 24 square feet. An improvement location permit for
the above-mentioned signs is not required.
         (b)   Advertising structures are prohibited.
      (2)   B2 Districts.
         (a)   Signs shall be permitted in this district subject to the
conditions of subsections (C) and (D) above. In addition, the following
conditions shall apply.
            1.   A maximum of two freestanding signs shall be permitted per
lot, out-lot or parcel. The signs may be lighted. The total area of all
freestanding signs shall not exceed 192 square feet. Maximum height of
freestanding signs is 32 feet. Signs mounted or attached to the building are
permitted provided the total area of the sign(s) in square feet does not exceed
three times the length of the wall in lineal feet (e.g., wall length 20 feet
maximum sign area is 60 square feet). Further, the total area of all signs,
freestanding and those attached or mounted on buildings, shall not exceed 372
square feet.
            2.   Small vertical directional signs each not to exceed eight
square feet in area may be attached to a building structure to aid customers
and suppliers in locating garbage entrances, delivery points and the like. No
improvement location permit shall be required for such signs.
            3.   “For Rent” and “For Sale” signs shall be permitted. Not more
than two such signs not exceeding 12 square feet per sign shall be permitted on
any lot, building or occupancy. No improvement location permit shall be
required for such temporary signs.
            4.   One temporary sign, not exceeding 32 square feet, for the
purpose of advertising a special event, such as a “Grand Opening”, “Special
Sale” or for the purpose of advertising the business until a permanent sign is
erected, shall be permitted per business provided the temporary signage does
not exceed a collective 30 days out of a calendar year. No improvement location
permit shall be required for such temporary signs.
         (b)   In addition to the two signs allowed in subsection (F)(2)(a)1.
above, shopping centers or multi-business buildings shall be allowed one multi-
listing sign consisting of a directory sign for each business no greater than
16 square feet per business, plus space for the shopping center name not to
exceed 128 square feet. Total area of all signs on the structure shall not
exceed 192 square feet. The sign structure shall not exceed 32 feet in height.
         (c)   Advertising structures are prohibited.
      (3)   B3, B4, I1, I2, I3 and I4 Districts.
         (a)   Signs shall be permitted in these districts subject to the
conditions of subsections (C), (D) and (E) above. In addition, the following
conditions shall apply.
            1.   A maximum of three freestanding signs shall be permitted on
each lot, out-lot or parcel. The total area of all freestanding signs shall not
exceed 256 square feet. Signs mounted or attached to the building are
permitted; provided, the total area of the sign(s) in square feet does not
exceed three times the length of the wall in lineal feet (e.g., wall length 96
feet maximum sign area is 288 square feet). Further, the total area of all
signs, freestanding and those attached or mounted on buildings, shall not
exceed 512 square feet. Maximum height of freestanding signs is 40 feet.
            2.   Shopping centers or multi-business buildings shall be allowed
one multi-listing sign consisting of a directory sign for each business no
greater than 48 square feet per business, plus space for the shopping center
name not to exceed 256 square feet. Total area of all signs on the structure
shall not exceed 384 square feet. The sign structure shall not exceed 50 feet
in height.
            3.   Small vertical directional signs each not to exceed eight
square feet in area may be attached to a building structure to aid customers
and suppliers in locating garage entrances, delivery points and the like. No
improvement location permit shall be required for such signs.
            4.   “For Rent” and “For Sale” signs shall be permitted. Not more
than two such signs not exceeding 24 square feet per sign shall be permitted on
any lot, building or occupancy. No improvement location permit shall be
required for such signs.
            5.   One temporary sign, not exceeding 32 square feet, for the
purpose of advertising a special event, such as a “Grand Opening”, “Special
Sale” or for the purpose of advertising the business until a permanent sign is
erected, shall be permitted per business provided the temporary signage does
not exceed a collective 30 days out of a calendar year. No improvement location
permit shall be required for such temporary signs.
         (b)   Advertising structures are permitted.
      (4)   Summary of specific regulations by district.
 
         Max. No.     Max. Area Max. Area Max.      Max. Area Max.
District Freestanding per Sign  on        Total All Shopping  Height    Lighted
                                Building  Signs     Center
AG*, R1, 1 per street           6 sqft              Not
R2, R3,  frontage **  12 sqft   per       24 sqft   allowed   6 ft      No
B1                              business
                      192 sqft
B2       2            total for 3 x front 372 sqft  192 sqft  32 ft     Yes
                      2
B3, B4,               256 sqft
I1, I2,  3            total for 3 x front 512 sqft  384 sqft  40 ft *** Yes
I3, I4                3
NOTES TO TABLE:
The area of a Shopping Center or Multi-Business signs is in addition to the
total area of all signs.
* See subsection (C)(6) for exempt signs in AG District.
** Freestanding signs are not permitted in R1 and R2 Districts.
*** Maximum height of shopping center or multi-business sign in these districts
is 50 feet.
 
   (G)   Fee for improvement location permit for signs. Fees are due at the
time of applying for the improvement location permit and should be paid at the
office of City Superintendent and in accordance with § 94-240 of this chapter
under signs or advertising structure. Failure to comply with this section shall
result in a fine in accordance with § 94-241 of this chapter with violations to
be filed by the City Superintendent in the City Court. Violations may also be
treated the same as any other violation of this chapter and can be enforced by
any discretion of the Plan Commission.
   (H)   Inspection, removal, safety and maintenance of signage.
      (1)   Inspection.  Signs for which a permit is required may be inspected
periodically by the Building and Planning Inspector and/or his or her agent for
compliance with this and other codes of the city.
      (2)   Removal of sign. 
         (a)   The Building and Planning Inspector may order the removal of any
sign erected or maintained in violation of this code. He or she shall give 30
days’ notice in writing to the owner of a permanent sign, or place a notice of
such violation on the building, structure, property, or sign in violation, to
remove the sign or to bring it into compliance within 30 days of the
notification. He or she shall give a three-day notice for temporary or portable
signs. The Building and Planning Inspector or his or her agent may remove a
sign immediately and without notice if in his or her opinion, and with the
consent of the Mayor, the condition of the sign is such as to present an
immediate threat to the safety of the public.
         (b)   Any sign removed by the Building and Planning Inspector and/or
his or her agent, pursuant of the provisions of this section, shall be held by
the city for redemption by the owner, unless the sign was removed from the
public right-of-way. To redeem, the owner shall pay all costs incurred by the
city for removal. Should said sign not be redeemed within 30 days of its
removal, it may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city.
The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall be considered a debt owed to
the city by the owner of the sign and owner of the property, and may be
recovered in an appropriate court action by the city. The cost of removal shall
include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with
the sign’s removal. Signs removed from the public right-of-way shall be
considered abandoned and disposed of immediately.
      (3)   Maintenance.  All signs and components thereof shall be kept in
good repair and in safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition. Failure to
comply will automatically revoke appropriate permits after such noncompliance
has been determined by the Building and Planning Inspector, and notice has been
given to the owner of the sign as reflected by the records of the Building and
Planning Inspector. Legally established signs, which were either located prior
to the requirement for a sign permit or where the subject of a permit and the
permit records have been subsequently destroyed, shall also be considered in
violation of this provision of the ordinance and enforcement proceedings may be
initiated to compel appropriate maintenance to comply with these requirements.
      (4)   Abandoned signs.  Any sign, to include advertising structures,
equipment and lighting fixtures, shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the
premises upon which the sign is located when the business which it advertises
is no longer conducted on the premises; unless however, it is possible to
remove only the sign copy (such as in the case of a box sign), then the
insertion of a blank, translucent panel shall be considered removal under this
code. If the owner or lessee fails to remove it, the Building and Planning
Inspector shall give the owner ten days written notice to remove it (except in
the cases of signs abandoned in the public right-of-way which shall be removed
and disposed of immediately). Upon failure to comply with this notice, the
Building and Planning Inspector or his/her duly authorized representative may
remove the sign at cost to the owner. Where a successor to a defunct business
agrees to maintain the sign(s) as provided in this code, this removal
requirement shall not apply. The new sign user shall notify the Building and
Planning Inspector’'s office, in writing, of this change. No new sign permit is
required unless the sign is altered or relocated. The Building and Planning
Inspector shall be notified in any matters relating to sign relocations.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011; Ord.
2017-1742, passed 4- -2017)
§ 94-38  BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Definitions.
      BUFFER. Any physical barrier, whether naturally occurring or human-made,
that has the year- round effect of protecting one land use by mitigating the
potentially negative effects of another.
      INTRUDING USE. Any land use that needs to provide buffering to mitigate
potentially negative effects it may have on another use.
      PROTECTED USE. Any land use that needs to be protected from potentially
negative effects of another use.
   (B)   Reasons for buffers.
      (1)   Visual appearance;
      (2)   Noise level;
      (3)   Odor;
      (4)   Public health and safety; and
      (5)   Density.
   (C)   Chart of buffering. Minimum buffering requirements in terms of
distance are given in the following Chart of Buffering Distances. These
distances shall be applied to all incompatible adjacent land uses as noted.
   (D)   Special exceptions. In applying the requirements of the chart,
attention should be focused on the actual use in a proposed zone if the use
involves a special exception. Appropriate buffering should be determined by the
requirements of the zone in which the special exception use would normally be
located. See the following Chart of Buffering Distances on the following page.
   (E)   Effectiveness of buffers.
      (1)   The goal of these buffering requirements is to describe the minimum
buffering required to protect one use from the potentially negative effects of
an intruding use. Attention should be given to:
         (a)   Distance between incompatible uses;
         (b)   Width of buffer;
         (c)   Height of buffer; and
         (d)   Substance of material used to buffer.
      (2)   Consideration must be given to the specific use within a particular
intruding zone, as not all uses in a given zone will have the same negative
effects on surrounding land uses. Different kinds of buffers will be required
by different intruding uses to effectively buffer protected uses.
      (3)   The performance standard of the buffer should be that the protected
use should be no more affected by the intruding use’s presence as it would be
by the presence of any use that would not require a buffer.
   (F)   Examples of buffers.
      (1)   In general, natural buffers are preferred over human-made buffers.
         (a)   Natural buffers include:
            1.   Topographical variations, including hills and ravines;
            2.   Vegetation, including evergreen trees and dense growths of
deciduous trees and hedges;
            3.   Bodies of water, including creeks, ponds and lakes;
            4.   Combinations of the above, including landscaped mounds; and
            5.   Judicious site planning with regard to prevailing wind
directions.
         (b)   Human-made buffers include:
            1.   Intervening non-intruding land uses;
            2.   Fences; and
            3.   Pools.
      (2)   The appropriateness and adequacy of a proposed buffer should be
evaluated in terms of its effectiveness at mitigating anticipated negative
effects of an intruding use. If equivalent effectiveness can be obtained with
alternative buffering methods not listed above, they should be looked upon with
favor by the governing body.
 
Chart of Buffering Distances Required (in feet)
Buffering distance required from protected use (top of chart) to
negative impact use (down side of chart)
AG R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 I3 I4
AG
R1
R2
R3 50  20
B1
B2 20  20
B3 50  50  20
B4 50  50  50  50
I1 50  50  50  50  20
I2 100 100 100 100 50 20
I3         500        200   100
I4                    1,000
NOTES TO TABLE:
All distances are minimums. All distances are measured from the
perimeter of the actively used area within the zone requiring the
buffer to the property line of the zone that needs to be protected.
ACTIVELY USED AREA shall include all buildings, outside storage
areas, outdoor utility generation and transforming areas, delivery
driveways and other outdoor areas actively used for the business or
industry. ACTIVELY USED AREA shall not include lawns, landscaped
areas or employee drives and parking lots.
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-39  SCREENING, FENCING AND OUTSIDE STORAGE.
   (A)   Industrial.
      (1)   Outside storage shall be enclosed within a fenced area.
      (2)   Outside storage shall not encroach upon parking areas or boundaries
to the extent that parking ordinance requirements as set out in this chapter
are not being complied with.
      (3)   Outside storage shall not be visible to the public excepting
industrial classifications I2, I3 or I4.
      (4)   Outside storage, finished or raw materials shall not exceed the
height of the enclosed fence in any zoning classification excepting areas zoned
I2, I3 or I4.
   (B)   Business.
      (1)   Bulk storage shall not be in front of the building structure.
      (2)   Package display storage shall be permitted in front of the building
structure.
      (3)   Outside storage is prohibited in B1 District and must be screened
from public view in B2 and B3 Districts.
      (4)   The following shall be excepted in business zoning classification
from the outside storage provisions of the ordinance; provided, the stored
merchandise, supplies or stock is permitted within the district:
         (a)   Merchandise or supplies that have been delivered less than 12
hours;
         (b)   Seasonal garden or landscaping merchandise for retail sale;
         (c)   Seasonal nursery stock for retail sale;
         (d)   Dumpsters or other trash containers; provided, they are screened
from public view;
         (e)   Items for retail sale that by law are prohibited from being
stored inside a building such as propane cylinders or flammables. However, any
such items must be stored in a locked, fenced and screened area in approved
containers and the total area for storage of such items shall not exceed 72
square feet; and
         (f)   Items that are permitted in a specific business district, but by
their nature are stored outside including, but not limited to: automobile,
truck, trailer or farm implement sales; or similar types of retail sales.
   (C)   Residential.
      (1)   All storage shall be in an enclosed structure, with the exception
of licensed and operable: vehicles; boats; camping trailers; and travel
trailers. Also, excepted are stacked firewood, trash receptacles and
operational mowing and lawn equipment.
      (2)   Maximum height of any fence in a residential or B1 Zoning District
is six feet.
      (3)   No fence shall be placed on public right-of-way or placed at a
location that violates § 94-33(M) of this chapter.
   (D)   Screening, fencing and temporary storage containers.
      (1)   In all zoning districts screening and fencing, type, height,
materials and location must be included as part of any improvement location
permit plan. Screening and fencing type, height, materials and location is
subject to approval of the city which reserves the right to require any changes
it deems necessary for protection of adjacent properties or the public.
      (2)   Pods, trailers and other temporary enclosures and commercial type
containers are prohibited in residential and B1 Zoning Districts, except when
moving into or out of a house or business in which case the use of temporary
enclosures shall not exceed 30 calendar days.
      (3)   In all business and industrial zoning districts, where outside
storage is permitted and screening and/or fencing is required, screening and
fencing type, height, materials and locations is subject to the approval of the
city which can require any changes the city believes are needed for the
protection of adjacent properties or the public. Further, screening and/or
fencing of outside storage is required for any business or industrial use that
adjoins a residential district. Screening or fencing of business or industrial
storage shall not exceed 12 feet in height on any side that joins a residential
use. Pods, trailers and other similar enclosures, used for any type of storage
for more than ten consecutive calendar days, are prohibited.
      (4)   During declared emergencies, or in the event of destruction of a
building by fire or natural disaster, a property owner may request the
placement of temporary storage enclosures during the period of active cleanup
and reconstruction of the building. Persons seeking such uses shall notify the
City Superintendent, in writing, of the necessity for temporary storage. The
request shall include the location and anticipated duration for use of the
temporary storage enclosures. The City Superintendent shall grant the request
only upon a finding that the need arises from a declared emergency or
destruction of a building by fire or natural disaster and that the placement of
the temporary storage enclosures will not constitute a hazard to the public,
will not be placed on public right-of-way or cause undue hardship to adjoining
property owners. Such temporary storage enclosures use shall not exceed a
period of 12 months unless the City Superintendent finds that the conditions
for which the use was originally approved still exist and grants an extension
which shall not exceed six months.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-40  OUTSIDE TRASH AND DEBRIS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   In order to promote and protect a healthy and safe environment for
every citizen and to retain property values throughout the planning area of the
city, the following shall be enforced to prohibit trash, junk, including
unlicensed vehicles, garbage and debris.
      (1)   In every district, except where specifically permitted as a primary
use or by special exception, junk, trash, debris, scrap, garbage or discarded
material of any kind, including yard waste, vehicles having outdated license
plates, and unused or inoperable appliances shall not accumulate, pile, gather
or be stored in sight of the public, including being seen from adjacent
property, except as allowed herein. Not included are materials, supplies,
merchandise or equipment used for manufacturing, wholesale distribution, retail
sales or other permitted use; provided, they are screened from the public in
compliance with § 94-39 of this chapter, or they are within a district that
permits unscreened outside storage. Nothing in this subsection (A)(1) shall be
construed to allow outside storage in a district where it is prohibited or
restricted.
      (2)   In multi-family residential, mobile home parks, business and
industrial districts, junk, trash, garbage, debris or other items to be
discarded shall be placed in a weather-proof commercial dumpster or other type
of commercial weather proof waste container, of adequate size to prevent
overflowing and the dumpster or container shall be emptied or removed from the
property weekly.
      (3)   In residential districts, except multi-family and mobile home
parks, junk, garbage, debris, including yard waste or other items to be
discarded, shall be placed curbside for pickup not more than 24 hours prior to
the scheduled time for pickup by the City Sanitation Department or commercial
waste hauler. All garbage placed curbside for pickup shall be in animal-proof
containers or other type of container that is approved by the city. Other
debris, scrap or discarded materials, placed curbside for pickup, that is loose
in nature shall be in an appropriate container to prevent spilling or
scattering. Outside storage of any kind, except as provided in § 94-39 of this
chapter, is prohibited.
      (4)   In any agricultural district, outside, unscreened, storage of
inoperable farm equipment and machinery, used as spare parts in the farm
operation, together with limited quantities of scrap metals and lumber, used to
make repairs on the farm, are permitted; provided, the storage is more than 660
feet from any residential district. Nothing in this section shall require an
existing farm operation to remove or relocate its present storage location to
comply with this chapter. However, if the existing location is within 660 feet
of a residential district, the storage area shall not be increased in size or
moved closer to the residential district. Nothing in this chapter shall require
a farm operation to remove or relocate its storage area to accommodate a new
residential district.
      (5)   In all districts, dumpsters or containers used for receiving debris
for construction, remodeling, repair or demolition, including clearing and
removal of trash, junk and debris that had accumulated prior to passage of this
chapter, are permitted provide they are removed from the property at least
monthly and shall be used only during the period work is progressing. However,
in no case shall the term of use be longer than 180 days without the express
permission of the City Superintendent.
   (B)   Finding of a violation of this section shall result in a penalty under
§ 94-241 of this chapter. Each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. A violation shall subject the landowner to the
remedies and penalties provisions of Art. XII of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-41  STORM WATER AND EROSION CONTROL.
   (A)   The developers, lot owners and permit holders of any lot shall be
responsible for storm water and erosion control during any construction phase
or development of the lot. The developer, permit holder and lot owner shall be
each jointly and severally responsible for keeping soil, construction and other
erosion debris off of the streets of the city or county. The developer, permit
holder, and lot owner shall be each jointly and severally responsible for
keeping soil and other construction debris and other erosion debris out of
storm sewers shown on the plat or storm sewers which are owned by or dedicated
to the city or county. Prior to beginning any construction activity that is
subject to the City or County Storm Water and Erosion Control Management Plan
Ordinance, the developer, owner or subdivider shall obtain a Storm Water and
Erosion Control Plan Approval permit from the office of the City Engineer if
within the city limits or the county’s Drainage Board if outside the city
limits.
   (B)   All developers shall be required to file copies of these permits with
the City Superintendent prior to beginning construction or filing of the final
plat for approval.
   (C)   Failure to comply with the provisions of the city, county and state
permits will subject the developers, owners or subdividers to delay of final
plat approval until such time as any violations are corrected or remedied.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-42  CELL, MICROWAVE AND COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   (A)   Cellular and microwave towers are permitted only by special exception
only in AG, B2, B3, B4, I1, I2, I3 and I4 Districts.
   (B)   The Commission may require commitments from the tower owner including,
but not limited to: landscaping; installation of an America flag with lighting;
fencing; screening; require the tower and equipment be painted or finished in
specific colors.
   (C)   The Commission shall require the applicant to provide written evidence
that there is no other existing tower, within the proposed service area, on
which the applicant can co-locate their facility.
   (D)   Tower owners shall be required to allow other communication companies
to lease space for equipment on the tower at reasonable market rates.
   (E)   Tower owner is required to obtain a “tower permit” from the office of
the City Superintendent and pay the fee per § 94-240 of this chapter. The
permit must be renewed bi-annually.
   (F)   If the tower owner fails to comply with commitments required by the
Commission, including maintenance of commitment items including, but not
limited to, fences, landscaping screening and finishes, the City Superintendent
shall notify the tower owner, in writing, of their failure to meet commitments
and shall order the tower owner to rectify the deficiencies within ten days of
notice. If the tower owner does not comply with the order, the Superintendent
shall file the violation in the City Court. Violation will carry the penalties
per item (e), Industrial Violation, of § 94-241 of this chapter. If, after a
period of 30 days, the tower owner has not complied with the order, the
Superintendent may revoke the tower permit.
   (G)   The tower company may appeal a revocation of a permit to the
Commission. Upon appeal the Commission may impose additional commitments or
penalties, require the tower to be removed at the owner’s expense, or order the
Superintendent to reinstate the permit.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-43  DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The intentional destruction, demolition or removal of a structure
including, houses, garages, sheds, office buildings, foundations and basements,
factories, warehouses, radio cellular or microwave towers, chimneys, water
towers or tanks, underground storage tanks, septic tanks, cisterns, wells (gas,
oil or water) is prohibited unless a demolition permit is obtained from the
office of the City Superintendent.
   (B)   Prior to beginning demolition, the owner or owner’s agent shall obtain
all necessary federal and state permits. Proof of obtaining the required
permits must be provided to the City Superintendent when making application for
a demolition permit.
   (C)   Applicant for a demolition permit shall provide the following:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the landowner and demolition
contractor;
      (2)   Traffic control plan;
      (3)   Proof of disconnection of utilities by the various utility
companies (electric, gas, water, sewer, telephone, cable);
      (4)   Proof of notification of proposed demolition to the police and fire
departments having jurisdiction, which shall include the name and phone number
of the contractor and landowner and the scheduled date for demolition to begin;
      (5)   Name and location of site (if site is a private landfill a map to
the site is required) where rubble, debris and other materials will be disposed
of (debris must be disposed of in a public IDEM approved landfill or a private
landfill which has DNR and IDEM approval);
      (6)   Schedule for completion of all work; and
      (7)   Plan for reclamation of the site including, but not limited to:
backfill material; final grades; mulch seeding or sodding; erosion control and
restoration of sidewalks; curbs; streets; or any other damage to infrastructure
on public right-of-way.
   (D)   A permit fee in the amount shown in § 94-240 of this chapter shall be
paid.
   (E)   The City Superintendent shall require the posting of a performance
surety (cash, certified check or bond) in an amount of not less than $2,000 or
more than $10,000. The amount of surety shall be determined by the City
Superintendent based upon the size, type and location of structure to be
removed and the potential for damage to public infrastructure from demolition
activities.
   (F)   Any person(s), company, corporation, partnership or contractor that
seeks a demolition permit shall carry general liability insurance in an amount
of not less than $1,000,000 and provide proof of insurance to the City
Superintendent at the time of permit application.
   (G)   Demolition work, other than disconnection of utilities, shall not
begin for 72 hours after issuance of the demolition permit to allow Police and
Fire Department personnel to take any needed precautions.
   (H)   Violation of this section will subject the landowner to the
enforcement provisions of Art. XII of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-44 — 94-54  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: SPECIAL USES
Section
   
94-55.   Special use procedure
   
94-56.   Special uses; all districts
   
94-57.   Minimum lot area; special uses
   
94-58.   Setbacks; special uses
   
94-59.   Minimum distance from residential district
   
94-60.   Fences and walls; special uses
   
94-61.   Screen planting adjoining residential use; special use
   94-62. — 94-69.   Reserved
§ 94-55  SPECIAL USE PROCEDURE.
   The special uses listed in this chapter shall meet the following
requirements of this chapter as well as all other chapters of this chapter. In
a district in which the specified use is allowed by right, the Building
Inspector shall ascertain that the specifications of this chapter are met. In a
district in which special exception allows the specified use, the Board shall
ascertain that the specifications of this chapter are met prior to approval of
the special exception.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-56  SPECIAL USES; ALL DISTRICTS.
   These uses are permitted in any district, but are subject to the
requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Artificial lake of three or more acres;
   (B)   Mineral extraction;
   (C)   Railroad right-of-way and necessary uses;
   (D)   Sewage disposal plant (primary use); and
   (E)   Transmission lines for gas, oil, electricity and other utilities,
including substations, regulators, booster stations and lift stations that
require an area, above ground, exceeding 150 square feet.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-57  MINIMUM LOT AREA; SPECIAL USES.
   A lot on which one of the following uses is located may not be smaller in
area than the area prescribed for that use on the following table. For uses not
listed, the requirements of the district in which the use is located shall
apply.
 
Use Minimum Lot Area
Airport                                               80 acres
Auction sales yard (excluding livestock)              20 acres
Cemetery                                              20 acres
Commercial facility for raising and breeding non-farm 3 acres
fowl or animals
Day care center and home day nursery                  110 square foot per child
Heliport                                              2 acres
Hospital                                              5 acres
Junkyard                                              10 acres
Kennel                                                3 acres
Penal or correctional institution                     80 acres
Public or commercial campground                       10 acres
Public or commercial sanitary landfill                10 acres
Public or commercial wastewater treatment plant       3 acres
Slaughterhouse                                        5 acres
Travel trailer park                                   5 acres
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-58  SETBACKS; SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses are subject to the special setbacks prescribed by the
following table. If a use does not appear, or if a figure does not appear for a
particular use, the standard setback for the district shall apply.
 
Use Front Side Rear
Anhydrous ammonia or similar fertilizer, commercial storage and 100 100 100
distribution
Bottled gas storage and distribution                            100 100 100
Commercial facility for raising and breeding non-farm fowl and  100 100 100
animals
Junkyard or salvage yard                                        100 100 100
Travel trailer park                                             100 40  40
Petroleum tank farm                                             100 100 100
Public or commercial campground                                 100 40  40
Public or commercial water supply treatment facility            100 50  50
Public or commercial sanitary landfill                          300 300 300
Public or commercial wastewater treatment plant                 300 300 300
Riding stables                                                  100 100 100
Sale barn for livestock resale                                  100 100 100
Slaughterhouse                                                  100 100 100
Warehouse (grain elevator)                                      100 100 100
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-59  MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The following uses shall be located not closer than 1,320 feet to
residential, business, I1 or I2 Districts:
   (A)   Commercial storage and distribution of anhydrous ammonia or similar
liquid fertilizer;
   (B)   Farm confined feeding operations;
   (C)   Junk or salvage yards;
   (D)   Manufacturing of, storage of or use of explosives;
   (E)   Penal or correctional institutions;
   (F)   Petroleum product tank farm; and
   (G)   Liquefied gas bulk storage.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-60  FENCES AND WALLS; SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses shall be fenced or walled as prescribed by the table
below unless a waiver is specifically granted by the Commission or Board:
 
Use Required Enclosure
Airport                         5-foot woven wire fence
Auction sales yard (excluding   6-foot solid fence, except when
livestock)                      adjoining AG, B3 and I Districts
Automatic car wash              6-foot solid fence when adjoining R1 and
                                R2 Districts
Junkyard                        Solid wall or fence sufficient to hide
                                from view
Kindergarten or day nursery     4-foot chain link fence
Outdoor commercial recreational 5-foot woven wire fence
enterprises
                                Protective fence or barrier not less
                                than 60 inches in height in accordance
Swimming pool                   with 675 I.A.C. 20-4-27(c), except a
                                power safety pool cover shall be capable
                                of supporting a prone adult at its
                                center
Slaughterhouse                  Solid wall or fence sufficient to hide
                                from view
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-61  SCREEN PLANTING ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL USE; SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   If the Commission approves a residential use abutting one of the
following uses, the developer of the residential district so approved shall be
required to construct the screening and provide for its maintenance. The
Commission shall determine the type and dimensions of screening as a
requirement for zoning or plat approval.
   (B)   Any of the following uses shall be screened from abutting residential
districts:
      (1)   Airport or heliport;
      (2)   Artificial lake of three or more acres;
      (3)   Automatic car wash;
      (4)   Cemetery or crematory;
      (5)   Clinic;
      (6)   Commercial facility for raising and breeding non-farm fowl and
animals;
      (7)   Country club or golf course;
      (8)   Drive-in restaurant;
      (9)   General industry;
      (10)   Hospital;
      (11)   Industrial park;
      (12)   Junkyard;
      (13)   Kennel;
      (14)   Kindergarten or day nursery;
      (15)   Light industry;
      (16)   Mineral extraction, borrow pit, top soil removal and their storage
areas;
      (17)   Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise;
      (18)   Police station or fire station;
      (19)   Private recreational development;
      (20)   Private swimming pool (non-residential);
      (21)   Public or commercial campground;
      (22)   Public or commercial sanitary fill or garbage disposal plant (also
along abutting street);
      (23)   Public or commercial wastewater treatment plant;
      (24)   Race track;
      (25)   Riding stable;
      (26)   Shopping center;
      (27)   Shooting range (outdoor);
      (28)   Slaughterhouse (also along abutting street);
      (29)   Trailer park;
      (30)   Truck freight terminal;
      (31)   Truck service terminal;
      (32)   Warehouse (grain elevator); and
      (33)   Wholesale produce terminal.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-62 — 94-69  RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURES
Section
   
94-70.   Regulations and procedures
   94-71. — 94-84.   Reserved
§ 94-70  REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The special exceptions listed in the districts (see §
94-30, Table 1, of this chapter) and their accessory buildings and uses may be
permitted by the Board in the districts indicated therein, in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a special exception, the Board
shall refer the application to the Commission for investigation as to the
manner in which the proposed location and character of the special exception
will affect the master land use plan. The Commission shall report the results
of its study to the Board within 90 days following receipt of the application.
If no such report is filed with the Board within the time period, the Board
shall proceed to process the application.
   (C)   (1)   The Board shall then proceed with a hearing on the application
in the manner prescribed in Art. XI of this chapter. Following the hearing and
upon an affirmative finding by the Board, in writing, that:
         (a)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special
exception will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals or general welfare;
         (b)   The special exception will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other properties in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted;
         (c)   The establishment of the special exception will not impede or
substantially alter the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
         (d)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
         (e)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion on the public roads;
and
         (f)   The special exception will be located in a district where such
use is permitted and all other requirements in this chapter, which are
applicable to such special exception, will be met.
      (2)   Having met all of the above requirements the Board shall order, the
City Superintendent to issue an improvement location permit for the use as
approved by the Board.
   (D)   An existing use which is listed herein as a special exception, and
which is located in a district in which such special exception may be
permitted, is a conforming use. Any expansion of the special exception
involving the enlargement of the buildings, structures or land area devoted to
such use shall be subject to the procedures described in this section.
   (E)   The filing fee for a special exception shall be as shown in § 94-240
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-71 — 94-84  RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
Section
   
94-85.   Intent of districts
   
94-86.   Classifications
   
94-87.   Organization of proposals
   
94-88.   Filing procedures
   
94-89.   Preliminary plan hearing
   
94-90.   Approval of final detail plan
   
94-91.   Covenants and maintenance
   
94-92.   Recording
   
94-93.   Permit
   
94-94.   Construction
   
94-95.   Extensions, abandonment and expiration
   
94-96.   Rules of procedures
   
94-97.   Limitation of rezoning
   94-98. — 94-104.   Reserved
§ 94-85  INTENT OF DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The purposes of these regulations are to provide greater design
flexibility in the development of land when consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan and intent of this chapter. The use of planned unit development (PUD)
zoning classifications shall be encouraged when the use of such regulations
promotes a harmonious variety of uses, and/or foster the creation of
attractive, healthful, efficient and stable environments for living, shopping
or working.
   (B)   The PUD regulations and procedures may apply to the redevelopment of
presently developed lands, or the development of open or vacant developments
and their relationship with other surrounding uses and the overall
characteristics of the area in which located.
   (C)   PUD regulations are intended to encourage innovations in land
development techniques so that the growing demands of the community may be met
with greater flexibility and variety in type, design and layout of sites and
buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open spaces and
other amenities generally enhancing the quality of life.
   (D)   Planned development projects should also encourage a more efficient
use of land that reflects the changes in the technology of land development so
that resulting economies may accrue to the benefit of the community at large.
   (E)   To enhance the purpose and intent of the PUD, the provisions of § 94-
33 of this chapter may be modified by specific finding of the Plan Commission
that the proposed PUD provides and allows for a deviation(s) in the standards
consistent with this chapter, the intent of which will allow more development
resulting in economies that accrue to the benefit of the community at large
through the use of a PUD. Under this provision, the Commission shall consider
and apply the buffering requirements set out in § 94-38 of this chapter when
considering a PUD.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-86  CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The general character of the dominant use of the development, as
provided by this chapter, shall identify PUD proposals reviewed by the
Commission.
   (B)   Such proposals shall be classified by the following designations.
      (1)   PUD-R - Planned Unit Development - Residential. Any development
consisting of not less than three acres in which more than 80% of the interior
floor area of all buildings to be included in the development are used for
residential purposes or those accessory purposes customarily related to
residential use.
      (2)   PUD-B - Planned Unit Development - Business. Any development
consisting of not less than four acres in which all of the interior floor area
of all buildings to be included in the development is to be used for business
and commercial purposes.
      (3)   PUD-I - Planned Unit Development - Industrial. Any development
consisting of not less than five acres in which more than 80% of the interior
floor area of all buildings to be included in the development are used for
industrial or manufacturing purposes or such accessory uses customarily
relating to industrial uses with the balance of such interior floor area, if
any, being intended for such commercial uses as reasonably relate to the
support or convenience of the intended industrial uses or their occupants.
      (4)   PUD-E - Planned Unit Development. A development not otherwise
distinguishable under any previous classification, containing less than the
minimum land area and/or less than the stated minimum proportions of any single
dominant use or function, and in which the proposed uses of interior and
exterior spaces require unusual design flexibility to achieve a completely
logical and complementary conjunction of uses and functions.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-87  ORGANIZATION OF PROPOSALS.
   Any person, corporation, partnership or association having an ownership
interest in a proposed development, or any group of owners united in interest,
acting jointly, and in pursuance to an agreement to carry out the proposal in
separate ownership may propose a PUD District in accordance with the procedures
hereinafter established, where such proposal intends to act as developer or
sponsor of the development if the zoning change is adopted and indicates the
requisite capabilities to carry out such proposal. A parcel, or site proposed
for PUD need not be under single ownership where the proposed development
consists of a group of structures or improvements capable of being developed
separately abut in accordance with a single, unitary plan and in which the
separate owners have given their express intentions to enter into such private
agreements between or among themselves as will facilitate their mutual
enterprise, and assure its completion as planned to the satisfaction of the
Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-88  FILING PROCEDURES.
   The authorization of a PUD shall be subject to the procedures expressed
herein.
   (A)   Submission of a petition and all other documents required for rezoning
for the appropriate PUD classification, which petition shall be signed by the
owner or owners of all real estate involved in the petition for the PUD, or
which petition shall have attached thereto the notarized consent of all such
owners to the filing of such petition, and to the change to a PUD
classification of their real estate included.
   (B)   The petition, which shall include a preliminary plan and plat for any
area proposed for development as a PUD, shall be filed with the Commission. The
preliminary plan and plat shall include:
      (1)   Proposed layout of streets, open space and other basic elements of
the plan to include identification of the approximate location and types of
building; approximate size and height; their use categories within the area;
and including proposed densities of said uses and lot dimensions if applicable.
Individual lots need not be shown but may be created individually as part of
the approval of the final detailed plan. If individual buildings are not shown,
the plan must have minimum development standards for front, side and rear yards
setbacks, maximum land coverage by buildings and parking lots, maximum height
of buildings, surface type of driveways and parking area, proposed street
standards with typical sections. The proposed land use for each area or area(s)
of the PUD must be given in adequate detail for the Commission to make a
determination as to the compatibility of uses within the PUD and with uses on
the perimeter of the PUD. Where individual lots are not shown, the Commission
can require that a typical lot development plan be placed on the preliminary
plan plat;
      (2)   Proposals for handling traffic including street standards and
typical sections, parking, sidewalks, water supply, sewage disposal, storm
drainage, retention/detention basins and systems, tree preservation and
removal, landscaping, lighting, signage and other pertinent development
features that may not be specific to an individual lot, but will apply to the
development as a whole;
      (3)   A separate location map to scale shall show the boundary lines of
adjacent land and the existing zoning of the area proposed to be developed as
well as the adjacent land;
      (4)   The condominium declaration (if applicable), a document creating an
owners’ association and any covenants to be made a part of the PUD as well as
the order and estimated time of development;
      (5)   Provide a statement of the proposed order of development for the
major elements of the project, including whether the development will be
accomplished in phases or sections and, if so, the order and content of each
phase or section; and
      (6)   A statement certified by a registered engineer or registered land
surveyor stating that development has or will be designed in accordance with
the City or County Storm Water and Erosion Control Management Plan Ordinance
and Design Manual.
   (C)   The developer shall provide the subdivision with a water system, fire
hydrants, and sanitary sewers if the subdivision is located within the
corporate limits of the city. PUDs outside the corporate limits of the city
shall be served by a water utility and sanitary sewers whenever possible.
Spacing and location of any fire hydrants shall be based upon the
recommendation of the respective fire chief of the area being served.
   (D)   The preliminary plan shall be presented at a scale ratio not to exceed
100 feet equals one inch. The preliminary plan may include any additional
graphics, which will explain the features of the development. Four copies of
the preliminary plan shall be given to the City Superintendent and a certified
letter sent to all checkpoint agencies advising them that the preliminary plan
is available for review at the office of the City Superintendent, at City Hall,
giving a brief detailed description of the proposed plan, including estimates
of the number of employees, households and type of traffic related to the
development. It shall also be provided to the following checkpoint agencies for
their review and comment:
      (1)   City Superintendent;
      (2)   City Police Department and County Sheriff’s Department when outside
of the city limits;
      (3)   Metropolitan School District of the city and any other school
district which is affected;
      (4)   County Soil and Conservation District;
      (5)   County Highway Department; and
      (6)   City Fire Department and any other fire department which is also
included in the area served.
   (E)   After filing, the Commission shall meet with the petitioner regarding
the preliminary plan and checkpoint agency comments. Checkpoint agency
personnel may attend this meeting to provide comments. After such consultation,
the petitioner may make modifications to the petition.
   (F)   After the meeting described in subsection (E) above and after making
any modifications to the proposed preliminary plans, the petitioner shall file
four copies of the final proposed preliminary plan which shall include:
      (1)   All documents included in the preliminary plan;
      (2)   An index identifying all documents included in the preliminary
plan;
      (3)   A cover sheet indicating that it is the final proposed preliminary
plan indicating the date and zoning case number; and
      (4)   All documents therein reduced to a size no larger than eight and
one-half by 14 inches except for the maps, sketches, and plat (if any).
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-89  PRELIMINARY PLAN HEARING.
   (A)   Filing for a public hearing on the preliminary plan shall be in
accordance with all provisions, conditions and limitations of Art. X of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   The petition, as modified, shall then be heard by the Commission
as a petition for zoning map amendment and subject to the procedures applicable
thereto. The Commission may recommend approval or disapproval of the plan and
may impose any reasonable condition(s) with its affirmative recommendation.
      (2)   If disapproval is recommended, the application shall not be
certified to the City Council. If approval is recommended, four copies of the
preliminary plan shall be stamped “Approved Preliminary Planned Development”
and be signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of the Plan Commission.
      (3)   One copy shall be permanently retained in the office of the City
Superintendent, one copy to the City Engineer, one copy shall be returned to
the petitioner and one copy and all conditions shall be certified as described
in subsection (C) below.
   (C)   The approved preliminary PUD shall then be certified to the City
Council for adoption as a PUD District pursuant to the laws governing proposals
to change zoning maps. Upon adoption by the legislative body, the petitioner
shall prepare his or her final detailed plan.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-90  APPROVAL OF FINAL DETAIL PLAN.
   (A)   Before any development or site improvement takes place, the petitioner
shall file with the Commission four sets of final detailed plan specifying the
location, composition and engineering design of all lots, storm drainage,
sanitary sewage, water supply facilities, public or private street, recreation
facilities, site perimeter treatment, landscaping, plat and other site
development features including locations of buildings. The petitioner shall
also file the original of all signed and notarized documents pertaining to
restrictive covenants, condominium declaration and/or the creation authority to
review or act thereon, except as to enforcement, except as to an amendatory
ordinance, and except as hereafter provided for. All infrastructure plans shall
be approved by the City Engineer prior to approval of any final detailed plan.
   (B)   The approved preliminary plan may provide for development of the
property involved in phases or sections. If such phasing or sections is
included as a part of the approval of the preliminary plan, the petitioner may
submit partial final detailed plans that correspond to the phases or sections
involved. Such partial final detailed plans, when approved, shall be treated in
the same manner as approved final detailed plans for an entire PUD. A fee, per
§ 94-140 of this chapter shall be paid for each phase, section or portion of
the preliminary plan for which final detailed plan approval is requested.
   (C)   The approved final detailed plan or phase thereof shall be stamped
“Approved Final Detailed Planned Unit Development” and be signed by the
Chairperson and Secretary with one copy permanently retained in the office of
the City Superintendent following recordation.
   (D)   Unless extended by the Commission pursuant to § 94-95(A) of this
chapter, approval of the first phase or section of the final detailed plan
shall be obtained within two years and approval of all other phases or sections
of the final detailed plan shall be obtained within six years after adoption of
the PUD District by the City Council. Prior to approval of any phase of section
of the final detailed plan, performance and maintenance surety shall be
provided for all infrastructure of the phase or section in accordance with §
94-200 of this chapter.
   (E)   If the zoning district is in place, but no final detailed plan has
been approved within two years after adoption of the PUD district, the
Commission may initiate an amendment to the zoning map to change the district
designation of the land.
   (F)   In the exercise of continuing jurisdiction, the Commission may from
time to time approve only minor modifications of the approved final detailed
PUD in a manner consistent with the approved preliminary PUD. Such
modifications shall not include any increase in density, any lessening of
aesthetic treatments, any alteration of frontage or building location, any
change in type of use or any change in access points.
   (G)   Approval of a final detailed plan shall expire two years after the
date of the final approval of the phase or section of the plan unless that
phase or section is 50% completed in terms of public improvements including
streets, parks, walkways, utility installations and sanitary sewers. The
Commission upon a recommendation of the City Superintendent shall make
determination of the amount of completion. Following expiration of the final
detailed plan, the city shall declare the surety to be in default and cause all
public improvements to be installed according to the final detailed plans.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-91  COVENANTS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All covenants, when required by the Commission, shall be set forth in
detail and shall provide for a provision for the release of such restriction by
execution of a document so stating and suitable for recording, signed by the
Commission Chairperson and Secretary upon authorization by the Commission and
all of the owners of property in the area involved in the petition for whose
benefit the covenant was created. Such covenants shall provide that their
benefits run to the Commission and shall be specifically enforceable by the
Commission.
   (B)   The Commission may require the recording of covenants for any
reasonable public or semi-public purpose, including, but not limited to, the
allocation of land by the petitioner for public thoroughfares, parks, schools,
recreational facilities, and other public and semi-public purposes. Such
covenants may provide that if a governmental unit or agency thereof does not
proceed with acquisition of the allocated land within a specified period of
time, the covenants shall automatically terminate. If such termination occurs,
the petitioners shall then submit for approval by the Commission a modified
final detailed plan for such land, otherwise consistent with the approved
preliminary PUD.
   (C)   The Commission may require the recording of covenants for any other
reasonable purpose, including, but not limited to, imposing standards for
development of property in a PUD. Such development standards may include, but
are not limited to, requirements as to the following:
      (1)   Lot area;
      (2)   Floor area;
      (3)   Ratios of floor space to land area;
      (4)   Area in which structures may be built (“buildable area”);
      (5)   Open space;
      (6)   Setback lines and minimum rear yards;
      (7)   Building separations;
      (8)   Height of structures;
      (9)   Signs;
      (10)   Off-street parking and loading space;
      (11)   Design standards (including landscaping requirements); and
      (12)   Phasing of development.
   (D)   Adequate provision shall be made for a private organization with
direct responsibility to, and control by, the property owners involved to
provide for the operation and maintenance of all common facilities including
private streets jointly shared by such property owners if such facilities are a
part of the planned development, and, in such instance legal assurances shall
be provided and recorded which show that the private organization is self-
perpetuating.
   (E)   (1)   Common facilities, which are not dedicated to the public, shall
be maintained to standards assuring continuous and adequate maintenance.
      (2)   Common facilities not dedicated to the public shall be operated and
maintained at no expense to any governmental unit.
   (F)   (1)   All private streets shall be maintained by the aforementioned
private organization in such a manner that adequate access is provided at all
times to vehicular traffic so that fire, police, health, sanitation and public
utility vehicles can serve the properties contiguous or adjacent thereto, and
so that said vehicles will have adequate turning area.
      (2)   All streets and roadways not dedicated to the public shall be
operated and maintained at no expense to any governmental unit.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-92  RECORDING.
   (A)   (1)   All approved final detailed PUD plans, plats and modifications
thereof shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder within two years
after approval, but not before completion of all infrastructure or improvements
or submittal of a performance bond in an amount equal to 100% of the cost of
any uncompleted work.
      (2)   Failure to so record shall automatically void the approval of the
final detailed planned unit development.
   (B)   Upon completion of all development, where the exact measurements as to
the location of buildings or structures erected during the development are
deemed desirable for public record by recording thereof, the developer may
submit a copy of the approved final detailed PUD to the Commission as an
amended approved final detailed PUD with the exact measurements thereon shown
and, upon being satisfied that the measurements are substantially the same as
indicated on the original approved final detailed PUD, shall re-approve, date
and sign said amended approved final detailed PUD, which the developer shall
then record.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-93  PERMIT.
   An improvement location permit shall be issued for any phase or section of a
PUD District upon application showing full compliance with the approved final
detailed PUD for that phase or section.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-94  CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No construction or installation work shall be done on any public
improvements until the petitioner has, at least 48 hours in advance, notified
the appropriate governmental inspector of his or her intention to begin such
work, in order that inspections may be made as the work progresses.
   (B)   All development shall be in conformity with the approved and recorded
final detailed PUD and any material deviations from the approved and recorded
final detailed PUD shall be subject to appropriate enforcement action as
provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-95  EXTENSION, ABANDONMENT AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Extensions of the time for accomplishing any matters set forth herein
may be granted by the Commission at a public hearing for good cause shown.
   (B)   Upon the abandonment of a development authorized under this section
( ABANDONMENT shall be deemed to have occurred when no improvements have been
made pursuant to the approved final detailed PUD for 12 consecutive months), or
upon the expiration of two years from the approval of a final detailed PUD for
a development which has not been completed, an amendment may be initiated as
provided by law to the zoning category or categories which the legislative body
deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-96  RULES OF PROCEDURES.
   All proceedings brought under this section shall be subject to the Rules of
Procedure of the Plan Commission, where not inconsistent with the procedure
otherwise stated herein.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-97  LIMITATION OF REZONING.
   Except as provided in §§ 94-90(E) and 94-95(B) of this chapter, the Plan
Commission shall not initiate any amendments to the zoning map concerning the
property involved in a PUD before completion of the development.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-98 — 94-104  RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
Section
   
94-105.   Definition, distance and public display
   
94-106.   Restrictions, requirements and conditions
   
94-107.   Administration of ordinance
   
94-108.   Licensing
   94-109. — 94-119.   Reserved
§ 94-105  DEFINITION, DISTANCE AND PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   Adult entertainment activities, as herein defined, shall be subject to the
restrictions, requirements and conditions contained herein. The restrictions,
requirements and conditions set forth in this article are in addition to any
and all other zoning requirements contained in this chapter.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. An establishment with customer-operated motion
picture devises, peep shows and/or similar devices.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade for sale, rent or display, pictures, books,
periodicals, magazines, appliances and similar material which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to sexual activities, as hereinafter described, or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
      ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment with a capacity for
less than 50 persons having as a substantial or significant portion of its use
the presentation of materials having as a dominant theme or characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
sexual activities as hereinafter described for observation by persons
thereinafter.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment for 50 or more persons
having as a substantial or significant portion of its use the presentation of
material having as a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities, as
hereinafter relating to sexual activities, as hereinafter described for
observation by persons therein.
      ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. An establishment used for presenting live
performances of human and/or animals having as a dominant theme or
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating
to sexual activities, as hereinafter described, for observation by persons
therein.
      BATH HOUSE. An establishment for providing bathing, sauna, steam room
and/or lavatory facilities for male and/or female persons which promotes its
services by using and/or advertising the use of homosexual attendants.
      CABARET. An establishment which features as entertainers and/or waiters
and/or bartenders, male or female impersonators and/or persons either male or
female, who expose to public view of the patrons of said establishment at any
time the bare female breast below a point immediately above the areola, human
genitals, pubic region and/or buttocks and/or human or simulated male genitals
in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
      CHURCHES. A building for religious and public worship.
      MASSAGE PARLOR. An establishment that provides services for treating the
human body by nibbing, stroking and kneading, tapping or similar treatment with
the human hand. (This would exclude chiropractic treatment and physical therapy
by a licensed chiropractor or licensed physical therapist, respectively.)
      PARK. A tract of land for public use that has been designated on the
city’s zoning use maps as a public area.
      RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS. Any residential use within the city or the
buffer zone of the city with a zoning classification of R1, R2 or R3 or a
mobile home park.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
            1.   Human genitals or pubic regions;
            2.   Buttock; and
            3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
         (b)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
         (c)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
      TAXI DANCE HALL. An establishment operated as a public dance hall where
dance partners, either male or female, are available for hire for a monetary
consideration payable either by the dance or as part of an entrance fee or
membership fee.
   (B)   Distance restrictions, requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Schools, parks, churches, residential, agriculture and public
areas. The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment
activities shall not be located within 2,000 feet of any building containing a
school, church, public park, public mall or park-like area of public open space
or residential use. Such distance shall be measured along a straight line from
the nearest property line of the real estate on which said building or public
park-like areas is located to the entrance of such establishment engaging in an
adult entertainment activity.
      (2)   Other adult entertainment uses, hotels, motels and transportation
depots. The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment
activities shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the entrance of a similar
adult activity establishment, nor within 2,000 feet of the nearest property
line of the real estate on which any hotel, motel, convention facility or
transportation depot is located.
      (3)   Restrictions. Restrictions and establishments engaging in adult
entertainment activities, except as otherwise provided by laws which may be
more restrictive, may not have any signs with wording or pictorial or
representational mater which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities, as herein
defined.
   (C)   Public display; prohibited activities and anatomical areas.
      (1)   Materials offered for sale from adult news racks shall not be
displayed or exhibited in a manner, which exposes to public view any pictures
or illustrations of human genitals or specified sexual activities.
      (2)   Adult bookstores and adult motion picture theaters shall not
display or exhibit any material depicting human genitals or specified sexual
activities in a manner which exposes said material to the view of persons
outside the building in which said bookstore or motion picture theaters are
located.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-106  RESTRICTIONS, REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   An establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities, except as
otherwise provided by laws which may be more restrictive, may not have more
than one outside flush to the wall, fascia style sign, not to exceed in size
three feet in length (horizontal to the ground) with no flashing lights and
with no lettering, wording or pictorial or representational matter which is
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to sexual activities as herein defined.
   (B)   An establishment engaging adult entertainment activities may not
display its stock in trade or activities in such a manner as to be subject to
public view from outside the establishment, including, but not limited to, view
from public sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passways.
   (C)   An operator engaging in adult entertainment activities may not permit
a person less than 18 years of age to enter his or her establishment.
   (D)   An operator engaging in adult entertainment activities shall, at all
times, cause the entrance of his or her establishment to be so attended as to
ensure compliance with the requirements contained in subsection (C) above.
   (E)   An adult amusement arcade, except as otherwise provided by law which
may be more restrictive, shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a room,
enclosure or both in which any amusement device is located shall be constructed
of not less than one-hour fire-resistive material.
      (2)   The width of the aisles in any room where an amusement device is
located shall be more than 42 inches.
      (3)   There shall be no fewer than two doorways of a width no less than
36 inches which provide ingress or egress from any room in which an amusement
device is located; provided, however, that, one doorway shall be sufficient in
the event the Fire Chief should so determine. Doorway or doorways shall be
unlocked during business hours.
      (4)   Over every doorway, which provides egress from any room in which an
amusement device is located, there shall be maintained an internally
illuminated exit sign with letters at least five inches in height.
      (5)   Each amusement device located in such establishment shall be
situated so as to permit the person using the device to have a constantly
unobstructed view of the doorway or doorways, which provide ingress or egress
from the establishment.
      (6)   All requirements of the state’s Department of Fire and Building
Services.
      (7)   A light level of no less than ten footcandles floor level shall be
maintained in every portion of said establishment to which the public is
admitted.
      (8)   The numbers of persons in any room or partitioned portion of a room
where amusement devices are located shall not exceed one person per 30 square
feet. The maximum occupancy load permitted in any amusement devices are located
shall be conspicuously posted by the operator, and shall remain posted, at the
entrance of said room.
      (9)   The number of amusement devices shall not exceed the maximum
occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which
an amusement device is located. The maximum number of amusement devices
permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room shall be conspicuously
posted by the operator and shall remain posted, at the entrance of said room.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-107  ADMINISTRATION OF ORDINANCE.
   The City Council is empowered to enact whatever rules and regulations are
necessary for the orderly and complete administration of this article.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2017-1742, passed 4- -2017)
§ 94-108  LICENSING.
   (A)   The operator of an establishment engaging in an adult entertainment
activity shall be required to make application for a license with the Council
through the Clerk/Treasurer’s office after the effective date of this chapter.
Such application shall be in writing, under oath, and shall be in the form
prescribed by the City Council and shall contain the following information
together with such further information as the Council may require:
      (1)   The name and location of the establishment;
      (2)   The names and addresses of the applicants, owners of the
establishment; and, if a corporation, the names and addresses of the directors
and the names and addresses of shareholders owning capital stock therein; and,
if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners;
      (3)   The names and addresses of any owners of the property on which the
establishment is located;
      (4)   The names and addresses of any rental agency of the property on
which the establishment is located;
      (5)   The nature of the activity or activities to be engaged at such
location;
      (6)   The name and address of any person the applicant wants mail notice
to be given in case of violation or other matters affecting the license
hereunder;
      (7)   The application shall include a photograph or drawing of any signs
displayed or proposed to be displayed on the exterior of the establishment and
a statement of the dimension of such signs;
      (8)   A certificate of occupancy issued through the city’s Plan
Commission, certifying the business is in compliance with the applicable zoning
laws, shall accompany such application; and
      (9)   The application shall include a certificate from the Fire Chief of
the jurisdiction having authority that all applicable fire regulations have
been met and, in the case of an adult amusement arcade, that all requirements
of this chapter have been met.
   (B)   The Council will cause the premises to be inspected after such
application has been received and shall issue a license forthwith if all
restrictions, requirements and conditions, and all applicable requirements of
law and ordinance have been met. The Building Inspector for the city shall be
empowered to inspect for purposes of this section of the ordinance. However,
the granting of a license does not certify compliance with all applicable laws,
nor does it stop the city from enforcement of all applicable laws. If
inspection reveals failure to comply with any restrictions, requirements or
conditions, the Trustees, through the Building Inspector, shall notify the
applicant in writing of the fact, stating what failures have been discovered
and allow a reasonable time to correct such defects and informing the applicant
of the procedure if the applicant does not agree with the Council’s decision
which shall be an appeal directly to the Circuit Court of the county.
   (C)   The Council may permit such variance or deviation from the regulations
of this chapter as will effectuate the purpose and intent of this chapter.
   (D)   After the effective date of this chapter, no operator shall maintain,
operate or conduct an establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities
unless such person has made application and obtained a license.
   (E)   After the effective date of this chapter, upon receipt of notice, no
owner shall permit adult entertainment activities to operate on his property
without a license.
   (F)   All licenses shall be for the calendar year January 1 to December 31,
or the remaining portion of such calendar year. An annual license fee shall be
paid in the amount listed in § 94-240 of this chapter.
   (G)   Annual fees may be prorated at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual
license fee for the remaining full months of the current calendar year.
   (H)   Application for renewal of a license shall be made on or before
October 1 of each year and accompanied by the annual fee as listed in § 94-240
of this chapter. Such application shall also contain any changes in the
information required by subsection (A) above which have occurred since the
previous application.
   (I)   A license may be transferred to a new owner or operator or to a new
location by a license holder by giving written notice to the Council 14 days
before the effective day of such transfer, and upon filing therewith the
complete information required in subsection (A) above for the new owner or
operator, and upon the finding by the Council that such new owner or operator
or location is qualified under this chapter. The fee for a licensed transfer
shall as listed in § 94-240 of this chapter.
   (J)   The City Council shall have the power to revoke said license for the
failure to comply with restrictions, requirements and conditions set forth
herein.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-109 — 94-119  RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: NON-CONFORMING USE (GRANDFATHER)
Section
   
94-120.   Non-conforming use specifications
   
94-121.   Incompatibility of non-conforming uses
   
94-122.   Avoidance of undue hardship
   94-123. — 94-129.   Reserved
§ 94-120  NON-CONFORMING USE SPECIFICATIONS.
   The lawful use of a building or premises, or land, existing at the time of
the effective date of this chapter, may be continued although such use does not
conform to all the provisions of the district in which it is located, except as
hereinafter provided.
   (A)   A non-conforming use may be extended throughout a building provided no
structural alterations are made therein, except those required by law.
   (B)   A non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use of
the same classification; provided, no structural changes are made. Whenever a
non-conforming use has been changed to a conforming use or to a use permitted
in a zoning classification of greater restrictions, it shall not thereafter be
changed to a non-conforming use of a less restricted zoning classification.
   (C)   No building shall be erected or an existing building expanded upon any
premises devoted to a non-conforming use, except in conformance with this
chapter.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or intended use of a building for which the improvement location
permit has been legally issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (E)   In the event that a non-conforming use of any building or property is
discontinued for a continuous period of one year, the use of said building or
property shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in
which it is located.
   (F)   When a building containing a non-conforming use is damaged or
destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or other catastrophic circumstances it
may be restored or reconstructed; provided that, the ground floor area and
total useable area does not exceed that of the original structure and further
that all development standards of this chapter shall be met to the maximum
extent possible, but in no case shall the deviation be less than was required
by the original structure. The City Superintendent shall determine what is the
maximum extent to which the development standards can be met.
   (G)   These provisions apply in the same manner to a use that may become a
non-conforming use due to a later amendment to this chapter.
   (H)   A change of use must meet all applicable city ordinances in addition
to the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-121  INCOMPATIBILITY OF NON-CONFORMING USES.
   Non-conforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts in which such use is located. A non-conforming
use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land or a non-conforming use of a
structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after
passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of additional
signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other
uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which
such use is located.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-122  AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP.
   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require
a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building or
development on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual
construction has been carried on diligently. Where demolition or removal of an
existing building has been substantially completed preparatory to rebuilding,
such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction; provided
that, the work shall be carried on diligently. ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION is hereby
defined as work done which is beyond the preparation stage and into that stage
where the changes or additions are made permanent.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-123 — 94-129  RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT
Section
   
94-130.   Applicability
   
94-131.   Certificate of occupancy
   
94-132.   Documentation
   
94-133.   Industrial uses; certificate of compliance
   
94-134.   Expiration of improvement location permit
   
94-135.   Records
   
94-136.   Notices
   94-137. — 94-144.   Reserved
§ 94-130  APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The City Superintendent or his or her appointed agent, being the
authorized representative of the Commission, shall be responsible for the
issuance of improvement location permits for any alteration to the condition of
land and/or structures thereon including: construction, alteration or addition
to buildings, driveways, parking areas, signs, drainage, area lighting,
swimming pools or any permanent improvements, within all zoning districts in
the jurisdiction of the Commission. Any persons making said alterations must
obtain an improvement location permit for said alterations from the
Superintendent, prior to the start of any construction.
   (B)   The filing fee for an improvement location permit is shown on § 94-240
of this chapter, which is hereby established as a part of this chapter.
However, no fee is charged for the permit for improvements to individual lots
in R1 and R2 Districts.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-131  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Application for a building permit shall be made concurrently with the
improvement location permit if construction or alteration of a building is
proposed.
   (B)   No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected,
altered or reconstructed shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for
any purpose whatsoever, until an improvement location permit has been issued by
the City Superintendent, or his or her agent, stating that the use complies
with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Upon notice by the owner or his or her agent that all
improvements are complete the Superintendent shall, within ten business days,
inspect the property for compliance and issue the certificate of occupancy
provided said improvements have been completed in compliance with the permit
and all provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Superintendent shall notify the owner of any deficiencies.
      (3)   After correction of the deficiencies, the owner must request a re-
inspection and pay the re-inspection fee per § 94-240 of this chapter.
      (4)   The Superintendent shall have ten business days in which to re-
inspect the property.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-132  DOCUMENTATION.
   Upon application for an improvement location permit, the applicant must
furnish the following information.
   (A)   The applicant must furnish a copy of a dimensioned site plan, prepared
by a state registered land surveyor or state professional engineer, drawn to
scale, showing the following unless a waiver is granted per subsection (A)(1)
below:
      (1)   Show owner’s name and address;
      (2)   Provide the legal description of the property including bearing
notations and lengths and if in a platted subdivision provide a copy of the
recorded subdivision plat;
      (3)   Show existing and proposed improvements including, but not limited
to: buildings; signs; utilities; driveways; parking areas; areas of grass or
lawn; fences; wells; sewage facilities and finger systems; area lighting; and
any other existing or proposed improvements that might impact drainage,
erosion, access, setback, lot coverage or any other requirement of this
chapter;
      (4)   Provide existing and proposed elevations of the building site
including the proposed elevation of the first floor of the structure. Also,
show existing and proposed drainage patterns, storm structures and retention/
detention areas with capacity calculations;
      (5)   Show any rivers, streams, creeks or ditches on or within 75 feet of
the property. Also show all floodways and floodway fringes that impact or may
impact the property and the 100-year base flood elevation if buildings are to
be constructed within the floodway fringe;
      (6)   Show all easements of record, including, but not limited to:
utility; drainage; and access. Show all proposed easements including utility,
drainage, access or any other easements required for by this chapter or any
other ordinance of the city, or by any act of the legislature of the state;
      (7)   Show any planned easements, setback lines or rights-of-way;
      (8)   Show the existing land use of the parcel and adjoining parcels;
      (9)   Show all adjacent streets including all required easements thereto
and also the location and size of ingress and egress points from the property;
and
      (10)   The City Superintendent may waive the requirement that the site
plan be prepared by a surveyor or engineer if the proposed improvements are of
such a minor nature that a professionally prepared site plan is not warranted.
A professionally prepared site plan is required for a new principal building
and cannot be waived. However, for accessory buildings and building additions
in Agricultural (AG), Rural Residential (RR(a)-(c)) (Rural Residential Zoning
Districts were created after § 94-132 of this chapter was amended. As these
districts are a transition between agricultural and residential districts, it
is the intent that amended § 94-132(A)(10) of this chapter should also apply to
RR districts), and Single- and Two-Family Residential (R1 and R2) Districts the
professionally prepared site plan requirement may be waived under the following
conditions:
         (a)   The distance from each side of the proposed accessory building
or addition to the nearest lot line is not less than one and one-half times
respective setback required for the district;
         (b)   There is no evidence of utility use or easements within or near
the required setback; and
         (c)   City Superintendent and City Engineer agree a professional site
plan is not needed to protect the interest of the public or city.
   (B)   The City Superintendent shall keep plans for a period of three years.
   (C)   All required special use requirements per Art. IV of this chapter,
such as fencing, screening and the like shall be shown on the site plan
required under subsection (A) above.
   (D)   The applicant shall present written approval of the proposed structure
from any agency, commission, board or other department of the state and/or
Federal Government having jurisdiction over the proposed structure prior to
issuance of the improvement location permit.
   (E)   The applicant shall present written approval for proposed wastewater
disposal (septic or sewage) facilities from the city, the county’s Health
Department or the state’s Department of Health, and the state’s Department of
Environmental Management, whichever is applicable.
   (F)   The applicant shall present written approval from the proper
jurisdiction for any proposed means of ingress and egress including driveway
permits.
   (G)   The applicant shall submit three complete sets of construction plans
for the proposed improvements. Additionally, if a professionally prepared site
plan is required, then the site plan shall also be submitted as an electronic
file in a format approved by the City Engineer.
   (H)   As a condition of issuing an improvement location permit, the City
Superintendent or his or her agent may require the relocation, elimination or
addition of any drainage structures, entrance or exit, pavement turn lands and
tapers, passing blisters or traffic devices, if the Superintendent or City
Engineer determines it is necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.
   (I)   An improvement location permit for a special exception may not be
issued until the Board has approved the application.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 94-133  INDUSTRIAL USES; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   If an application for an improvement location permit relates to an
industrial use, a certificate of compliance must accompany it, certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect of the state, stating that the
design will meet the performance standards established by § 94-35 of this
chapter. After a ten business day period has elapsed, during which the
Superintendent or his or her agent has not required additional information, a
permit shall be issued; provided, all other requirements of this have been met.
The Superintendent may waive the requirements of this section on a case-by-case
basis.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-134  EXPIRATION OF IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.
   (A)   If a person to whom an improvement location permit has been issued
fails to begin construction within 12 months after the permit is issued; fails
to complete 50% of the total plan within 24 months; or 100% of the improvements
within 36 months after the permit is issued, then said improvement location
permit shall be automatically revoked and becomes void.
   (B)   Upon application by the holder of an improvement location permit for a
special exception, the Board may change the plan on which the permit is based.
The Board shall handle the application as if it were an original application
for an improvement location permit for a special exception. The filing fee for
a special exception shall be collected as established in Art. V of this
chapter. If the Board approves the application, it shall notify the City
Superintendent who shall issue an amended permit reflecting the approved
change.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-135  RECORDS.
   The City Superintendent shall keep a record of each improvement location
permit and each certificate of occupancy. Upon request, a copy shall be
furnished to any person having a proprietary, contract, financial, fee or other
similar legal interest in the premises concerned.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-136  NOTICES.
   During the course of all construction and as a prerequisite to obtaining the
certificate of occupancy under this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the property to give the City Superintendent or his or her agent
48-hour notice prior to all required inspections. Failure to give notice to the
Superintendent for appropriate inspections required to establish that any
structure meets the Building Code and the requirements of this chapter, may
result in a fine as listed in § 94-241 of this chapter and in the event of more
than three violations of this section during the construction process, the
Superintendent shall void the improvement location permit. Violations shall be
enforced through the City Court with any appeal to the county’s Circuit or
Superior Court. All court costs and cost of litigation and attorney fees shall
be the responsibility of the violating party.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-137 — 94-144  RESERVED.
ARTICLE X: COMMISSION AND BOARD FILING PROCEDURES
Section
   
94-145.   Filing procedures
   
94-146.   Special meeting; Plan Commission
   94-147. — 94-154.   Reserved
§ 94-145  FILING PROCEDURES
   (A)   Notice procedure for all public hearings. All petitions before the
city’s Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals shall be filed at the office
of the City Superintendent at least 20 calendar days prior to the date of
public hearing at which the petitions are to be heard and must be on file prior
to the date any public notices are sent out. Petition shall include three
copies of any plans, plats or exhibits. The petitioner is responsible for cost
and preparation of: all filing documents; legal notice; notice to adjacent
owners; notice to agencies; notice to Commission and Board members; placement
of “notice of public hearing”; plans, plats and exhibits; and all other
requirements for filing and presentation of a petition before the Commission or
Board.
   (B)   Limit on subsequent filing of petitions. Any petition to the
Commission or Board that has been denied shall not be again presented to the
Commission or Board for a period of one-year from the date of denial unless the
subsequent petition has substantial and material changes from the denied
petition. Change in ownership, in and of itself, is not a substantial or
material change with respect to filing of a petition.
   (C)   Notice of publication. Legal notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city shall be published at least 15 days prior to the
hearing date and proof of publication shall be made by an affidavit of the
publisher attached to a copy of the notice taken from the paper in which it was
published. Such affidavit shall include the name of the newspaper and the time
of publication. Proof of publication shall be returned to the City
Superintendent not later than two business days prior to the public meeting.
   (D)   Property notice posting. The petitioner shall post on the land that is
the subject of the petition before the Commission or Board a “notice of public
hearing”. The notice will be provided by the City Superintendent at the time of
application. Notice shall be prominently located and easily visible from the
road or street at the address of the property and shall remain until final
action by the Commission or Board.
   (E)   Notice to adjacent owners. Additional notice shall be given to all
adjacent landowners who are within two parcels in depth or 660 feet from the
subject property, whichever is least. Such notification shall be made at least
15 days prior to the hearing date and be made by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested. For purposes of this notice requirement, where the
petitioner owns any of the adjacent parcels of ground, the subject property
shall be deemed to include such adjacent land owned by the petitioner. For the
purpose of determining the names and addresses of the legal adjacent property
owners, the records in the bound volumes of the most recent tax assessment
records as they appear in the offices of the County Auditor shall be deemed to
be the true names and addresses of persons entitled to be notified.
 
PUBLICATION AND NOTICE TO ADJACENT LAND OWNER SHALL STATE:
 
1.   The location, by address with distance and direction to nearest intersecting
streets, together with legal description of the land involved in the petition.
2.   That the petition may be examined in the City Superintendent’s office,
during regular business hours at City Hall, 59 So. Jefferson St., Martinsville,
Indiana.
3.   The docket number and the specific request set out in the petition. For a
zoning map, a change the current zoning classification and the proposed district
being requested, and in the case of a variance, special exception or other
matter, sufficient detail shall be included for the public to determine the
extent of proposed change, modification or use.
4.   The time and location that said petition has been set for public hearing and
which body, Commission or Board, will hear the petition.
 
   (F)   Notice to checkpoint agencies. Notice shall also be provided to the
following checkpoint agencies stating that plans are available for their review
and comment at the office of the City Superintendent. The notice shall state
specifically the nature of the development, the number of employees or
potential households and traffic impact. Notice shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivered with proof of delivery to the
following not less than 15 days prior to the hearing:
      (1)   The city’s Police Department or County Sheriff;
      (2)   Metropolitan School District of the city;
      (3)   The county’s Soil and Conservation District;
      (4)   The county’s Highway Engineer;
      (5)   The city’s Fire Department and any other fire departments having
jurisdiction; and
      (6)   The county’s Board of Health if the development is to be serviced
by individual waste treatment (septic) systems.
   (G)   Notice to Commission and Board members. Each member of the Plan
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, as the case may be, shall be sent by
regular mail at their address as provided by the Commission, not less than 15
calendar days prior to the hearing, a notice per subsection (C) above. Also,
the notice to Commission or Board members shall contain any exhibits, plans or
other documents that were filed with the application. Further, should any
meeting of the Commission or Board be continued to allow the petitioner more
time to gather additional information then any documents or exhibits that the
petitioner wishes to present at the next meeting shall be mailed, ten calendar
days in advance of the continued meeting date, to the City Superintendent and
the respective Commission or Board members. In the event that the petitioner
fails to provide the necessary information in a timely manner, the Commission
or Board may continue the hearing until the information is provided or deny the
petition.
   (H)   Affidavit of notice. The petitioner shall furnish evidence of
compliance of the notice requirements by filing a notarized statement with the
Board or Commission as is appropriate. Said notice shall list names and
addresses of the property owners to whom the notices sent out and the return
receipts of postal registrations shall be attached to the affidavit in the same
order as the property owners are listed on the affidavit and returned to the
office of the City Superintendent not less than two business days prior to the
public meeting.
   (I)   Plan Commission meeting date. The Plan Commission meets on the fourth
Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted, and conducts
hearings for zoning map changes, subdivision plats, minor plats and planned
unit developments. The regular meeting of the Plan Commission shall be in
session until 10:30 p.m. At the discretion of the Chairperson, the meeting can
continue for the completion of an item past 10:30 p.m. In the event there are
additional items still scheduled on the agenda, those items that have not been
heard shall be continued until the following Tuesday at 7:00 p.m. at the City
Hall at which time the Plan Commission shall reconvene without additional
notices being required and the continued items shall then be heard.
   (J)   Proposed forms for rezoning. Minor plats, subdivisions, planned unit
development, Board of Zoning Appeals variance applications, model permits and
special exceptions are all on file with the office of the City Superintendent.
   (K)   Fees. All filing fees are posted with the Clerk/Treasurer’s office and
shall be paid prior to the acceptance of the petition for zoning map change,
variance, plat, planned unit development, subdivision plat, minor plat, model
permit or special exception. All filing fees are non-refundable.
   (L)   Forms. Filing forms, example letter to adjacent property owners,
petition application and affidavit of notice of public hearing can be obtained
from the office of the City Superintendent City Hall, 59 South Jefferson
Street, P.O. Box 1415, Martinsville, Indiana 46151.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 94-146  SPECIAL MEETING; PLAN COMMISSION.
   Whenever a petitioner desires to have a special meeting of the city’s Plan
Commission the petitioner must request said special meeting at a regular
scheduled meeting of the Commission. If the Chairperson of the Commission
approves a special meeting, then the Chairperson will schedule said special
meeting on an agreed date with the petitioner. In addition to meeting all the
filing, application, notice, fees and other requirements of this chapter, the
petitioner shall pay a non-refundable special meeting fee in the amount shown
in § 94-240 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-147 — 94-154  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
   
94-155.   Members, organization, jurisdiction, rules
   
94-156.   Board of Zoning Appeals; hearings and notices
   
94-157.   Conditions
   
94-158.   Appeals
   
94-159.   Enforcement
   
94-160.   Amendments
   
94-161.   Uses not listed
   
94-162.   Special meeting; Board of Zoning Appeals
   94-163. — 94-169.   Reserved
§ 94-155  MEMBERS, ORGANIZATION, JURISDICTION, RULES.
   There is hereby re-established the advisory Board of Zoning Appeals to be
known as the “Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Martinsville, Indiana”.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be a continuation of the present Board of
Zoning Appeals of the city heretofore established under the Advisory Plan Law,
being I.C. 36-7-4-900, as added amendment 1981, Pub. Law No. 309, § 23.
   (A)   Membership. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be established pursuant
to Indiana Code. The terms of office of each member shall, likewise, be as set
out under the Indiana Code for an advisory board of zoning appeals.
   (B)   Territorial jurisdiction. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
jurisdiction over all the land subject to the zoning ordinance as shown in the
zoning maps.
   (C)   Organization. At the first meeting of the calendar year, the Board
shall elect from its members a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson and secretary
consistent with state law, recording secretary and such employees as it
considers necessary to discharge its duties.
   (D)   Subject matter jurisdiction. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
exclusive jurisdiction for:
      (1)   Use variance under I.C. 36-7-4-918.4 and all acts amendatory
thereto;
      (2)   Development standards variance under I.C. 36-7-4-918.5 and all acts
amendatory thereto;
      (3)   Special exception request pursuant to this chapter;
      (4)   Appeals as provided by statute, including requirements for
procurement of improvement location or occupancy permits or any ordinance
adopted under I.C. 36-7-4 or any prior zoning statute, and any other appeals
authorized by statute;
      (5)   Appeals of decisions of the City Superintendent concerning zoning
or development standards; and
      (6)   Other request that are directed to the Board by this chapter.
   (E)   Rules and by-laws. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have sole
authority to adopt any and all rules under I.C. 36-7-4-916 and any and all by-
laws concerning organization, forms for applications, filing requirements,
other than as to the place of filing as herein provided for, procedures for
notice and conduct of meetings. If no formal by-laws are adopted, the
Chairperson shall have the right to set out the procedures for conducting the
meetings.
   (F)   Facilities and funding. The city shall provide suitable facilities for
meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals hearings and the storage of its
recorded documents and accounts and in its annual budget to provide sufficient
funds for the functioning of said Board and its staff.
   (G)   Hearings. All hearings shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep minutes of its meetings, keep records of all examinations and other
official actions, making the findings in writing and shall record the vote of
each question. Minutes and records shall be filed in the office of the City
Superintendent and made available to the public.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-156  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; HEARINGS AND NOTICES.
   (A)   Upon application for a variance or special exception, the Board shall
hold a public hearing.
   (B)   (1)   Notice for public hearings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be the same as a petition before the Plan Commission.
      (2)   Public notice and filing procedures shall meet the requirements of
§ 94-145(A) through (H) and (J) through (L) of this chapter.
   (C)   The Board of Zoning Appeals meets on the fourth Tuesday of each month
at 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted, and shall conduct hearings for
variances, special exceptions and appeals of decisions of the Superintendent
and Building Official.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-157  CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Board may permit or require the owner of a parcel of property to
make written commitment or commitments concerning the use or development of
that parcel or may impose conditions upon that grant of variance.
   (B)   A variance granted by the Board shall run with the land until such
time as:
      (1)   The use for which the variance was granted ceases for a period of
one year or more;
      (2)   Change of ownership of the land on which a USE variance was
granted; and
      (3)   The property conforms to the ordinance as written in both use and
development standards.
   (C)   The Board may approve a variance of use only upon a determination in
writing that:
      (1)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community;
      (2)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in
the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
      (3)   The need for the variance arises from some condition peculiar to
the property involved;
      (4)   The strict application of the terms of the zoning ordinance will
constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property for which the
variance is sought; and
      (5)   The approval does not interfere substantially with the
Comprehensive Plan adopted under I.C. 36-7-4-500
   (D)   The Board may approve a variance from development standards only upon
a determination in writing that:
      (1)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community;
      (2)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in
the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
      (3)   The strict application of the terms of the zoning ordinance will
result in practical difficulties in the use of the property. However, the
zoning ordinance may establish a stricter standard than the “practical
difficulties” standard.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-158  APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person who is adversely affected by a zoning decision of the City
Superintendent in enforcing this chapter may appeal the decision to the Board.
The filing fee for appeals is established in § 94-240 of this chapter.
   (B)   On appeal under subsection (A) above, the Board may make any decision
that the City Superintendent might have made regarding zoning matters.
   (C)   All appeals from the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
made pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1000 through 36-7-1020 and all amendments thereto.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-159  ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement shall be under the terms and conditions of Art. XII of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-160  AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments to this chapter shall be in accordance with §§ 46 through 50
of Ch. 138 of the Acts of the Indiana General Assembly of 1957 and all acts
amendatory thereto.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-161  USES NOT LISTED.
   (A)   It is recognized that in the development of a zoning ordinance, not
all uses of land can be listed, nor can all future uses be anticipated. A “use”
may have been omitted from the list of those specified as permissible in the
various districts established by this chapter, or questions may arise
concerning words that are synonymous.
   (B)   In such instances, the following procedures shall apply.
      (1)   When classification of use is appealed or referred to the Board, it
shall be the duty of the Board to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning said
use and set forth in writing its findings and the reasons for designating a
specific classification for such use.
         (a)   The applicant shall file a request with the City Superintendent
for a decision by the Board. The Board may also initiate an application. An
applicant who requests a use classification by the Board must follow the filing
procedures of § 94-145(A) to (F) and (I) to (K) of this chapter.
         (b)   The Board shall render a decision not less than 30 days after
such application is made, and shall notify the applicant and any person
requesting such notice of such decision.
      (2)   In classifying a use, the Board shall first make a finding that all
of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The investigation has disclosed the nature of the subject use
and its operations are compatible with the uses permitted in the district
wherein it is proposed to be located;
         (b)   The subject use is similar to one or more uses permitted in the
district within which it is proposed to be located;
         (c)   The subject use will not cause substantial injury to the values
of property in the neighborhood or district within which it is proposed to be
located; and
         (d)   The subject use will be so designed, located, and operated that
the public health, safety and general welfare will be protected.
      (3)   The Board shall classify such use as to permitting such use by
right or permitting such use subject to special exception.
      (4)   In no instance shall the Board determine that a use be permitted in
a district when such use is specifically listed as first permissible in a less
restricted district.
      (5)   Uses classified pursuant to this section shall be regarded as
listed uses.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-162  SPECIAL MEETING; BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   Whenever a petitioner desires to have a special meeting of the city’s Board
of Zoning Appeals the petitioner must request said special meeting at a regular
scheduled meeting of the Board. If the Chairperson of the Board approves a
special meeting, then the Chairperson will schedule said special meeting on an
agreed date with the petitioner. In addition to meeting all the filing,
application, notice, fees and other requirements of this chapter, the
petitioner shall pay a non-refundable special meeting fee in the amount shown
in § 94-240 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-163 — 94-169  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XII: REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
Section
   
94-170.   General
   94-171. — 94-179.   Reserved
§ 94-170  GENERAL.
   (A)   General. Action on the violation of provisions of this chapter and
rights of injunction against such violation shall be as set out below and shall
also include any and all remedies set out under I.C. 36-7-4 and all acts
amendatory thereto. Further, when the City Superintendent is informed of a
violation of this chapter, he or she or his or her appointed agent shall notify
the landowner of record, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at the address on file in the tax records of the office of the
Auditor of the county, on whose land the violation exist and give the landowner
ten days from the date of receipt of notice to eliminate the violation. If the
landowner is making continuous and steady progress on elimination of the
violation, the City Superintendent may allow a reasonable extension of time for
achievement of compliance. Failure to comply with this section shall result in
a fine in accordance with § 94-241 of this chapter with violations to be filed
by the City Superintendent in the City Court. Violations may also be treated
the same as any other violation of this chapter and can be enforced at the
discretion of the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals. All other legal
remedies provided by law shall also be available to the Plan Commission and the
city.
   (B)   Penalties. Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall build, reconstruct or structurally alter any
building or land improvement without the required permits and inspections,
shall, for each and every violation of non-compliance, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than those sums
listed under § 94-241 of this chapter and each day that such violation of non-
compliance shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Remedies. The Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, City
Superintendent, Building Inspector, or any designated enforcement official, or
any person or persons, firm or corporation, jointly or severally, may institute
a suit for injunction in the Circuit or Superior Courts of the county to
restrain an individual or government unit from violating the provisions of this
chapter. The Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals may also institute a
suit for mandatory injunction directing an individual or corporation or a
governmental unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the provisions
and requirements of this chapter, or to enforce any other provision of this
chapter, and said violation being declared to be a common nuisance and as such
may be abated in such a manner as nuisances are now or may hereinafter be
abated under existing law. The above remedies and penalties are cumulative and
the Commission and Board shall have the option of taking any of the above
actions it chooses without waiving the right to any other action available and
shall also have the right to proceed with all other remedies that are available
under the law.
   (D)   Stop work, restraining order, enforcement of stay.
      (1)   When the City Superintendent, Building Inspector or their
authorized representative finds work is being performed that is not in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter or issued permits, they shall
immediately notify the person in charge of the work and the landowner of the
violation(s). If, after notification of the violation(s), the work is not
corrected or the violation(s) continue then, in addition to the penalties of
subsection (A) above, a stop work order shall be issued. The stop work order
shall be displayed prominently at the premises of the violation. All work shall
stop immediately, except in the case where the Superintendent or Inspector has
determined that stopping work would cause imminent peril to life or property.
If so determined, then work may proceed until life and properly are no longer
in imminent peril after which all work must cease. No work shall be performed
except that which is necessary to correct the cause of the violation and then
only after 48 hours notification to the Superintendent or Inspector, as the
case may be that the necessary work to correct the violation is being taken.
Only work on correction of the violation shall be allowed until a re-inspection
can be performed. If work is proceeding after issuance of a stop work order in
defiance of this section, the Superintendent or Inspector, as officers of the
Plan Commission, may seek injunctive relief in any court of jurisdiction. A
stop work order may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals as an appeal
under § 94-158 of this chapter.
      (2)   The Appellant, Board, City Council, City Superintendent, Building
Inspector or any other resident of the city or buffer zone, may appeal any
decision of the Board of Appeals to the Circuit or Superior Court of the
county. The court may stay or uphold the decision of the Board, impose a
permanent injunction or any other appropriate remedy allowed by law.
      (3)   Police power of the municipality may be used to give effect to any
order of the City Superintendent, Building Inspector, Plan Commission or Board
of Zoning Appeals until stayed or overruled by order of the Circuit or Superior
Court of the county.
   (E)   Attorney’s fees. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to
the contrary or appearing contrary, and in addition and supplementary to other
provisions of this chapter, if the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals,
City of Martinsville, City Superintendent or Building Inspector is required to
utilize the services of the Commission, Board or City Attorney or any other
attorney in investigating a possible violation of this chapter or enforcing the
provisions of this chapter before any board or court (including appeals), and
such investigation results in a determination that a violation has occurred or
if the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, City Superintendent or
Inspector is successful in its enforcement of this chapter by way of suit,
appeal or other appropriate proceeding, the respondent, defendant or party
investigated for a violation shall pay the Commission’s, Board’s,
Superintendent’s or Inspector’s or city’s reasonable attorney fees and all
costs related to the investigation of the violation and/or the enforcement of
this chapter, unless such attorney fees or costs are specifically waived by the
City Council.
   (F)   Costs on appeal. As to any appeal from a decision of the Board of
Zoning Appeals, the costs of appeal, including any investigation or
transcripts, shall not be allowed against the Board of Zoning Appeals or city,
unless the court makes a specific finding that the Board acted with gross
negligence or in bad faith in making the decision brought up for review.
   (G)   Permits. No improvement location permit required by this chapter or
building permit required under the city’s Building Code shall be issued on any
property subject to this chapter in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (H)   Inspections. The City Superintendent, Building Inspector or their
appointed agent(s) are hereby authorized to go onto private property for the
purpose of conducting inspections required by this chapter or any order of the
Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, or required to determine if this
chapter is being violated, or required to enforce this chapter. Such inspection
(s) shall occur at reasonable times and shall be conducted in a manner not to
disturb the peace.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-171 — 94-179  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIII: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, SEPARABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Section
   
94-180.   Interpretation
   
94-181.   Conflict between public and private provisions
   
94-182.   Separability
   
94-183.   Saving provision
   
94-184.   Exclusion
   
94-185.   Effective date and revision
   94-186. — 94-194.   Reserved
§ 94-180  INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-181  CONFLICT BETWEEN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROVISIONS.
   The regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provisions of the law.
Where any provision of these regulations imposes a restriction different from
those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, those provisions,
which are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. These
regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other
private agreement or restriction; provided that, where the provisions of these
regulations are more restrictive than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirement of these regulations shall govern.
Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or
restrictions impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or to a higher
standard than the requirements and standards of this chapter, or the
determinations of the Commission in enforcing this chapter, and such private
provisions, covenants or restrictions are not inconsistent with this chapter or
the determinations of the Commission, then such private provisions shall be
operative and supplemental to these regulations and any determinations made
thereunder. Generally, private provisions can only be enforced privately unless
a public agency such as the City Council or Plan Commission has been made a
party to such agreements. Not withstanding the foregoing, neither the
Commission or its representative shall knowingly issue any permit that would
result in a direct violation of a covenant or restriction that was recorded
with, and a part of, the platting of a subdivision approved by the Commission
or any other duly authorized government agency. However, if a permit is issued,
neither the Commission or its representative, is liable or responsible, in any
form or manner, for the resulting violation of the private covenants or
restriction.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-182  SEPARABILITY.
   If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any
person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent
circumstances or is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision or
application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of
these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances.
The city hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these
regulations even without any such part, provision or application.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-183  SAVING PROVISION.
   This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under,
or by virtue of, prior existing Subdivision Control Ordinance and Zoning
Ordinance, or a discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty
accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm
or corporation, or waiving any right of the city under any section or provision
existing at the time of the effective date of this chapter, or as vacating or
nulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful
action of the city, except as shall be expressly provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-184  EXCLUSION.
   Nothing in this chapter or in any rules, regulations or orders issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to restrict or regulate or to
authorize any unit of government, legislative body, plan commission or board of
zoning appeals now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate the
exercise of the power of eminent domain by the state or by any state agency, or
the use of property owned or occupied by state or any state agency. As used in
this section, the term STATE AGENCY shall mean and include all state agencies,
boards, commissions, departments and institutions, including state educational
institutions of the state.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-185  EFFECTIVE DATE AND REVISION.
   (A)   Effective date. This chapter was originally adopted on 11-19-2001 as
Ord. 2001-1478.
   (B)   Revision. Ord. 2001-1478 is hereby revised and amended per a
recommendation of the city’s Plan Commission at a public hearing held 7-27-2004
and adopted by the Common Council as Ord. 2004-1530 on 8-16-2004 and is
effective upon passage.
   (C)   Conflict. Where conflicts arise between the above cited ordinances and
this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-186 — 94-194  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIV: SUBDIVISION CONTROL
Section
   
94-195.   Establishment of control
   
94-196.   Definitions
   
94-197.   Procedure
   
94-198.   Primary (preliminary) plat approval; subdivision
   
94-199.   Hearing notice requirements
   
94-200.   Secondary (final) plat approval for subdivision
   
94-201.   Minor plat approval
   
94-202.   Principles and standards of design
   
94-203.   Standards of improvements
   
94-204.   Plat certificates and dedication
   
94-205.   Interpretation, conflict and separability
   
94-206.   Saving provision and exclusion
   
94-207.   Effective date
   94-208. — 94-214.   Reserved
§ 94-195  ESTABLISHMENT OF CONTROL.
   (A)   Any parcel of land which is divided, and is a subdivision as defined
in § 94-5 of this chapter, shall be divided and platted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No plat or replat of a subdivision of land located within the
jurisdiction of the city’s Plan Commission shall be recorded until it shall
have been approved by such Commission, and such approval shall have been
entered in writing on the plat by the Chairperson and Secretary of the
Commission.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-196  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the definitions shall be the same as those
found in § 94-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-197  PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A developer or landowner desiring approval of a plat of a subdivision
of any land lying within the jurisdiction of the Commission shall submit a
written application to the Commission. Such application shall be accompanied by
the information, requirements and plans set forth hereafter, all in accordance
with the requirements set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Ord. 2011-1655 revised notice and filing procedures. It requires that
public notice and filing procedures shall meet the requirements of § 94-145(A)
through (H) and (J) through (L) of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-198  PRIMARY (PRELIMINARY) PLAT APPROVAL; SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Primary approval for subdivision
      (1)   The owner or developer shall provide a plan of the subdivision that
shall show the manner in which the proposed subdivision is coordinated with the
master plan and its provisions. Specifically, with relation to the requirements
of the thoroughfare plan; school and recreational sites; shopping centers;
community facilities; sanitation; water supply; drainage; and other
developments existing or proposed, in the vicinity. However, no land shall be
subdivided for residential, business or industrial use until the developer has
given sufficient evidence, as determined by the Commission: that there is
adequate and safe access to the land over existing improved streets and roads
or that such adequate and safe access will be provided to the developer; that
flooding and drainage problems do not exist on the land eliminated; that
adequate sanitary and water systems are available to service the subdivision or
can be provided; that the land is free from objectionable earth and rock
formation, topography or such objectionable features can be eliminated; and
that any other feature harmful to the health and safety of possible residents
and the community as a whole has been or can be eliminated. In making a
determination of suitability for subdividing, the Commission shall be the sole
judge of the acceptability and adequacy of the evidence presented.
      (2)   The developer shall provide a location map of appropriate scale
(which may be prepared by indicating the data by notations on available maps)
showing:
         (a)   Title of map, scale, north arrow and date of submittal;
         (b)   Subdivision name and location;
         (c)   State highways, arterial streets, major and minor collectors and
feeder streets related to the subdivision; and
         (d)   Existing elementary and high schools, parks and playgrounds and
other community facilities that will be serving the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   Plat requirements.
      (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision shall be shown and shall not be
the same as any other subdivision in the county unless a subsequent phase of an
existing subdivision;
      (2)   Names and addresses of the owner, developer and the planner, land
planning consultant, engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat;
      (3)   A plat shall show accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and
angles that provide a survey of the tract together with those requirement of
865 I.A.C. 12 or a recording reference to a boundary survey of the perimeter of
the subdivision performed in accordance with 865 I.A.C. 12;
      (4)   An accurate distance and direction from the proposed subdivision
perimeter to the nearest intersections of existing streets shall be shown;
      (5)   Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary of the tract;
      (6)   Source of title to the land to be subdivided as shown by books of
the County Recorder as of the date of making application;
      (7)   Show street names with a statement that the county’s Highway
Department or 911 Coordinator has approved names;
      (8)   Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plan;
      (9)   Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of
feet, with angles or bearings to street, alley and lot lines if applicable;
      (10)   Lot numbers;
      (11)   Lot dimensions in feet and hundredths thereof and angles or
bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds of arc;
      (12)   Show accurate locations of easements for utilities, drainage,
signs and landscaping together with any limitations on such easements. All
plats shall have easements for utilities and drainage;
      (13)   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved
for public, semi-public or community use;
      (14)   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions;
      (15)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot
markers. Monuments shall require caps with surveyors name and license number;
      (16)   Information on type and location of all infrastructures to serve
the subdivision including: streets and roads; sidewalks; sanitary system; water
system; storm drainage; recreation facilities; street lighting; landscaping;
and signage. Detailed construction plans are required for all subdivisions.
Plans must be reviewed and released for construction by the City Engineer prior
to secondary plat approval. The Commission reserves the right to require
detailed construction plans prior to approval of any primary plan or plat;
      (17)   Restrictions of all types, which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for lots must be submitted with the primary plat at time
of making application;
      (18)   North point, scale and date;
      (19)   Certification by a registered land surveyor in accordance with §
94-204(B) of this chapter shall appear on the plat;
      (20)   Dedication of public streets, to the city’s Board of Public Works
or the County Commissioners as applicable. Any dedication of land other than
for public streets must have the express approval of the Board of Public Works
or County Commissioners. Streets to be dedicated must meet all standards of
construction and right-of-way width established in this chapter or as the city
or county might require;
      (21)   Certificate for approval by the Commission in accordance with §
94-204(A) of this chapter;
      (22)   A statement in writing from the county’s Health Department or the
state’s Department of Health, if the proposed subdivision would be served by
individual sewage systems. The statement shall indicate that the minimum
requirements for approval of septic systems by the Health Department can be met
for the individual lots in the subdivision;
      (23)   The developer shall provide the subdivision with a complete water
supply system or show to the Plan Commission an individual water supply on each
lot in accordance with minimum requirements of the county’s Health Department;
      (24)   A statement in writing from the county’s Highway Department, if
the subdivision is to be outside the corporate limits of the city, indicating
that the proposed streets will meet the minimum standards adopted by the
county. Regardless of any other standard, all streets, in or outside the
corporate limits, must, as a minimum, meet the standards set by this chapter;
      (25)   The original drawing of the plat of the subdivision shall be drawn
to a scale of 50 feet to one inch; provided that, if the resulting drawing
would be over 36 inches in longest dimension a scale of 100 feet per one inch
may be used and filed in sections. Four blue or black line prints and a
reproducible velum or Mylar shall be submitted;
      (26)   All drainage and utility easements shall be separate if open
drainage is being used. Where a county road is involved or a road not dedicated
to the city, then sewer easements shall be provided along with other utility
easements;
      (27)   The application shall be accompanied by the non-refundable fee
prescribed in § 94-240 of this chapter. Said fee shall be paid to the Clerk/
Treasurer of the city;
      (28)   A statement certified by a registered engineer or registered land
surveyor stating that development has been designed in accordance with the city
or county, Storm Water and Erosion Control Management Plan Ordinances and
Design Manual; and
      (29)   Provide a traffic plan or statement that shall address the impact
the proposed development will have on existing street safety, capacity and any
other traffic concerns of the City or County Engineer. Proof shall be submitted
of having obtained a driveway permit from the county’s Highway Department for
each proposed street that is to be connected to an existing county road.
   (C)   After an application for approval of a plat of a subdivision has been
filed, the Commission, or its appointed representative(s), shall review the
proposed plat for the sole purpose of determining whether to allow the plat and
accompanying data to be formally filed with the Commission, or whether to
return the documents to the developer with comments for change. Unless and
until the Commission, or its appointed representative(s), formally accepts a
plat for filing, it shall not be considered as actually filed for the purposes
of proceeding to the succeeding steps toward plat approval as hereinafter set
forth. The filing of a plat grants no proprietary rights to the applicant in
the proposed subdivision and in no way is binding upon the Commission as to
what terms and conditions will apply before plat approval is granted, if any.
It being the purpose of such filing to advise both the Commission and the
interested public as to what the applicant or developer is proposing in order
to have the appropriate issues addressed in public hearing on the proposed
subdivision. The developer may request that the Commission allow the submittal
of a primary plat that meets the requirements of § 94-88(C) and (D) of this
chapter and with the following additional requirements, conditions and
restrictions:
      (1)   It is a single use development (e.g., all R1(a) or all R1(d) or all
B1 or all I2 and the like);
      (2)   Subsections (B)(1) through (B)(9) and (B)(12) through (B)(29) above
are provided on a plat suitable for approval by the Commission;
      (3)   The maximum number of lots, minimum lot area, minimum lot width and
depth and a typical lot diagram are given on the plat;
      (4)   Provide a schedule or timetable for completion of the development
that, at a minimum, must give the estimated number of lots to be secondary
(final) platted each year:
      (5)   A written commitment by the landowner and developer shall appear on
the plat stating that the final plat will comply with all provisions and
development standards for the zoning district and classification of the land on
which the development is contemplated;
      (6)   A written commitment and agreement that, in addition to a
subdivision platting fee based upon the maximum number of lots shown, the
developer will pay an additional fee in an amount equal to the zoning
application fee for a minor plat for each secondary (final) plat that is placed
on the agenda for approval of the Commission;
      (7)   A written commitment that the provisions of this chapter relating
to construction drawing plan approval, surety and construction of
infrastructure will be completed and complied with prior to submittal for
secondary plat approval of any section(s), block(s) or lot; and
      (8)   On the secondary (final) plat the relationship, graphically and by
dimensions, will be shown to the perimeter of the development and to prior
approved lots within the development.
   (D)   Within 30 days of accepting a filing application, the Commission shall
set a date for a hearing and notify the applicant of the hearing date.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-199  HEARING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Notice of publication for primary plat hearing. After notification by
the Commission of the date of public hearing for the primary plat, the
applicant shall place legal notice, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city, which shall be published at least 15 days prior to the hearing date
and proof of publication shall be made by an affidavit of the publisher
attached to a copy of the notice taken from the paper in which it was
published. Such affidavit shall include the name of the newspaper and the time
of publication. Proof of publication shall be returned to the City
Superintendent not less than two business days prior to the public meeting.
   (B)   Notice to adjacent owners of primary plat hearing.
      (1)   Additional notice shall be given to all adjacent landowners who are
within two parcels in depth or 660 feet from the subject property, whichever is
least.
      (2)   Such notification shall be made at least 15 days prior to the
hearing date and be made by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested.
      (3)   For purposes of this notice requirement, where the petitioner owns
any of the adjoining parcels of ground, the subject property shall be deemed to
include such adjoining land owned by the petitioner.
      (4)   For the purpose of determining the names and addresses of the legal
adjacent property owners, the records of the most recent tax assessment records
as they appear in the offices of the County Auditor shall be deemed to be the
true names and addresses of persons entitled to be notified.
 
PUBLICATION AND NOTICE TO ADJACENT LAND OWNER SHALL STATE:
 
1.   The location, by address with distance and direction to nearest
intersecting streets, together with legal description of the land involved in
the petition.
2.   That the petition may be examined in the City Superintendent’s office,
during regular business hours at City Hall, 59 So. Jefferson St., Martinsville,
Indiana.
3.   The docket number and the specific request set out in the petition with
sufficient detail for the public to determine the extent of the proposed
development. At a minimum, the acreage to be developed, number of lots and
typical lot size shall be included.
4.   The time and location that said petition has been set for public hearing by
the Commission.
 
   (C)   Notice to checkpoint agencies. Notice shall also be provided to the
following checkpoint agencies stating that plans are available for their review
and comment at the office of the City Superintendent. The notice shall state
specifically the nature of the development, the number of employees or
potential households and traffic impact. Notice shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivered with proof of delivery, to
the following not less than 15 days prior to the hearing:
      (1)   The city’s Police Department or the County Sheriff;
      (2)   Metropolitan School District of the city;
      (3)   The county’s Soil and Conservation District;
      (4)   The county’s Highway Engineer;
      (5)   The city’s Fire Department and any other fire departments having
jurisdiction; and
      (6)   The county’s Board of Health if the development is to be serviced
by individual waste treatment (septic) systems.
   (D)   Notice to Commission and Board members. Each member of the Plan
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, as the case may be, shall be sent by
regular mail at his or her address as provided by the Commission, not less than
15 days prior to the hearing a notice per subsection (B) above.
   (E)   Affidavit of notice. The petitioner shall furnish evidence of
compliance of the notice requirements by filing a notarized statement with the
Board or Commission as is appropriate. Said notice shall list names and
addresses of the property owners to whom the notices sent out and the return
receipts of postal registrations shall be attached to the affidavit in the same
order as the property owners are listed on the affidavit and returned to the
office of the City Superintendent not less than two business days prior to the
public meeting.
   (F)   Surety. With every plat filing, the developer shall specify the type
of surety (cash, bond or non- revocable letter of credit) and the name of the
surety company or bank providing letter of credit, for the surety required for
performance and maintenance for all infrastructure required to be constructed
as part of primary plat approval.
   (G)   Written finds, determination. If, after the hearing, the Commission
determines that the application and plat comply with the standards in this
chapter, it shall make written findings and a decision granting primary
approval to the plat. This decision must be signed in the appropriate space
upon the plat by the Chairperson of the Commission and attested to by the
Secretary of the Commission.
   (H)   Design plans. If the primary plat is approved by the Commission, the
developer shall cause complete design plans for all infrastructure to be
prepared by a state registered professional engineer or, if no water system or
sanitary lift stations are required, by a state registered land surveyor. All
required federal, state and local permits must be obtained. Prior to beginning
any infrastructure work, three complete sets of plans shall be submitted to the
City Engineer for his or her comment and approval. The developer shall amend or
revise the design plans to comply with the City Engineer’s comments. After
revision, the developer shall again submit three complete sets of plans
together with copies of all required federal, state and local permits to the
City Engineer. If complete design plans are not submitted to the City Engineer
within one year after primary plat approval by the Commission, then the plat is
void. If the primary plat was approved showing, sections, blocks or phases
only, design plans for the first section need be submitted within one year.
   (I)   Compliance. If, after the hearing, the Commission determines that the
application and plat do not comply with the standards in this chapter, it shall
make written findings and a decision denying primary approval to the plat. The
Commission will provide a copy of its findings to the applicant and any
interested party requesting such information. This decision must be signed by
the Chairperson of the Commission and attested to by the Secretary of the
Commission.
   (J)   Voidance. If infrastructure construction has not begun within two
years from the date of design plan approval by the City Engineer, per
subsection (H) above, then the entire primary plat is void. When a primary plat
was approved showing sections, blocks or phases construction on a subsequent
section, block or phase must begin within four years of the date of recording
of the secondary (final) plat of the previous section, block or phase. The
Commission may void any primary plats, sections, blocks or phases where
construction has not begun within these time limits.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-200  SECONDARY (FINAL) PLAT APPROVAL FOR SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Prior to submitting a secondary (final) plat for approval, the
following conditions and requirements apply.
      (1)   Infrastructure shall be constructed to include, but not limited to,
site grading, streets, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, sanitary sewer, storm
drainage system including retention/detention systems, street signs, street
lighting, public water system, fire hydrants and any and all other improvements
outlined and shown on the plat or that are required by the Commission or City
and County Engineer. Including having passed all material and performance test
for streets, sanitary sewers and lift stations, water system including fire
hydrants and pumping stations, storm sewer system together with all testing
required by the state’s Department of Environmental Management, the city, the
county or a private utility.
      (2)   Any portion of infrastructure, as listed in subsection (A)(1)
above, that is not completed prior to a request to the Commission to approve a
secondary (final) plat shall be guaranteed via a performance surety (bond,
cash, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit). The surety shall be in
an amount equal to 100% of the uncompleted work, including testing. The cost of
the uncompleted work shall be determined by bids from qualified contractors and
approved by the City Engineer or in the absents of bids an estimate of the
remaining cost of construction by the City Engineer.
      (3)   The secondary plan (final plat) shall not be approved until all
infrastructure has been completed, tested and accepted by the city and/or
county, or a performance surety has been posted with the city or county in an
amount equal to 100% of the cost of any uncompleted construction, including
testing. Further, if all infrastructure has been completed, a three-year
maintenance surety equal to 20% of the total cost of construction is required.
If all construction is not completed, in addition to the performance surety,
proof of ability to obtain maintenance surety is required.
      (4)   Four copies of secondary plat (final plat) meeting all the
requirements of § 94-198(B) of this chapter together with said plat drawn on
Mylar or velum, suitable for recording, shall be submitted to the City
Superintendent at least 15 days prior to any scheduled hearing or approval.
   (B)   If the infrastructure required in subsection (A)(1) above has not been
completed and accepted by the city within two years after recording of the
secondary (final) plat or at any time the Commission determines that the
developer is unable or unwilling to complete the infrastructure, then the
Commission may call in the performance surety and cause the infrastructure to
be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
   (C)   The developer, in writing, shall notify the City Superintendent when
all improvements and installations have been completed in accordance with the
provisions of the plat that was approved by the Commission. The Commission may
release the developer’s performance surety under the following conditions:
      (1)   Certification to the Commission by the City Engineer that all the
requirements of the plat and approved design plans have been met;
      (2)   Complete as-built design plans, on velum or Mylar, have been
submitted by the developer and accepted by the City Engineer; and
      (3)   A three-year maintenance surety to the city or Board of County
Commissioners, as the case may be, has been posted.
   (D)   Where applicable, a separate performance and maintenance surety for
construction on county right-of-way may be furnished to the County
Commissioners in amount not less than stated above.
   (E)   Upon the acceptance of all streets and other improvements in the
subdivision by the Board of Public Works and Safety of city or by the Board of
County Commissioners, as the case may be, the three-year maintenance surety may
be released and the surety discharged from further obligation.
   (F)   The Commission may grant secondary approval of a plat under this
section or may delegate to the City Superintendent the authority to grant such
approvals. No notice or hearing is required. A plat of a subdivision may not be
filed with the Auditor, and the Recorder may not record it, unless it has been
granted secondary approval and signed and certified by the appropriate official
of the Commission. The filing and recording of the plat is without legal effect
unless approved by the Commission or its designated delegate.
   (G)   All plats shall be filed with the city’s Plan Commission in recordable
form along with the recording fee made payable to the County Recorder in the
appropriate amount. The City Superintendent shall check the final document for
recording to make sure it complies with the approved plat. The City
Superintendent shall arrange for the recording of the plat within ten days from
the date of receipt said plat. Any subdivision secondary (final) plat that is
not recorded in the records of the Recorder of the county within one-year from
date of approval by the Commission is void.
   (H)   Filing and recording of the plat is without legal effect unless
approved by the Commission or its designated delegate.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-201  MINOR PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   General. After a determination by the Plan Commission that a new
dedicated road (to the county or the city) is not necessary and/or adequate
access to a public road can be provided, the owner or subdivider may apply for
a minor plat. A minor plat is limited to division of the original or parent
parcel into not more than four parcels, including any remainder of the original
(parent) parcel. An original or parent parcel is a parcel of land with a
separate legal description shown on the plat books of the Auditor of the county
and given as a separate legal description in an instrument of conveyance in the
office of the Recorder of the county as of 5-7-2001. For minor plats, the
Commission may waive primary plat submittal and proceed with secondary plat
(final plat) approval provided all provisions of this section have been met.
   (B)   Plat requirements and submittals.
      (1)   On the face of the plat shall appear the name and address of the
owner and developer and the name, address and state registrations number of the
engineer and surveyor who prepared the plat;
      (2)   A plat shall show accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and
angles that provide a survey of the tract together with those requirement of
865 I.A.C. 12 or a recording reference to a boundary survey of the perimeter of
the minor plat performed in accordance with 865 I.A.C. 12;
      (3)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract that is subdivided shall be given;
      (4)   Accurate metes and bounds, description of the boundary of the
tract;
      (5)   Show accurate locations of easements for access, utilities,
drainage, signs, and landscaping together with any limitations on such
easements. Easements for utilities and drainage shall be provided if required
by the Commission or City/County Engineer;
      (6)   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved
for public, semi-public or community use;
      (7)   Show street names with a statement that the county’s Highway
Department or 911 Coordinator has approved names;
      (8)   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions. All setbacks
shall be measured from the property line, or access easement line, whichever
provides the greater setback;
      (9)   Show existing: buildings; driveways; septic systems, utility
transmission lines; existing easements; lakes, ponds, streams; and public
streets and roads together with dedicated right-of-way;
      (10)   Provide four copies of complete plans and specifications for the
improvements that are required by this chapter. The City Engineer or Commission
may require a topographic survey to show that there is adequate drainage,
septic system sites, access or other matters that could be a concern for
safety, health and welfare of the community. The City Engineer may waive the
requirement for detailed construction plans for minor plats;
      (11)   Restrictions of all types that will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for lots shall be shown on the plat or referenced by
recording reference;
      (12)   North point, scale and date;
      (13)   Certification by a registered land surveyor in accordance with §
94-204(B) of this chapter shall appear on the plat;
      (14)   Certificate for approval by the Commission in accordance with §
94-204(A) of this chapter;
      (15)   A statement in writing from the county’s Health Department or the
state’s Department of Health, if the proposed subdivision would be served by
individual sewage systems. The statement shall indicate that the minimum
requirements for approval of septic systems by the Health Department can be met
for the individual lots in the subdivision;
      (16)   Notice to the public shall be made in compliance with § 94-199(A)
to (E) of this chapter. At the hearing, the Plan Commission may make secondary
plat (final plat) approval or, if additional time is needed, the public hearing
can be continued, as the Plan Commission deems necessary;
      (17)   The original drawing of the plat of the subdivision shall be drawn
to a scale of 50 feet to one inch; provided that, if the resulting drawing
would be over 36 inches in longest dimension a scale of 100 feet per one inch
may be used and filed in sections. Four blue or black line prints and a
reproducible velum or Mylar shall be submitted;
      (18)   If construction drawing or minor plat plan requires improvements
on public right-of-way or other infrastructures improvements that will be
dedicated to the city or county or if such improvements are required by the
Commission, then surety must be provided in accordance with subsections (B)(1)
to (B)(5) above;
      (19)   The application shall be accompanied by the non-refundable fee
prescribed in § 94-240 of this chapter. Said fee shall be paid to the Clerk/
Treasurer of the city;
      (20)   The subdivision shall not have a common drive unless a covenant
for perpetual maintenance is shown on the face of the plat that will be
presented for approval of the Plan Commission;
      (21)   A statement certified by a registered engineer or registered land
surveyor stating that the development has been designed in accordance with the
city or county, Storm Water and Erosion Control Management Ordinances and
Design Manual, and, if a permit is required under the relative ordinance, then
a copy of the Storm Water and Erosion Control Management Plan approval permit;
      (22)   All drainage and utility easements shall be separate if open
drainage is being used. Where a county road is involved or a road not dedicated
to the city, then the City Engineer may require separate easements for future
sanitary sewers in addition to other utility easements;
      (23)   Any plat that adjoins a county road must designate and grant a
dedicated right-of-way to the county. Width of the right-of-way to be dedicated
shall be determined by the county’s Highway Engineer. In no case shall the
dedicated right-of-way be less than 25 feet. The developer shall provide a
letter from the county’s Highway Engineer stating the required right-of-way
width to be dedicated. Proof shall be submitted of having obtained a drive
permit from the county’s Highway Department for each proposed street that is to
be connected to an existing county road; and
      (24)   Any minor plat that is not recorded in the records of the Recorder
of the county within one-year from date of approval by the Commission is void.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-202  PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF DESIGN.
   The plat of the subdivision shall conform to the following principles and
standards of design.
   (A)   General. The subdivision plan shall conform to the principles and
standards of this chapter.
   (B)   Streets.
      (1)   The streets shall provide access to all lots and parcels of land
within the subdivision and, where streets intersect, offsets of less than 200
feet shall be avoided.
      (2)   Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as
to produce useable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
      (3)   Streets shall intersect the boundary of the tract to be subdivided
so as to provide for normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity. The
Commission or City Engineer can require streets to be constructed to the
boundary of the subdivision as needed to provide for future access to adjacent
lands. Frontage roads may be used as collector streets when the Commission or
City Engineer determines it is in the best interest of the overall flow of
traffic.
      (4)   Wherever an existing dedicated or platted street, or portion
thereof as in a half right-of- way, is adjacent to the proposed subdivision or
dead ends at the subdivision boundary, additional right-of-way shall be platted
to provide the street or alley the full right-of-way width, as required by this
chapter, to the next intersecting street.
      (5)   The minimum right-of-way width for residential streets, minor
access streets or residential streets ending in a cul-de-sac is 60 feet;
minimum right-of-way width for feeder, minor collectors and industrial streets
is 70 feet; minimum right-of-way width for arterial street or major collectors
is 80 feet. Cul-de-sac diameter for all residential streets is 110 feet and for
all business and industrial streets is 120 feet. Minimum right-of-way
transition radius from street to cul-de-sac is 50 feet. For minor plats,
subdivision of land containing four and fewer lots including the residual of
the parent parcel, an access (ingress/egress) easement shall be provided that
is not less than 30 feet in width. In major subdivisions, the streets must be
dedicated to the public and provision made for acceptance of the streets by the
governing public agency. In minor subdivisions, the streets may be privately
maintained by the various lot owners; provided, the dedication of the plat
contains specific provisions for perpetual maintenance and repair of the
streets, including drainage items.
      (6)   Alleys shall be prohibited, except as provided in subsection (B)(4)
above.
      (7)   The centerlines of streets should intersect as nearly at right
angles as possible, but in no case less than 75 degrees.
      (8)   At intersections of streets, property line corners shall be rounded
by arcs of not less than a 25-foot radius or by chords of such arcs.
      (9)   Streets from opposite directions shall intersect at a common point
(four-way or three-way intersection). Streets intersections shall not be less
than 200 feet, when measured between centerlines, for residential streets; not
less than 400 feet for intersection with a feeder or minor collector street;
not less than 600 feet between intersections for a major collector, arterial
street; and not less than that required by the state’s Department of
Transportation between intersections with state highways.
      (10)   Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the
Commission may apply another standard to be followed in their design.
      (11)   Horizontal visibility of curved streets and vertical visibility on
all streets must be maintained along the centerlines as follows:
         (a)   Arterial or major collector streets: 500 feet;
         (b)   Feeder streets and minor collectors: 300 feet; and
         (c)   Residential streets: 150 feet.
      (12)   Curvature measured along the centerline shall have a minimum
radius as follows:
         (a)   Arterial or major collector streets: 500 feet;
         (b)   Feeder streets and minor collectors: 300 feet; and
         (c)   Residential streets: 200 feet.
      (13)   Between reverse curves arterials, collectors and feeder streets a
tangent of not less than 100 feet shall be provided. On residential streets, no
tangent section is required.
      (14)   Maximum grades for streets shall be as follows:
         (a)   Arterial streets and major collectors: not greater than 6%;
         (b)   Feeder streets and minor collectors: not greater than 8%; and
         (c)   Residential streets and minor plat access: not greater than 10%.
      (15)   Maximum length of a cul-de-sac, dead end street or access easement
is 800 feet. The length shall be measured from the centerline of the nearest
dedicated or public cross street.
   (C)   Lots.
      (1)   All lots shall front on a public street or road. However, lots in
minor plats may front on an access (ingress/egress) easement.
      (2)   Sidelines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets. Some variation from
this rule is permissible, but pointed or very irregular lots should be avoided.
      (3)   Double frontage lots should not be platted.
      (4)   Widths and areas of lots and building setback lines shall be not
less than that provided in this chapter for dwellings for the district in which
the subdivision is located.
      (5)   Wherever possible, unit-shopping centers, based upon sound
development standards, should be designed in contrast to the platting of lots
for individual commercial use.
      (6)   Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal in order to
permit appropriate setbacks from both streets.
   (D)   Easements, utility. Easement for utility shall be provided. This
easement area for utilities shall not include the paved surfaces. Such
easements shall have minimum widths of 20 feet, or greater where needed, and
where located along lot lines, one-half of the width shall be taken from each
lot. Before determining the location of easements, the plan shall be discussed
with local utility companies to assure their proper placing for the
installation of such services to allow necessary room for the placement of all
possible utilities.
   (E)   Public open spaces.
      (1)   Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public uses
are located within the subdivision area as shown on the master plan, the
Commission may request its dedication for such purposes, or their reservation
for a period of one year following the date of the approval of the plat. In the
event a governmental agency concerned passes a resolution expressing its intent
to acquire the land so reserved, the reservation period shall be extended for
an additional six months.
      (2)   All public open spaces dedicated to the public shall be granted
access through an easement or direct access to a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-203  STANDARDS OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The plat of subdivision shall conform to the following standards of
improvements.
   (A)   Monuments.
      (1)   Monuments shall be placed so that the center of the monument shall
be marked to coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be monumented
and shall be set so that the top of the monument is level with the finished
grade. The monument shall have caps with the surveyor’s name and license
number.
      (2)   Monuments shall be set:
         (a)   At the intersection of all lines forming angles on the perimeter
of the subdivision;
         (b)   At the intersection of street centerlines;
         (c)   Centerline of streets at the beginning and end of curves;
         (d)   Centerline of street tangent sections at intervals not to exceed
500 feet; and
         (e)   At any other location required by Indiana Code.
      (3)   Monuments interior to the subdivision shall be at a minimum one-
inch galvanized iron pipe or five-eighths-inch diameter reinforcing bar, 30
inches in length, except in pavement where the length may be eight inches, with
a cap embossed with the surveyor’s name and registration number. On the
perimeter of the subdivision, monuments shall be one-inch galvanized iron pipe
or five-eighths-inch diameter reinforcing bar with a cap embossed with the
surveyor’s name and registration number. Perimeter monuments shall be 36 inches
in length and set in concrete.
   (B)   Survey standards. Survey of the subdivision and subdivision perimeter
shall be in accordance with 865 I.A.C. 12 (Rule 12). It is required that if all
of the information required by Rule 12 is not shown on the face of the
subdivision plat then a separate perimeter survey in compliance with said rule
must be recorded in the office of the Recorder of the county and the recording
information placed on the face of the subdivision plat.
   (C)   Streets.
      (1)   Streets shall be completed to grades shown on plans, profiles and
cross-sections provided by the developer, and prepared by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor. Prior to beginning
construction and secondary plat approval, the City Engineer shall approve all
construction and site plans.
      (2)   The streets shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the
dimensions required by the cross-sections and the work shall be performed in
the manner prescribed in Standard Specifications (latest issue) of the state’s
Department of Transportation.
         (a)   In a subdivision proposed to have residential streets and
containing an average of less than three lots per acre, excluding streets, open
areas, common areas, retention/detention areas, parks or other similar non-
building areas, the street pavement shall be a minimum width of 28 feet,
exclusive of curbs or curbs and gutter.
         (b)   In a subdivision proposed to have residential streets and
containing an average of three or more lots per acre, excluding streets, open
areas, common areas, retention/detention areas, parks or other similar non-
building areas, the street pavement shall be a minimum width of 32 feet,
exclusive of curbs or curbs and gutter.
         (c)   Streets in a business or industrial development and feeder or
minor collectors shall be a minimum width of 32 feet, exclusive of curbs or
curbs and gutter.
         (d)   Arterial or major collectors shall be a minimum width of 36
feet, exclusive of curbs or curbs and gutter.
         (e)   In residential districts the minimum radius of cul-de-sac
pavement, exclusive of curbs or curb and gutter, is 42 feet. In business and
industrial districts the minimum radius of cul-de-sac pavement exclusive of
curbs or curb and gutter, is 48 feet. The minimum radius for the transition
from back of curb on street to back of curb on the cul-de-sac is 60 feet for
all districts.
      (3)   Materials and construction methods employed for construction of
infrastructure within existing right-of-way or proposed right-of-way shall meet
the requirements of the state’s Department of Transportation, Standard
Specifications (latest edition) in addition to those requirements contained in
this chapter.
      (4)   The developer shall provide pavement tapers, turn lanes and passing
lanes, including any additional right-of-way, if in the opinion of the County
or City Engineer, traffic counts, visibility or other safety considerations
warrant them.
      (5)   (a)   The City Superintendent shall be notified 48 hours prior to
beginning paving operations so that a representative of the city or county, as
the case may be. Can make any necessary inspections. Any failure by the
developer or his or her subcontractor to comply with the design standards of
this chapter and the specifications approved by the Commission shall be grounds
for issuance of a cease and desist order and notice of corrective actions to be
taken. Failure to make necessary corrections shall be grounds for suit against
the performance surety posted by the developer by the city or the county, as
the case may be, to properly install and complete the streets in question. The
responsibility for the compliance with these provisions shall be solely that of
the developer shown on such performance surety as the principal obligor.
         (b)   Street pavement standard:
            1.   Residential street typical section:
               a.   Six inches of wire or fiber reinforced portland cement
concrete on eight inches of No. 8 crushed stone subbase;
               b.   110 lbs/syd of No. 11 bituminous surface on 330 lbs/syd of
No. 8 bituminous base or binder on eight inches of compacted aggregate base No.
53; or
               c.   110 lbs/syd of No. 11 bituminous surface on 220 lbs/syd of
No. 9 bituminous binder on 440 lbs/syd of No. 5 or 5D bituminous base.
            2.   Feeder, minor collector, business or light industrial street
typical section:
               a.   Eight inches of wire or fiber reinforced portland cement
concrete on six inches of No. 8 crushed stone subbase;
               b.   165 lbs/syd of No. 11 bituminous surface on 440 lbs/syd of
No. 5 or 5D bituminous base on eight inches of compacted aggregate base No. 53;
or
               c.   110 lbs/syd of No. 11 bituminous surface on 880 lbs/syd of
No. 5 or 5D bituminous base placed in two lifts.
            3.   Arterial, major collector or heavy industrial street typical
section:
               a.   Nine inches of wire or fiber reinforced portland cement
concrete on six inches of No. 8 crushed stone subbase;
               b.   110 lbs/syd of No. 11 bituminous surface on 220 lbs/syd No.
9 bituminous binder on 440 lbs/syd No. 5 or 5D bituminous base on eight inches
of compacted aggregate base No. 53; or
               c.   110 lbs/syd of No. 11 bituminous surface on 220 lbs/syd of
No. 9 bituminous binder on 880 lbs/syd of No. 5 or 5D bituminous base placed in
two lifts.
      (6)   Prior to placing the street surfaces, adequate subsurface drainage
for the street shall be provided by the developer. Subsurface drainage pipe
shall be coated corrugated steel pipe, PVC or HDPE or other approved pipe not
less than six inches in diameter approved by the City Engineer. Upon the
completion of the street improvements, as-built drawings shall be filed with
the City Superintendent.
      (7)   Pavement for private access roads (as would be allowed in minor
plats) shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and constructed of a minimum of
ten inches of compacted aggregate (four inches of No. 53 or No. 8 crushed stone
on six inches of No. 2 crushed stone or equivalent) on prepared, well-drained,
compacted subgrade.
   (D)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   Within the municipal limits or where sanitary sewers are within 300
feet of the perimeter of the proposed development, the developer shall provide
the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system, which shall connect to
the city sewers at an approved location. Where connection to city sewers is not
possible, one of the following methods of sewage disposal shall be used:
         (a)   A complete sanitary sewer system to convey the sewage to a
treatment plant shall be provided by the developer in accordance with the
minimum requirements of the county’s Health Department, the state’s Board of
Health and/or the state’s Stream Pollution Control Board; and
         (b)   The county’s Board of Health shall approve each lot for an
individual on site sewage disposal system.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer system plans shall meeting the requirements of the
city shall be provided by the developer and submitted to the City Engineer and
the state’s Department of Environmental Management for approval. The design
shall give consideration to service extensions into adjacent areas. Upon the
completion and testing of the sanitary sewer system, as-built plans for the
sanitary sewers shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
      (3)   In this subsection (D) and subsection (E) below, the phrase THE
DEVELOPER SHALL PROVIDE shall be interpreted to mean that the developer shall
install the facility referred to, or, whenever a private sewage disposal system
or an individual water supply is to be provided, that such facilities referred
to in these sections shall be installed by the developer of the lots in
accordance with these regulations.
   (E)   Water system.
      (1)   Within the municipal limits of the city or where adequate public
water mains are within 500 feet of the perimeter of the proposed development,
the developer shall provide the subdivision with a complete water supply
system. Where connection to a municipal or public water system is not
available, the developer shall provide one of the following.
         (a)   A complete community water supply system shall be provided in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the state’s Board of Health and the
state’s Department of Environmental Management.
         (b)   An individual water supply on each lot in the subdivision in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the county’s Board of Health.
      (2)   Water system plans shall meeting the requirements of the city or
the public water company who is supplying the water shall be provided by the
developer and submitted to the City Engineer or public water company and the
state’s Department of Environmental Management for approval. The design shall
give consideration to service extensions into adjacent areas. Upon the
completion and testing of the water system, as-built plans for the sanitary
sewers shall be submitted to the City Engineer or public water company.
   (F)   Storm drainage system. The developer shall provide the subdivision
with an adequate storm water collection system in conformance with the city
and/or county, Storm Water and Erosion Control Management Plan and Design
Manual.
   (G)   Curb and gutter. Curb or curb and gutter are required to be installed
on each side of the street in all subdivisions, except minor subdivisions. The
curb and/or curb and gutter shall be of one of the construction types shown in
Appendix “E”, Standard Details.
   (H)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets in any
subdivision.
      (2)   Sidewalks shall be installed in all B and PUD-C zoning
classifications as determined by the Commission.
      (3)   When sidewalks are installed, they should be constructed of
portland cement concrete at least four inches thick and five feet wide and
placed one foot from the street right-of-way line.
      (4)   Sidewalks shall also be required where necessary to accommodate
present and future pedestrian traffic as determined by the Commission.
      (5)   (a)   Sidewalks shall be constructed to provide a minimum of five
feet planting strip between the back of curb and the sidewalk.
         (b)   On all arterial and feeder streets the planting strip shall be a
minimum of seven feet between the back of curb and the sidewalk.
         (c)   Where it is not possible to meet the requirements of subsections
(H)(5)(a) and (H)(5)(b) above, the developer shall provide an alternate method
of sidewalk placement and obtain approval of the Commission.
         (d)   Sidewalks are required in all developments whether in
residential, business or industrial districts as determined by Commission.
   (I)   Street signs. The developer shall provide the subdivision with
standard city street signs at the intersection of all streets unless an
alternate design or type is approved by the Commission.
   (J)   Street lights. The developer shall provide the subdivision with street
lights, the quality and location of which shall be determined by the
Commission. The streetlights shall not be required in the buffer zone. The
street lights provided shall be with the approval of the city when the
subdivision is located on a dedicated street and the developer shall cover all
expenses for installation of the lights.
   (K)   Fire hydrants. The developer shall provide the subdivision with fire
hydrants if the subdivision is located within the corporate limits of the city.
Subdivisions outside the corporate limits of the city served by a water utility
shall, likewise, provide fire hydrants. Spacing and location of the fire
hydrant shall be based upon the recommendation of the respective fire chief of
the area being served.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-204  PLAT CERTIFICATES AND DEDICATION.
   The following forms shall be used in platting.
   (A)   Commission certificate.
 
UNDER AUTHORITY PROVIDED BY I.C. 36-7-4 ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF INDIANA, AND ALL
ACTS AMENDATORY THERETO, AND BY AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARTINSVILLE,
INDIANA. THIS PLAT WAS GIVEN APPROVAL BY THE PLAN COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MARTINSVILLE AS FOLLOWS:
 
Adopted by the Martinsville Plan Commission at a public meeting held on the            day of          
         , 20       .
 
 
Martinsville Plan Commission Primary Approval
 
By:                                                              
Chairperson
 
                                                                     
Secretary
 
Martinsville Plan Commission Secondary Approval
 
By:                                                                
 
 
   (B)   Surveyor’s certificate.
 
SURVEYORS SUBDIVISION CERTIFICATION
 
I, Name of Surveyor, an Indiana Registered Land Surveyor, hereby certify that, to the best of my
information, knowledge and belief, this plat represents a subdivision of land in accordance with the City
of Martinsville Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinances. That the perimeter of said subdivision was
surveyed in accordance with 865 I.A.C. 1-12 and that all information required by said rule, including
surveyor’s report, is shown hereon or is given in a separate boundary survey that has been recorded in the
Office of the Recorder of Morgan County as Instrument Number                                  . Further,
that all monuments required by 865 I.A.C. 1-12 and this chapter have been set or will be set prior to the
transfer of any lot in this subdivision.
 
Certified this                      day of                                    , 20               .
 
 
SEAL OF SURVEYOR
 
 
                                                               
Signature of Land Surveyor
 
 
   (C)   Dedication of plat and public lands. Each final plat submitted to the
Commission for approval shall carry a deed of dedication in substantially the
following form:
 
We, the undersigned owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do hereby certify that we have laid off,
platted and subdivided, and do hereby lay off, plat and subdivide, said real estate in accordance with the within
plat.
 
This subdivision shall be known as                                                                                
                               , an addition to                                                                  
                                                                           . All streets shown and not heretofore
dedicated are hereby dedicated to the public.
 
Front and side yard building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat, between which lines and
the property lines of the street, there shall be erected or maintained, no building or structure.
 
There are strips of ground as shown on this plat and marked “Easement”, reserved for the use of utilities, except
transmission lines or main, for the installation of water and sewer mains, pipes, ducts, lines and wires, subject
at all times to the proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved. No permanent or other structures are
to be erected or maintained upon said strips of land, but owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their
titles subject to the rights of the utilities.
 
(Insert similar language for drainage easements.) (If access easements are used a dedication of the access
easement to the various lot owners must be given.) (If the subdivision is to have private streets provisions must
be made in the covenants for perpetual maintenance of said streets.)
 
(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions would be inserted here upon the
Developer’s initiative or the recommendations of the Commission; important provisions are those specifying the use
to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the minimum habitable floor area).
 
The foregoing covenants, (or restrictions), are to run with the land and shall be binding on all parties and all
persons claiming under them until January 1, 20               .
 
(A 25-year period is suggested), at which time said covenants, (and/or restrictions), shall be automatically
extended for successive periods of 10 years unless changed by vote of a majority of the then owners of the
buildings covered by these covenants, or restrictions in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of the
foregoing covenants or restrictions, by judgment or court order shall in no way affect any of the other covenants
or restrictions, which shall remain in full force and effect. The right to enforce these provisions by injunction,
together with the right to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof erected, or
maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public, and reserved to the several owners of the
several lots in this subdivision and to their heirs and assigns.)
 
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-205  INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
   In their interpretation and application the provisions of these regulations
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
   (A)   Public provisions. These regulations and ordinance are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation. If
these regulations imposes a restriction different from any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, those provisions that are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   (B)   Private provision. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction; provided
that, where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive than such
easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirement
of these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easements,
covenant or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these regulations, or
the determinations of the Commission in enforcing these regulations, or the
determinations of the Commission in enforcing these regulations, and such
private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations and such private
provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations or determinations there
under, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to
these regulations and determinations made there under. Generally private
provisions can only be enforced privately unless a public agency such as the
City Council or Plan Commission has been made a party to such agreements.
   (C)   Separability. If any part or provision of these regulations or
application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have rendered and shall be confined in
its operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have rendered and shall not affect or
impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application
thereof to other persons or circumstances. The city hereby declares that it
would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such
part, provision or application.
   (D)   Acceptance of streets and infrastructure. Regardless of any other
provisions of this chapter, neither the city nor county are required to accept
for maintenance or repair any street or road, platted or unplatted, until all
other infrastructure associated with the development, such as sanitary sewers
and water system, has been accepted by the city or county, as the case may be.
After acceptance of other infrastructure, the city or county may accept
dedication of the streets and roads; provided that:
      (1)   A deed of dedication, executed by the owner, has been prepared for
all proposed public right-of-way in which streets and roads have been
constructed;
      (2)   There exist no know violations of this chapter and the appropriate
maintenance surety have been submitted;
      (3)   There is a written acceptance of the deed of dedication by the city
or county; and
      (4)   The completely executed deed of dedication is recorded in the
office of the Recorder of the county.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-206  SAVING PROVISION AND EXCLUSION.
   (A)   Saving provision. This chapter shall not be construed as abating any
action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing Subdivision Control
Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance, or as a discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability
of any person, firm or corporation, or waiving any right of the city under any
section or provision existing at the time of the effective date of this
chapter, or as vacating or nullifying any rights obtained by any person, firm
or corporation, by lawful action of the city, except as shall be expressly
provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   Exclusion. Nothing in this chapter or in any rules, regulations or
orders issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to restrict or regulate
or to authorize any unit of government, legislative body, plan commission or
board of zoning appeals now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate
the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the state or by any state
agency, or the use of property owned or occupied by this section, the term
STATE AGENCY shall mean and include all state agencies, boards, commissions,
departments and institutions, including state educational institutions of the
state.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 94-207  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   Effective date. This chapter was originally adopted on 11-19-2001 as
Ord. 2001-1478.
   (B)   Revision. Ord. 2001-1478 is hereby revised and amended per a
recommendation of the city’s Plan Commission at a public hearing held 7-27-2004
and adopted by the Common Council of the city as Ord. 2004-1530 on 8-16-2004
and is effective upon passage.
   (C)   Conflict. Where conflicts arise between the above cited ordinances and
this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001)
§§ 94-208 — 94-214  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XV: HISTORIC DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
Section
   
94-215.   Purpose and intent
   
94-216.   Boundaries
   
94-217.   Permitted business uses
   
94-218.   Permitted residential use
   
94-219.   Development standards for new buildings
   
94-220.   Exterior design standards
   
94-221.   Exterior property maintenance
   
94-222.   Demolition
   
94-223.   Signs
   
94-224.   Parking
   
94-225.   Use of public right-of-way and exterior lighting
   
94-226.   Parks and outside recreation
   
94-227.   Public buildings and postal facilities
   
94-228.   Permit and fees
   
94-229.   Remedies and penalties
   94-230. — 94-239.   Reserved
§ 94-215  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Historic Downtown District is established to provide for the unique
needs of the downtown business area of the city as follows:
   (A)   Protect and enhance the city’s core downtown business district, which
contains many unique and historic structures;
   (B)   Promote high density development of mixed uses with storefront retail,
professional office and residential dwelling uses; and
   (C)   Incorporate development and design that is pedestrian-oriented.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-216  BOUNDARIES.
   The Historic Downtown District shall comprise nine square blocks bounded by
the south side of Pike Street on the north, the west side of Sycamore Street on
the east, the north side of Jackson Street on the south and the east side of
Mulberry Street on the west.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-217  PERMITTED BUSINESS USES.
   (A)   A large variety of uses including public, cultural, commercial,
professional and residential is encouraged in the Historic Downtown District.
Representative permitted uses include:
      (1)   Amusements, indoor;
      (2)   Artisan and craft shop;
      (3)   Art gallery;
      (4)   Artist studio;
      (5)   Barber/beauty shop;
      (6)   Bed and breakfast;
      (7)   Cellular phone/pager service;
      (8)   Community center;
      (9)   Computer sales and service;
      (10)   Cultural center;
      (11)   Financial institution;
      (12)   Fitness/training center;
      (13)   Government facility;
      (14)   Hotel and motel;
      (15)   Library;
      (16)   Lodge and private clubs;
      (17)   Medical care clinic;
      (18)   Museum;
      (19)   Newspaper publishing;
      (20)   Office, business/professional;
      (21)   Park;
      (22)   Photographic studio;
      (23)   Police, fire or rescue station;
      (24)   Post office;
      (25)   Radio/TV station and studio;
      (26)   Residential dwelling, multi-family;
      (27)   Residential dwelling, single-family;
      (28)   Restaurant, dine-in or carryout;
      (29)   Retail store;
      (30)   School/education/training center;
      (31)   Shoe repair;
      (32)   Social service office;
      (33)   Tailor/seamstress;
      (34)   Tanning salon;
      (35)   Tavern;
      (36)   Theater; and
      (37)   Transportation terminal.
   (B)   Prohibited uses:
      (1)   Adult entertainment; and
      (2)   Retail store, lingerie.
   (C)   Other uses shall require approval of the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-218  PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (A)   Residential dwelling units are permitted above street level and at the
rear of the ground floor.
   (B)   A ground floor rear residential unit shall not be placed such that the
business use of the ground floor area, at the front of the building, is less
than 1,000 square feet.
   (C)   Condominiums are permitted subject to the same restrictions that apply
to residential uses. Further, the state’s Condominium Statute, I.C. 32-25 shall
apply to the creation of condominium units.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-219  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR NEW BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Lots shall not be subdivided, except as provided in § 94-218 of this
chapter for the creation of residential condominium units.
   (B)   If a building is destroyed, the replacement building shall have not
less than the same ground floor area as the previous building, except 24 feet
of even width off of the rear of the lot may be used for parking.
   (C)   Minimum ground surface area: 760 square feet.
   (D)   Front and side setbacks: zero feet.
   (E)   Minimum rear setback: zero feet.
   (F)   Maximum percent coverage of all improvements: 100%.
   (G)   Maximum building height shall not exceed the height of the original
building.
   (H)   Building fronts shall meet the sidewalk across entire width of the
building. Street level of the front of the building must be a continuous
storefront, except traditional piers and recessed entries are permitted.
   (I)   Street level, front facades shall include windows, signs and
architectural details that are suitable for pedestrian viewing.
   (J)   Street level storefronts shall be a minimum 75% glass.
   (K)   Any new building or reconstruction of an existing building that has
sustained more than 40% damage shall be subject to approval by the Plan
Commission or any other agency with jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-220  EXTERIOR DESIGN STANDARDS.
   In order to maintain and promote the unique historic character of downtown
Martinsville and to foster economic revitalization, the following design and
visual compatibility standards shall apply to the exterior of every building in
the district.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   A building exterior shall not be altered where the defining
characteristics of the structure are lost or substantially changed.
      (2)   The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features is prohibited unless no other practical alternative is
available.
      (3)   Because each building is a physical record of its time, place and
use, any change that creates a false sense of historical development, such as
adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, is
prohibited.
      (4)   Because a building changes over time, those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and
preserved.
      (5)   Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a building shall be preserved.
      (6)   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture and other visual qualities.
      (7)   Chemical or physical treatments such as sandblasting and high
pressure water washing that cause damage to historic materials are prohibited.
      (8)   New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the building.
      (9)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
done in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and
integrity of the building would be unimpaired.
      (10)   Lost or missing historic features are not required to be replaced.
   (B)   Specific requirements.
      (1)   All replacements of historic elements such as windows shall conform
to the size, style and shape of the original. Where practical, the use of like
material is required.
      (2)   Brick, wood, metal, stone and other original building materials
shall be preserved and retained, and not covered with non-historic material
such as vinyl.
      (3)   Paint colors, awning styles and colors, and signage must evoke
historicity and be visually compatible with other colors, awnings and signage
in the Historic Downtown District.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-221  EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
   The exterior of all buildings shall be maintained to meet the applicable
requirements established under state statute for buildings so as to prevent the
loss of historic material and the deterioration of important character defining
details and features. Historic buildings shall be maintained to meet all
applicable requirements established under statute and city ordinance for
buildings.
   (A)   Walls.
      (1)   All walls, including parapet walls at the roofline, shall be
structurally sound.
      (2)   Brick shall be adequately and appropriately tuck pointed and
secure.
      (3)   Masonry repairs shall not be done in such a way as to harm or
destroy historic materials.
         (a)   Replacement mortars shall have a 1:3 lime binder to sand ratio.
         (b)   Replacement joints must match historic joints in color and
tooling.
         (c)   Substitute masonry units shall be compatible to the historic
units in color, permeability and compressive strength. Hard, modern brick and
cinder block is generally not suitable, unless used as original construction
material.
      (4)   Unpainted brick shall not be painted.
      (5)   Metal cornices and brackets, corbelled brick cornices and other
decorative elements shall be retained and maintained.
      (6)   Painted brick shall be in good repair, free of flaking and
chipping.
      (7)   Paint colors shall accentuate the historic character of the
Historic Downtown District. Compatible and complementary paint colors shall be
used throughout the Historic Downtown District.
      (8)   All exterior building walls shall be free of plant growth, with the
exception of container plants.
   (B)   Roofs.
      (1)   Roofs shall be leak-free and sound.
      (2)   Roofs shall maintain the same appearance from the street as the
original roof.
      (3)   If roofs are visible from the street, roofing material must be
appropriate to the historic character of the building and the Historic Downtown
District.
      (4)   Gutters shall be installed as necessary, but shall be as
unobtrusive as possible. Constructed, or box gutters, shall be in good repair.
   (C)   Windows.
      (1)   Street level storefronts shall be a minimum 75% glass unless
verifiable historic evidence for a building shows otherwise.
      (2)   Replacement windows, when necessary, shall fit the original
openings.
      (3)   Replacement windows, when necessary, shall be of the same style as
the originals, as verified by existing windows or historic photographs, or
shall be compatible with the style of building as it currently exists, or shall
be compatible with the proposed remodeling.
      (4)   Existing original openings shall not be filled or covered.
      (5)   Transoms above display windows and doors, and sidelights, shall not
be filled or obscured.
      (6)   Window glass shall be secure.
      (7)   Only clear glass is permitted, unless a substitute material is
approved by the Plan Commission or any other agency with jurisdiction.
      (8)   Sills and lintels shall be in good repair.
      (9)   Shutters are prohibited.
   (D)   Approvals.
      (1)   Any building construction, reconstruction or exterior structural
alteration, including, but not limited to, masonry repair and tuck pointing,
awnings, windows, doors, storefront and signage, is subject to approval by the
Plan Commission or any other agency with jurisdiction.
      (2)   Regular, ongoing, normal preventive maintenance, including, but not
limited to, caulking, glazing, replacing non-structural glass and painting (see
subsection (A)(7) above), shall not require approval by the Plan Commission or
any other agency with jurisdiction. Any work that impacts public safety, such
as placement of ladders, scaffolding, man lift or dumpster, shall require
consultation with the City Superintendent before the commencement of such work.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-222  DEMOLITION.
   (A)   The issuance of a demolition permit by the Building Inspector shall
require the approval of the Common Council, except when there is an imminent
threat to public health or safety as determined by the Fire Chief or City
Engineer.
   (B)   The following conditions and standards shall apply to any entity
requesting demolition of a building.
      (1)   A building shall only be demolished if it is deemed a hazard and
threat to public health, safety and welfare by a professional engineer hired by
the owner or by the city.
      (2)   A demolition permit shall not be issued without the approval of the
Common Council or any other agency having jurisdiction.
      (3)   The Common Council or any other agency with jurisdiction may allow
a demolition permit to be issued only after the property owner has established
all of the following:
         (a)   A good faith effort has been made to sell or otherwise dispose
of such property to any public agency or private person which gives a
reasonable assurance of its willingness to preserve and restore such property;
         (b)   Such documented evidence shall be provided at the property
owner’s expense and shall include:
            1.   Offering price;
            2.   Date the offer of sale began;
            3.   Name and address of listing agent, if any;
            4.   A copy of an advertisement which offers the property for sale
to run in the same manner as set forth in I.C. 5-3-1-1 et seq.; and
            5.   An appraisal of the property’s fair market value by a licensed
real estate appraiser.
      (4)   Filing procedure for Common Council approval for demolition of a
building or portion of a building shall be as follows:
         (a)   Make application to the Building Inspector not less than 30 days
prior to the Common Council meeting date for which a demolition public hearing
is desired and pay a non-refundable application fee which shall be in an amount
equal to the fee for a use or development variance;
         (b)   Place in a newspaper of general circulation a legal notice
advising of the public hearing before the Common Council. The notice shall
appear not less than ten days prior to the hearing date. The notices shall
contain the following information:
            1.   Owner’s name and address;
            2.   Address of the property for which a demolish permit is being
requested;
            3.   Legal description of the property;
            4.   Date of the public hearing;
            5.   Location and time of the public hearing; and
            6.   Statement that the purpose of the public hearing is for the
Common Council to receive public comment on the proposed demolition.
         (c)   Not less than ten days prior to the hearing date, send notice of
the public hearing, containing the same information as listed in subsections
(B)(4)(b)1. through (B)(4)(b)6. above, via certified mail return receipt
requested, to all adjacent landowners who are within two parcels in depth or
660 feet fro the subject property, whichever is least. Notice is also to be
sent by certified mail not less than ten days prior to the hearing to the
following persons or agencies:
            1.   Mayor of the City of Martinsville;
            2.   Martinsville Fire Chief;
            3.   Martinsville City Engineer;
            4.   Martinsville Chamber of Commerce;
            5.   Morgan County Historic Preservation Society;
            6.   Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana;
            7.   Rediscover Martinsville; and
            8.   Department of Natural Resources, Division of Historic
Preservation and Archeology.
         (d)   Not less than ten days prior to the hearing date, place a
placard, provided by the Building Inspector in a conspicuous location on the
front of the building that will advise the public of the proposed hearing on
demolition of the building.
      (5)   During the 30 days between the time application is made for
demolition and the public hearing by the Common Council, the owner of a
property proposed for demolition shall pursue and give due consideration to all
possible alternatives to demolition, and shall make a good faith effort to
accommodate reasonable requests from any interested parties for information
about or access to the building for the purpose of evaluating alternatives to
demolition.
      (6)   Any demolition permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
valid for a period of six months from the date of issuance. If the demolition
has not commenced within this six-month-period, then the owner shall be
required to apply for a new permit and satisfy all notification requirements.
      (7)   If the Common Council approves application for a demolition permit,
then the Building Inspector shall issue a demolition permit pursuant to § 94-
227 of this chapter. Applicant shall pay the permit fee and furnish the bond as
required by § 94-227 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 2017-1757, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 94-223  SIGNS.
   (A)   The number, size, design and placement of signs have significant
influence on the character and function of the Historic Downtown District.
   (B)   In order to promote public safety, limit clutter and confusion, allow
businesses to effectively communicate with the public, and to protect and
enhance the physical appearance and scenic value of the Historic Downtown
District, the following sign regulations shall apply.
      (1)   Permanently affixed exterior signs shall pertain only to products
for sale, events occurring or services rendered upon the premises.
      (2)   One square foot of sign shall be permitted for each ten square feet
of building face fronting on a public street or for each one linear foot of
property fronting on a publicly maintained right-of-way, whichever is greater.
The name of a business on an awning constitutes a sign and as such shall apply
to the total square area of allowable signage.
      (3)   Free-standing stationary and portable signs, with the exception of
sidewalk signs are not allowed. Sidewalk signs shall conform to the following
requirements:
         (a)   Sign shall have a maximum face area of six square feet per side;
         (b)   Sign shall have a maximum width of two and three-fourths feet
measured from the extreme outside limits of the sign, including legs;
         (c)   Sign shall have a maximum height of four and one-half feet
measured from the sidewalk to the top of the sign;
         (d)   Sign shall not be placed on the sidewalk so as to hinder
pedestrians;
         (e)   Only one sign per business; and
         (f)   Sign shall be taken in every night.
      (4)   One temporary sign or banner, not exceeding 32 square feet, for the
purpose of advertising a special event, such as a “Grand Opening” or “Special
Sale”, or for the purpose of advertising the business until a permanent sign is
erected, shall be permitted per business; provided, the temporary signage does
not exceed a collective 30 days out of a calendar year. No improvement location
permit shall be required for such temporary signs.
      (5)   Wall-mounted signs shall not extend more than three feet over the
public sidewalk and the bottom of said signs shall be a minimum of eight feet
above the sidewalk. Signs that extend over a public street or alley pavement or
curb are prohibited.
      (6)   No sign shall be erected or painted on a roof, the only exception
being the historic “Martinsville City of Mineral Water” sign, as it presently
appears and is located.
      (7)   No sign shall be painted directly on a building surface.
      (8)   Signs shall not be placed on a building so as to obscure any window
or door opening.
      (9)   Restoration of existent historic advertising murals is permitted.
Murals or other public art shall be compatible with the Historic Downtown
District and shall not be injurious to the public health, safety morals and
general welfare of the community and in addition must be approved by the Plan
Commission or any other agency with jurisdiction.
      (10)   All signs must be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all
hazards, such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose fastenings, and
must be maintained at all times in such safe condition so as not to be
detrimental to the public health or safety.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-224  PARKING.
   (A)   Buildings shall not be demolished for the specific purpose of
providing parking.
   (B)   All parking surfaces must be of asphalt, concrete or approved
permeable asphalt, concrete, open grid concrete pavers or similar pavement
system that provides reduced storm water runoff.
   (C)   Parking lot surfaces must be well-maintained. All landscaping,
including plants, must be maintained. Dead plants or vegetative materials must
be removed and replaced.
   (D)   One on-street parking space is permitted for each owner occupied
residential unit.
   (E)   One off-street parking space must be provided for each bedroom in a
non-owner occupied residential unit.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-225  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Sidewalks, street curbs and gutters and planting beds shall be
maintained in good condition. All landscaping, including plants, must be
maintained. Dead vegetative materials must be removed and replaced.
   (B)   Private dumpsters and other refuse receptacles shall not be placed on
sidewalks, except trash receptacles may be placed curb side no earlier than 6:
00 p.m. on the date preceding the scheduled day for collection, and receptacles
shall be removed from the curb not later than 6:00 p.m. the day of collection.
   (C)   Retail merchandise displayed on sidewalks is permitted only during the
hours that the business is open. Merchandise shall not block or impede
pedestrian passage.
   (D)   Exterior lighting, whether for area lighting, security or signage,
shall be hooded, screened or otherwise shielded and arranged such that it does
not directly pose a hazard or nuisance to traffic on adjacent streets. Further,
no exterior lighting shall be used that will produce a direct glare or
concentrate light onto adjacent property or be a nuisance to adjoining
residential uses. The City Superintendent or his or her appointed agent shall
be the sole determiner of what constitutes unacceptable glare, concentrated
light or a lighting nuisance.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-226  PARKS AND OUTSIDE RECREATION.
   Any use of land for parks or outside recreation is prohibited unless
specifically approved by the Plan Commission or any other agency having
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-227  PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND POSTAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   If public buildings are required to be constructed, remodeled or
expanded in the Historic Downtown District, the controlling government agency
shall cooperate to make the exterior of the building and the site conform to
the general historic nature of the district while still retaining the public
function for which the building is needed.
   (B)   The following restrictions shall apply: the exterior of building(s)
and structure(s) shall be designed and landscaped to be in general conformity
with the exterior of existing buildings in the Historic District Architectural
and Landscaping Plans shall require the approval of the Plan Commission or any
other agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-228  PERMIT AND FEES.
   (A)   A permit is required to construct, alter, change, improve or repair
any lot, building or sign in the “Historic Downtown District”.
   (B)   An application for said permit shall be submitted to the City
Superintendent for review and processing.
   (C)   A permit fee shall be paid in accordance with § 94-240 of this
chapter. Said permit fee shall be in the same amount as required for an
Accessory Building, Table Item (e).
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 94-229  REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   This section shall be the same as § 94-170 of this chapter.
   (B)   The penalty of violation of this article shall be the same as a
violation of Development Standards, Table Item (b), in § 94-241 of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2009-1626, passed 5-4-2009)
§§ 94-230 — 94-239  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVI: MISCELLANEOUS TABLES
Section
   
94-240.   Building and Zoning Fee Table
   
94-241.   Penalty Fee Table
§ 94-240  BUILDING AND ZONING FEE TABLE.
   (A)   Building permits, license fees and other permits.
 
(a) New single-family residential    $200   Plus $0.10 per sqft over 1,500 sqft
(b) Duplex or two-family residential $300    
(c) Multi-family                     $300   Per project, plus $75 per living
                                            unit
(d) New business, industrial,        $400   Plus $0.10 per sqft
commercial
(e) Accessory building               $100    
(f) Swimming pool                    $100    
(g) Electrical - residential         $75    $50 for upgrade, relocation or
                                            extension
(h) Electrical - business,           $150   $100 for upgrade, relocation or
industrial, commercial                      extension
(i) Addition or remodel              $100   For every 2 units if multi-family
(residential)
(j) Addition (business, industrial,  $300   Plus $0.10 per sqft
commercial)
(k) Signs                            $100    
(l) Advertising structures           $400    
(m) Re-inspection                    $50     
(n) Remodel business, industrial,    $200   Plus $0.10 per sqft
commercial
(o) Under ground tanks               $200   Per tank
(p) Adult entertainment              $1,000  
(q) Adult entertainment renewal      $500    
(r) Adult entertainment transfer     $1,000  
(s) Improvement location permit -    $50     
residential
(t) Improvement location permit -    $200   $100 if permit obtained under (c)
multi-family
(u) Improvement location permit -    $300   $200 if permit obtained under (d)
business commercial
(v) Improvement location permit -    $400   $300 if permit obtained under (d)
industrial commercial
(w) Improvement location permit -           $300 if storm water and erosion
subdivision or PUD                   $400   control management plan permit
                                            obtained
(x) Improvement location permit -    $400   In addition to any other permit
wellhead protection area
(y) Cellular or microwave tower      $500   Renewal required every two years
permit
(z) Demolition permit                $100    
(hd) Historic district               $50    Permit for historic building
                                            maintenance
NOTES TO TABLE:
—Moving or changing the location of an existing structure carries the same as
fees for new construction. Re-inspection fee will be invoked any time the
inspector has to return to the site due to the work not being completed,
corrections required, or access not available.
—Fees listed in this table supersede the fees given in the city’s Building Code
Ord. 96-1389.
 
   (B)   Zoning applications.
 
(a) Amend zoning map (rezoning)                  $400 + Recording fee
(b) Use or development variance                  $300  
(c) Special exception and wellhead overlays      $400  
(d) Subdivision plat - major                     $500 + $40 per lot
(e) Planned unit development final detailed           + $40 per lot or $100 per
plat, per section or phase (requires prior       $500 acre
rezoning)
(f) Subdivision plat - minor                     $400 No per lot fee
(g) Special meeting of Plan Commission           $750 If approved by
                                                      Chairperson
(h) Special meeting of Board of Zoning Appeals   $350 If approved by
                                                      Chairperson
(i) Appeal of the City Superintendent’s zoning $200 See § 94-158 of this
decision                                              chapter
 
   (C)   Notes to tables.
      (1)   The filing fee hereinafter specified shall accompany applications
and petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Filing fees may be returned if the Building Inspector is unable to
approve the issuance of a building permit because of technical defects, also
filing fees may be returned if the applicant withdraws the application prior to
permit issuance or prior to a hearing, but in no case shall filing fees be
returned after a permit has been issued or after a hearing has been held.
      (3)   If construction of a structure begins prior to the issuance of all
applicable permits, the permit fee for said application shall be double the
normal fee specified herein. Any excavations of foundation materials shall
constitute beginning of construction.
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 94-241  PENALTY FEE TABLE.
 
(a) Signs, §                              Not less than $100 or more than $500
94-37 of this chapter                      per day
(b) Development standards                  Not less than $100 or more than $500
                                           per day
(c) Building Code - residential            Not less than $100 or more than $500
                                           per day
(d) Building Code - business, industrial,  Not less than $200 or more than
commercial                                 $1,000 per day
(e) Industrial violation, § 94-34 of this Not less than $500 or more than
chapter                                    $1,000 per day
(f) Any other zoning violation             Not less than $100 or more than
                                           $1,000 per day
NOTES TO TABLE:
Penalties listed in this table supersede the penalties given in the city’s
Building Code Ord. 96-1389.
 
(Ord. 2001-1478, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2011-1655, passed 7-18-2011)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
 
I.C. Section Code Section
1-1-4-1 et seq.             1-2
4-33-13-5(f)                2-175
5-2-8-2                     46-1
5-3-1                       58-3
5-3-1-1 et seq.             58-3
5-11-1-27                   2-140
5-11-1-28                   2-140
5-22                        2-174
8-1.5-3-8                   82-39
9-13-2                      78-1
9-13-2-1                    78-71
9-13-2-1 et seq.            78-1
9-13-2-196                  30-66
9-20-1-3(c)                 78-136,
                            78-137
9-21-1-3(a)(1)              Ch. 78, Art. IV
9-21-1-3(a)(3)              Ch. 70, Art. III
9-21-1-3(a)(9)              Ch. 78, Art. V
9-21-1-6                    78-2
9-21-1-7                    78-3
9-21-1-8                    78-4
9-21-1-9                    78-5
9-21-1-10                   78-6
9-21-4-18                   78-131
9-21-8-1 et seq.            Ch. 78, Art. III
9-21-8-24                   78-133
9-21-8-34                   78-135
9-21-8-41(a)                78-131
9-21-8-42                   78-135
9-21-10-1 et seq.           78-138
9-21-11-1 et seq.           Ch. 78, Art. V
9-21-11-2                   Ch. 78, Art. V
9-21-11-3                   78-218
9-21-11-5                   78-221
9-21-11-7                   78-220
9-21-14-1 et seq.           Ch. 70, Art. III
9-21-16-1 et seq.           Ch. 78, Art. IV
9-22-1                      78-72;
                            78-99
9-22-1-1 et seq.            78-72;
                            78-99
9-22-1-2                    78-73
9-22-1-11                   30-67
9-22-1-13                   78-72
9-22-1-14                   78-72
9-22-1-20                   78-74
9-29-11-1                   46-1
10-5-12-1                   18-219
10-5-13-1                   18-219
14-28-1                     42-44
14-28-1-26                  42-44
22-9-1-4 et seq.            15-2
22-9.5-1 et seq.            15-1
22-9.5-2-2                  15-2
22-9.5-2-3                  15-2
22-9.5-2-4                  15-2
22-9.5-2-8                  15-2
22-9.5-2-9                  15-2
22-9.5-2-10                 15-2
22-9.5-2-10(b)              15-2
22-9.5-2-10(c)              15-2
22-9.5-2-11                 15-2
22-9.5-2-13                 15-2
22-9.5-3                    15-3
22-9.5-3 et seq.            15-10
22-9.5-4-8                  15-11
22-9.5-5                    15-2
22-9.5-5-1                  15-3
22-9.5-6                    15-2;
                            15-11
22-11-14-1 et seq.          Ch. 38, Art. I
22-14-4-3 et seq.           38-1
25-35-1-1 through 25-35-1-8 82-329
25-37-1-1 et seq.           Ch. 18, Art. V
33-35-1-1 et seq.           Ch. 26
34-4-30.1                   2-172
34-4-30.5                   2-172
34-4-32-1                   78-171
35-1-5-6                    1-3
35-43-1-2                   38-5
35-44-3-8                   38-4
35-45-3-2                   66-39
35-46-3-1                   10-62
35-46-3-7                   10-37
35-47-1-1 et seq.           50-1
                            Ch. 10, Art. I;
                            Ch. 38, Art. I;
36-1-3-1 et seq.            Ch. 50;
                            Ch. 70, Art. I;
                            Ch. 86, Art. I
36-1-3-8(a)(9)              1-7
36-1-3-8(a)(10)             1-7
36-1-5-3                    Ch. 1
                            2-62;
36-1-5-4                    14-176;
                            86-31
36-1-6-1 et seq.            1-7
                            30-33;
36-1-6-2                    30-34;
                            30-69;
                            78-9
36-1-8-2                    2-169,
                            2-170
36-1-8-5                    2-179
36-1-8-5.1                  2-179
36-4-5-5                    18-38
36-4-6-1 et seq.            2-2
36-4-6-4                    2-36
36-4-6-7                    2-37
36-4-7-1 et seq.            Ch. 2, Art. V
36-4-8-1 et seq.            Ch. 2, Art. V
36-4-9-4                    2-1
36-4-9-8                    Ch. 2, Art. III
36-4-11-1 et seq.           Ch. 2, Art. III
36-7-4                      42-1
36-7-4-100 et seq.          Ch. 58
36-7-4-202 et seq.          Ch. 58
                            2-177;
36-7-9                      14-176;
                            14-177
36-7-9-1 et seq.            14-176;
                            14-177
36-7-9-2                    14-178
36-7-9-7                    2-177
36-7-9-13                   2-177
36-7-9-17-22                2-177
36-7-10.1-3                 86-31
36-7-14                     2-136
36-7-14-3                   2-136
36-7-14-6.1                 2-136
36-8-2-2                    Ch. 46, Art. II
36-8-2-3                    Ch. 38, Art. I
36-8-2-4                    Ch. 50
36-8-2-6                    Ch. 10, Art. I
36-8-2-11                   Ch. 18, Art. V
36-8-3-1 et seq.            Ch. 46, Art. II
36-8-3-3                    38-41
36-8-3.2-1 et seq.          38, Art. II
                            38-61,
                            38-65,
36-8-3.5 et seq.            38-66,
                            46-51,
                            46-55,
                            46-56
36-8-3.5-6                  38-64,
                            46-54
36-8-3.5-6(a)               38-64,
                            46-54
36-8-3.5-7                  38-64,
                            46-54
36-8-3.5-8                  38-64,
                            46-54
36-8-3.5-10                 38-65,
                            46-55
36-8-3.5-11                 38-63,
                            46-53
36-8-6-1 et seq.            46-33
36-8-7                      38-42
36-8-7-1 et seq.            38-42
36-8-8-1 et seq.            46-33
36-8-14-1 et seq.           2-173
36-9-2-5 et seq.            Ch. 70, Art. I
36-9-2-14                   Ch. 82, Art. II
36-9-12-4                   78-172
36-9-15.5                   2-178
36-9-17-1 et seq.           2-171
36-9-23-1 et seq.           82, Art. III
36-9-23-25 et seq.          82-266
36-9-23-29                  82-132
36-9-23-30                  82-106
36-9-23-33                  82-280
36-9-30-7                   66-35
36-9-30-12                  66-35
36-9-30-21                  66-1
36-10-3 et seq.             54-1
36-10-3-4                   54-1
36-10-3-19                  54-1
                            
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No.  Date Passed Code Section
2016-1721 6-20-2016   2-3
2019-560  6-3-2019    2-139
2019-565  6-3-2019    2-140
                     
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1068      5-19-1980  66-43
1079      7-6-1981   82-1
1170      8-6-1984   50-1
1171      8-20-1984  78-217—
                     78-221
1256      11-6-1989  2-2;
                     34-31
                     78-10;
                     86-66—
                     86-68;
                     86-91—
1271      9-6-1990   86-95;
                     86-116;
                     86-117;
                     86-131—
                     86-136
                     34-625;
1330      10-3-1994  82-132;
                     82-266
96-1369   1-16-1996  2-172
97-1396   1-16-1996  82-132
–       4-1-1996   82-140
97-1391   1-6-1997   58-2;
                     58-3
97-1402   8-5-1997   78-8
97-1403   8-18-1997  78-71;
                     78-72
                     34-622;
97-1404   9-15-1997  82-34;
                     82-39
                     66-31—
                     66-42;
97-1406   9-15-1997  66-66—
                     66-71;
                     78-9;
                     86-31
97-1411   12-15-1997 82-278
98-1412   2-2-1998   2-167
98-1427   7-6-1998   2-174
2001-1462 3-19-2001  78-137
                     94-1—
                     94-5;
                     94-15—
                     94-19;
                     94-30—
                     94-43;
                     94-55—
                     94-61;
                     94-70;
                     94-85—
                     94-97;
                     94-105—
                     94-108;
2001-1478 11-19-2001 94-120—
                     94-122;
                     94-130—
                     94-136;
                     94-145;
                     94-146;
                     94-155—
                     94-162;
                     94-170;
                     94-180—
                     94-185;
                     94-195—
                     94-207;
                     94-240;
                     94-241
2002-1480 3-4-2002   46-1
2002-1482 5-6-2002   34-501
2002-1496 10-7-2002  2-36
                     34-627;
2003-1500 1-6-2003   34-628;
                     82-351—
                     82-360
2003-1510 8-18-2003  2-175
2004-1520 5-17-2004  2-176
2004-1527 8-16-2004  2-106
2004-1536 9-7-2004   34-622;
                     82-39
2004-1541 11-4-2004  2-107
2004-1546 12-6-2004  34-625;
                     82-266
2006-1569 3-6-2006   34-625
2006-1570 3- -2006   34-625;
                     82-39
2006-1573 3-20-2006  34-622
2006-1583 8-11-2006  2-167
                     10-36;
2006-1590 10-2-2006  10-39;
                     10-61
2006-1592 10-16-2006 2-177
2007-1605 - -2007    34-501
2007-1608 10-15-2007 82-1
2008-1610 - -2008    2-179
2009-1569 3-6-2009   82-278
2009-1627 5-4-2009   82-1
2009-1630 - -2009    94-18
2010-1644 2-1-2010   2-136
2010-1647 7-19-2010  2-178
2010-1648 8-23-2010  34-622;
                     82-39
                     94-5;
2011-1655 7-18-2011  94-31;
                     94-240;
                     94-241
2012-1668 5- -2012   34-622;
                     82-39
                     15-1—
2012-1673 11-19-2012 15-8,
                     15-10,
                     15-11
2013-1678 6-17-2013  94-18
2013-1680 8-19-2013  74-1
2014-1686 6-16-2014  38-46;
                     38-47
                     42-1—
                     42-16;
                     42-25—
2014-1688 9-15-2014  42-27;
                     42-40—
                     42-47;
                     42-60—
                     42-66
2015-1702 8-24-2015  82-81—
                     82-86
2015-1705 11-16-2015 2-180
2016-1709 2-1-2016   30-66—
                     30-68
2016-1710 2-1-2016   86-32—
                     86-35
2017-1745 2-1-2016   86-32—
                     86-35
2016-1712 4-4-2016   78-240—
                     78-250
2016-1717 5-16-2016  2-182
2016-1720 6-20-2016  2-181
2016-1722 7-18-2016  2-137
2017-1735 1-17-2017  54-3
2017-1739 2-21-2017  10-66
2017-1740 3-13-2017  54-4
                     94-5,
2017-1742 4- -2017   94-37,
                     94-107
2017-1744 5-5-2017   30-66—
                     30-68
2017-1746 6-5-2017   78-171
2017-1748 6-5-2017   15-1—
                     15-11
2017-1751 8-7-2017   70-41—
                     70-46
2017-1752 8-7-2017   82-87
2017-1757 9-5-2017   94-222
2017-1760 10-2-2017  2-183
2017-1761 10-2-2017  2-184
2018-1769 3-5-2018   2-138
2018-1778 8-20-2018  14-3
2018-532  10-22-2018 54-1
2019-1801 8-19-2019  34-626
2019-1811 11-18-2019 46-51—
                     46-56
2019-1812 11-18-2019 38-61—
                     38-66
                    
 
