
North Manchester, IN Code of Ordinances


NORTH MANCHESTER,
INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Current through Local Legislation Ord. No. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




TOWN OFFICIALS
OF
NORTH MANCHESTER, INDIANA



 



Chalmer Tobias
 
Council President


Laura Rager
 
Council Vice-President


Tom Dale
 
Member


Allen Miracle
 
Member


Jim Smith
 
Member


 
 
 


Adam Penrod
 
Town Manager


Carrie Mugford
 
Clerk-Treasurer


Matthew J. Mize
 
Town Attorney




 



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



      11.   TOWN STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of code



   10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices; name designations



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Repeal or modification of code section



   10.12   Limitation periods



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Section histories; statutory references



   10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“North Manchester Town Code”, for which designation “code of
ordinances”, “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.
Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the code.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.



   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws,
amendments thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or
amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and
effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code. All rules and
regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full
force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of
this code.



   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is
continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that
appropriation.



   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does
not resolve a conflict between two or more sections.



   (D)   (1)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be
resolved by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted.



      (2)   The section most recently enacted supersedes any
conflicting section or division.



   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.



   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings
assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this
code, as originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be
altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any
official publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive
headings are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning,
application or construction of the law they precede.



      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for
reference purposes only and is not a part of the section.



   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all
subsequent amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.



(I.C. 1-1-1-5)



§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the
following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
legislative intent or context of the provision.



      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. Technical  words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate  meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.



      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons
shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless
otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.



      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the
performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.



      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include
the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a
verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.



      COUNCIL. The North Manchester Town Council.



      COUNTY. Wabash County, Indiana.



      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



      MONTH. One calendar month.



      PERSON.



         (a)   Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic.



         (b)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any
unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions
in this code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next
preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is
designated.



      STATE. The State of Indiana.



      TOWN. North Manchester, Indiana.



      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.



         (a)   Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters.



         (b)   Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the
person’s mark.



      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.



(I.C. 1-1-4-5)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently
amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.



   (B)   (1)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this
code containing a non-severability provision, each division or part of every
section is severable.



      (2)   If any portion or application of a section is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:



         (a)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



         (b)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless
of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.



   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the
provisions of a chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in
division (B) above does not affect the operation of division (B) above with
respect to that chapter, subchapter or section.



(I.C. 1-1-1-8)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer
shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the town
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.



   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the
Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that
name designation is incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that
ordinance or following the effective date, the rights, powers, duties or
liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different
entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the
ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or
the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were
transferred.



(I.C. 1-1-6-1)



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.



      (2)   If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a state
holiday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.



   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section
or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law
is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section
shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred
under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The
section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of
sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the
penalty, forfeiture or liability.



(I.C. 1-1-5-1)



§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.



   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or
to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and
forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall
not be affected by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and
prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date
of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this
code had not been enacted.



Statutory reference:



   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   (1)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the
existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.



      (2)   In addition to an indication thereof as may appear in
the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in
concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.15  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed
5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25,
passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example: (I.C. 36-5-2-2)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in a previous year and subsequently amended,
the previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(Prior Code, §     )”.



§ 10.16  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the
effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as
provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date
of this code. The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued;
punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if
this code had not been enacted.



   (B)   In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the
acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of this code of ordinances shall be guilty
of an offense. Except in cases where a different penalty is prescribed by any
ordinance of the town, any person convicted of an offense shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $2,500.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. II, Art. II)



CHAPTER 11:  TOWN STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   Official seal



§ 11.01  OFFICIAL SEAL.



   The official seal of the town shall be of circular form, one and
one-half inches in diameter with the numbers in the center – 1837-1874 –
encircled by a scroll with the inscription, “The Town of North Manchester,
Indiana”.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. II, Art. I)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   TOWN COUNCIL



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



      32.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



CHAPTER 30:  TOWN COUNCIL



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Designation of legislative body



   30.02   Terms of Council members



   30.03   Council President; selection



   30.04   Quorum



   30.05   When majority or two-thirds vote required



   30.06   Clerk-Treasurer to break ties



   30.07   When ordinance takes effect



   30.08   Meetings



   30.09   Compensation




Election Districts




   30.20   Election of Council members



   30.21   Council member districts




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  DESIGNATION OF LEGISLATIVE BODY.



   The legislative body of the town shall be known as the “Town
Council” and shall consist of five members elected at large by the voters
of the whole town.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 1)



§ 30.02  TERMS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   Each member of the Town Council shall serve a four-year term, beginning
at noon on January 1 after his or her election and continuing until his or
her successor is elected and qualified.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 2)



§ 30.03  COUNCIL PRESIDENT; SELECTION.



   The Town Council shall select one of its members to be its President
and one of its members to be its Vice President for a definite term. The term
shall not exceed the term of the office as a member of the legislative body.
The President of the Town Council is the Town Executive. In the absence of
the President, the Vice President shall preside at meetings and shall act as
the ex-officio Town Executive in the absence of the President.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 3)



§ 30.04  QUORUM.



   A majority of all the elected members (three) of the Town Council
constitutes a quorum.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 4)



§ 30.05  WHEN MAJORITY OR TWO-THIRDS VOTE REQUIRED.



   (A)   A majority vote of the Town Council is required to pass an
ordinance, unless a greater vote is required by statute. A MAJORITY VOTE
means at least a majority vote of all the elected members.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 5)



   (B)   A two-thirds vote (four) with unanimous consent of the members
present is required to pass an ordinance on the same day or at the same
meeting at which it is introduced. A TWO-THIRDS VOTE means at least a
two-thirds vote of all the elected members.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 6)



§ 30.06  CLERK-TREASURER TO BREAK TIES.



   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is the Clerk of the Town Council. Whenever the
membership of the Town Council shall consist of an even number of members for
any reason, such as death, resignation or removal from office, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall become an ex-officio member for the purpose of casting
the deciding vote to break a tie.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 7)



§ 30.07  WHEN ORDINANCE TAKES EFFECT.



   (A)   An ordinance, order or resolution passed by the Town Council
becomes effective when signed by the President of the Council unless the
ordinance, order or resolution, by its own terms, establishes the date upon
which it takes effect.



   (B)   If required by statute, an adopted ordinance, order or
resolution must be promulgated or published before it takes effect.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 8)



§ 30.08  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held monthly at
a time and date approved by resolution during the first meeting of the Town
Council each year and such other meetings as may be necessary for the
transaction of the business of the town.



   (B)   All meetings of the Town Council shall be announced and
conducted in accordance with the state’s Open Door statutes, being I.C.
5-14-1.5.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 9)



§ 30.09  COMPENSATION.



   The Town Council shall, by ordinance, fix the compensation of its own
members, the Town Clerk-Treasurer and the Town Marshal. The Council shall
provide reasonable compensation for other town officers and employees. The
compensation of an elected town officer may not be changed in the year for
which it is fixed, nor may it be reduced below the amount fixed for the year
1980.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 10)




ELECTION DISTRICTS




§ 30.20  ELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   The legislative body of the town shall be composed of five
Council members, to be known collectively as the “Town Council”.



   (B)   Candidates for Town Council shall reside within the election
district for which they seek the office and shall be nominated by the voters
of the same election district.



   (C)   Council members shall be elected at large by a plurality of
the votes cast for the office within the entire town.



   (D)   One member of the Council shall be elected from each election
district, as hereinafter defined, commencing in 1993, under and as provided
for by the Election Code of the state.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. II, § 1)



§ 30.21  COUNCIL MEMBER DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The five legislative body election districts of the town shall
be as follows:



      (1)   District 1. The entire area embraced within the
corporate boundaries of the town. District 1 includes all of Chester Township
Precincts 3, 4, 5 and 6 as now established by the county’s Board of
Commissioners;



      (2)   District 2. Beginning at the intersection of Westchester
Drive and Indiana Highway 13; thence north along Indiana Highway 13 and
Meridian Street to the intersection of Meridian Street and the Conrail
right-of-way; thence southeasterly, east and southerly, following the north
corporate limits of the town, so as to include Clear Creek Estates, to
Indiana Highway 13; thence east along said highway to its intersection with
Market Street; thence south on Market Street to its intersection with Ninth
Street; thence west on Ninth Street to its intersection with Maple Street;
thence south on Maple Street to its intersection with Fourth Street; thence
west on Fourth Street, and vacated Fourth Street, to its intersection with
Kech Street; thence south on Kech Street to its intersection with Westchester
Drive; thence west on Westchester Drive to the place of beginning. District 2
shall be co-extensive with Chester Township Precinct 6, as now established by
the county’s Board of Commissioners;



      (3)   District 3. The area within the corporate limits of the
town lying south of the following boundary: beginning at the intersection of
Indiana Highway 13 and Westchester Drive; thence east on Westchester Drive to
Kech Street; thence north on Kech Street to Fourth Street; thence east on
Fourth Street to Sycamore Street; thence south on Sycamore Street to Main
Street; thence east on Main Street (and Indiana Highway 114) to the east
corporate limits of the town. District 3 shall be co-extensive with Chester
Township Precinct 3, as now established by the county’s Board of
Commissioners;



      (4)   District 4. Commencing at the intersection of Main and
Sycamore Street; thence north on Sycamore Street to Kohser Street; thence
east on Kohser Street to Wayne Street; thence north on Wayne Street to
Indiana Highway 13; thence northeasterly along said highway to the point of
its intersection with Blickenstaff Road (on the north) and East Street on the
south; thence south on East Street to the point where the corporate limit
runs east; thence east along the corporate limit to the northeast corner of
Hilsamer Addition; thence south along the east corporate limit to Second
Street Extended; thence east on Second Street extended to its intersection
with State Highway 114; thence westerly along Indiana Highway 114 (and Main
Street) to its intersection with Sycamore Street, the place of beginning.
District 4 shall be co-extensive with Chester Township Precinct 4, as now
established by the county’s Board of Commissioners; and



      (5)   District 5. Beginning at the intersection of Maple and
Fourth Streets; thence north on Maple Street to Ninth Street; thence east on
Ninth Street to its intersection with Market Street; thence north on Market
Street to Indiana Highway 13; thence easterly and northeasterly along said
highway to its intersection with East Street (on the south) and Blickenstaff
Road (on the north); thence following the courses and distances set forth in
Exhibit A to Special Ord. 6, 1988, being an ordinance effecting an annexation
of land to the town, so as to include that annexed land in District 5.
District 5 shall be coextensive with Chester Township Precinct 5, as now
established by the county’s Board of Commissioners.



   (B)   Any territory annexed by the town subsequent to the enactment
of this section shall be and become a part of the election district to which
such annexed territory is appurtenant.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 2)  (Ord. passed 7-11-2002)



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



   31.01   Petty cash funds



   31.02   Internal control standards



   31.03   Appointed officials



   31.04   Clerk-Treasurer



   31.05   Town Manager



   31.06   Nepotism policy



§ 31.01  PETTY CASH FUNDS.



   A petty cash fund shall be established for the Water, Wastewater, Storm
Water, MVH, Parks, Town Manager and Town Hall Departments in the amount of
$100 for each department. These petty cash funds are to be reconciled and
balanced on a regular basis. Funds will be replenished by completing a claim
form with proof of the use of the funds and submitted through the normal
claims process. Each department head shall be responsible for said petty cash
funds.



(Ord. -, 2017, passed - -2017)



§ 31.02  INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.



   (A)   The town hereby adopts the Internal Control Policy attached to
the ordinance codified herein and incorporated as if set out in full.



   (B)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer was directed to ensure that all
personnel receive training concerning the internal control procedures adopted
and approved herein prior to 6-30-2016.



   (C)   The town hereby adopts a materiality threshold of $500 for
purposes of the internal control procedures adopted and approved herein.



(Ord. 1, passed - -2016)



§ 31.03  APPOINTED OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The Town Council shall appoint the Town Marshal, Town
Attorney, Building Commissioner, Fire Chief, Town Manager and members of the
boards and commissions authorized by law or ordinance.



   (B)   The Town Council may combine the duties of Marshal, Street and
Utilities Commissioner and Chief of the Fire Department in one appointee.



   (C)   Appointed officials shall have the duties as prescribed by the
Town Council and as provided by law.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. IV)



§ 31.04  CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is both the Town Clerk and the Town Fiscal
Officer.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the powers and duties as
prescribed by I.C. 36-5-6-6.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer may appoint the number of deputies and
employees authorized by the Town Council, each of whom shall serve at the
pleasure of the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. III)



§ 31.05  TOWN MANAGER.



   (A)   The administrative head of the government of the town shall be
the Town Manager.



   (B)   The Town Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Town
Council which shall fix the compensation and determine terms of employment.



   (C)   The Town Manager shall execute a bond for the faithful
performance of his or her duties.



   (D)   The Town Manager shall exercise the powers and duties
enumerated in I.C. 36-5-5-8 and such other powers and duties as may from time
to time be authorized by ordinance or written order of the Town Council.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. V)



§ 31.06  NEPOTISM POLICY.



   (A)   Purpose. Decisions about hiring, promoting, evaluating,
awarding salary increases, job assignment, terminating employees, and the
awarding of contracts for goods, services, and public works projects should
be based on the qualifications, performance, and ability of the employee or
contractor. Every attempt to avoid favoritism and conflicts of interest in
employment related and contractual decisions instills confidence of the
electorate in its government. The purpose of this policy is to prohibit
certain individuals from being employed by the town in a position in which a
relative, as defined in this section, provides direct supervision.
Additionally, this policy regulates contracting with relatives of individuals
employed by the town for goods, services, and public works projects.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BREAK IN EMPLOYMENT. Termination, retirement, or resignation of
an employee from the town, A break in employment does not occur due to
absence from the workplace while on a paid or unpaid leave, including but not
limited to: vacation, personal days, sick or family medical leave, or
worker's compensation leave, or if the employment is terminated followed by
immediate re-employment by the town without loss of payroll time.



      DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION. An elected officer or employee who is
in a position to affect the terms and conditions of another individual's
employment. Such affect may include, but is not limited to, making decisions
about work assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement, or performance
evaluation. Decisions and action taken by the Town Manager or Town Council
regarding the passage of annual salary ordinances, annual budgets, and
personnel policies are excluded from this definition.



      ELECTED OFFICIAL. Members of the Town Council.



      EMPLOYED. An individual who works for or is appointed to any
department or board of the town on a full-time, part-time, temporary,
intermittent, seasonal, hourly, or contractual basis.



      MEMBER OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT. The fire chief and any firefighter
appointed to the Town Fire Department.



      MEMBER OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT. The police chief and any police
officer appointed to the Police Department.



      RELATIVE. For the purposes of this section, the term includes any
of the following:



         (a)   Spouse;



         (b)   Parent or step-parent;



         (c)   Child or step-child (includes an adopted child);



         (d)   Sister, brother, step-sister, step-brother
(includes sister or brother by half blood);



         (e)   Niece or nephew;



         (f)   Aunt or uncle;



         (g)   Daughter-in-law or son-in-law; and



         (h)   Sister-in-law or brother-in-law.



      TOWN. The Town of North Manchester, its boards and departments.



   (C)   Employment policy.



      (1)   Individuals who are relatives, as defined in division
(B) above, of existing employees may not be employed by the town in a
position that results in one relative being in the direct line of supervision
of the other relative.



      (2)   An individual who is employed by the town on July 1,
2012, is not subject to this nepotism policy unless the individual has a
break in employment, as defined herein, with the town.



      (3)   If an individual is employed by the town and the
individual's relative begins serving a term of elected office, the individual
may continue his or her employment with the town and retain his or her
position or rank even if that individual's position or rank would be in the
direct line of supervision of the individual's relative.



      (4)   While an individual who is employed by the town and the
individual's relative begins serving a term of elected office may continue
his or her employment with the town, that individual may not be promoted to a
position or rank if the new position or rank would place that individual
within the direct line of supervision of the individual's relative.



   (D)   Contracting policy. The town may enter into or renew a
contract for the procurement of goods, services, or public works projects
with a relative of an elected official or a business entity in which a
relative has an ownership interest if:



      (1)   The elected official files with the town a full
disclosure, which must be:



         (a)   In writing;



         (b)   Describe the contract or purchase to be made by
the town; and



         (c)   Describe the relationship the elected official has
to the individual or business entity that provides the contract for goods,
services or public works projects.



      (2)   The appropriate town board or department:



         (a)   Issues a certified statement that the contract
amount or purchase price was the lowest amount or price bid offered; or



         (b)   Issues a certified statement detailing the reasons
why the particular vendor or contractor was selected.



      (3)   The town satisfies all other requirements of Indiana's
public purchasing (I.C. 5-22) or public works projects (I.C. 36-1-12)
statutes.



      (4)   The elected official complies with disclosure provisions
of I.C. 35-44-1-3.



   (E)   Submission of compliance statements. In addition to any other
disclosures or certifications required by this section, the following actions
must be taken:



      (1)   The annual report filed by the town with the State Board
of Accounts under I.C. 5-11-13-1 must include a Town Manager's statement that
the town has implemented a nepotism policy with regard to employment matters
and the contracting for the procurement of goods and services.



      (2)   Prior to December 31 of each year, each elected officer
shall submit to the Town Manager a certification in writing, subject to the
penalties of perjury, that said officer has not violated the provisions of
the town's nepotism policy with regard to employment matters and the
contracting for the procurement of goods and services.



(Ord. 5, 2012, passed 6-6-2012)



CHAPTER 32:  TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



Section



   32.01   Park and Recreation Board



   32.02   Plan Commission



   32.03   Department of Economic Development; Economic Development
Commission



   32.04   Traffic Commission



   32.05   Police Reserve



   32.06   Tree Advisory Commission



   32.07   Department of Storm Water Management



   32.08   Department of Redevelopment; Redevelopment Commission



   32.09   Tax Abatement Review Committee



   32.10   Community Development Block Grant Commission



§ 32.01  PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.



   (A)   Under the provision of I.C. 36-10-3, there is hereby created
the town’s Parks and Recreation Board.



   (B)   A Parks and Recreation Board shall be composed of four members
and an ex-officio member from the members of the School Board of the
Manchester Community Schools. The members shall be appointed by the Town
Council on the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks and
recreation. No more than two members shall be of the same political party.
The ex-officio member shall be appointed by members of the School Board of
Manchester Community Schools and shall have all the rights of a member,
including the right to vote.



   (C)   The original appointments to the Board by the Town Council
shall be for staggered terms of one, two, three and four years. Thereafter,
as a term expires, each new appointment should be for a four-year term. All
terms shall expire on the first Monday in January, but the appointee shall
continue in office until a successor is appointed. If an appointment for a
new term is not made by the Town Council by the first Monday in April, the
incumbent shall serve another term. If a vacancy occurs, the Town Council
shall appoint a new member for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (D)   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall
elect a President and Vice President. The Vice President shall have authority
to act as the President of the Board during the absence or disability of the
President. The Board may select a Secretary either from within or without its
own membership.



   (E)   The Board shall have the power to perform all acts necessary
to acquire and develop sites and facilities and to conduct such programs as
are generally understood to be parks and recreation functions. In addition,
the Board shall have the powers and duties listed in I.C. 36-10-3 et seq.



   (F)   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the
same manner as other departments of town government as prescribed by the
state’s Board of Accounts and Department of Local Government Finance. The
Board may accept gifts, donations and subsidies for parks and recreation
purposes.



   (G)   The Board shall have the power and shall exercise the
functions given to it by law as the same now exist or may hereafter be
amended or enacted, but subject to such limitations and restrictions as the
Town Council may, from time to time, by ordinance establish.



(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. I, Art. I)  (Ord. 9, 2015, passed 12-16-2015)



§ 32.02  PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby established an advisory Town Plan Commission
under I.C. 36-7-4-200 et seq.



   (B)   The membership of the town’s Plan Commission shall be
provided by I.C. 36-7-4-207 and 36-7-4-214. The Town Council shall appoint
one of its own members to serve as a member of the Plan Commission, and the
Street Commissioner and Town Marshal shall complete the membership from the
municipal government.



   (C)   Four citizen members residing within the town shall be
appointed by the President of the Town Council for initial terms of two years
and two members for four years, in accordance with the provisions of said
statute, no more than two of whom shall be of the same political party.



   (D)   The President of the County Commissioners shall appoint two
additional citizen members who reside in the unincorporated area over which
the Plan Commission exercises jurisdictional authority and be of opposite
political parties, which appointments shall be for terms of four years.



   (E)   The town’s Plan Commission shall exercise, on behalf of the
town, all of the powers and duties as prescribed by I.C. 36-7-4-100 et seq.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XI)



§ 32.03  DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT; ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
COMMISSION.



   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted by I.C. 36-7-12-1 et seq., there
is hereby created the town’s Department of Economic Development, to be
controlled by a commission known as the “North Manchester Economic
Development Commission”.



   (B)   The members of the town’s Economic Development Commission
shall be appointed by the Town Executive. One of the members shall be
selected by the Town Executive; one shall be nominated by the County Council;
and one shall be nominated by the Town Council.



   (C)   Terms of members of the town’s Economic Development
Commission shall run from February 1 after their original appointment for a
period of three years, if selected by the Town Executive; two years, if
nominated by the Town Council; and one year, if nominated by the County
Council.



   (D)   The powers and duties of the town’s Economic Development
Commission shall be as prescribed by I.C. 36-7-12-1 et seq.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XII)



§ 32.04  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a commission to be
known and designated as the “North Manchester Traffic Commission”.



   (B)   The Commission shall be responsible for: developing and
implementing coordinated traffic safety programs which meet local needs;
acting in an advisory capacity to the Town Council in the coordination of
traffic safety activities, including the initiation and formulation of
recommendations to the Town Council regarding new traffic safety ordinances
and amendment of existing traffic ordinances; establishing traffic safety
priorities for the town; reviewing and approving project applications for
funding; serving in a liaison capacity between the town and the state’s
Department of Traffic Safety in developing state highway safety programs and
in meeting the National Highway Safety Program standards; promoting public
acceptance of official programs proposed or instigated by the town; fostering
public knowledge and support of traffic law enforcement and traffic
engineering problems; cooperating with schools in promoting educational
traffic safety aids; educating the public in traffic safety; and generally
aiding the overall reduction of traffic accidents, injuries and deaths on
town streets.



   (C)   (1)   Membership. The Commission shall consist of nine
official members as follows: Town Marshal and Town Manager, ex-officio; a
member of the Town Council; and a student representative of Manchester
Community Schools and Manchester College, each of whom shall be appointed by
the Town Council to serve for a term of one calendar year or until his or her
successor is appointed; and four other members who are determined to be
representative of the town’s community, each of whom shall be appointed by
the Town Council, for a term to two years and until their respective
successors are appointed; provided that, two of the initial four appointees
shall be for a term of one calendar year. All appointive terms shall expire
December 31.



      (2)   Unofficial members. The Commission is hereby authorized
to appoint an unofficial member of said Commission at any meeting where a
quorum is present. Unofficial members shall not have voting privileges.



      (3)   Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Commission shall be
selected annually in the January meeting, upon nomination by a member of the
Commission and election by majority.



      (4)   Secretary. The Chairperson of the Commission shall:
appoint the Secretary of the Commission, whose duty it shall be to send all
notices for special meetings of the Commission; keep and preserve the
minutes; place all documents and papers of the Commission for safekeeping
with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town; advise and consult with the Town
Council as to the work and recommendations of said Commission; work with said
Commission and its sub-committees, if any; work with organized community
groups and others to carry forward all plans and policies of the Commission
as to accident prevention which may be approved by the Commission; and to
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by said Commission.



      (5)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet once each month at a
predetermined time and shall meet on the call of the Chairperson or on call
by the majority of its members.



      (6)   Quorum. Five official members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of any business or the making of any recommendation.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      POLICE, OFFICERS, POLICE DEPARTMENT and TRAFFIC DIVISION. As used
in Ord. 6, 1983, the Marshal of the town.



      TRAFFIC ENGINEER and TRAFFIC COMMISSIONER. As used in Ord. 6,
1983, the Town Manager of the town, who shall, by virtue of appointment as
Town Manager, be the Traffic Engineer and Traffic Commissioner.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XIII)



§ 32.05  POLICE RESERVE.



   (A)   Pursuant to provisions of I.C. 36-8-3-20, there is hereby
authorized and created a Police Reserve of the town, as follows.



      (1)   The number of Police Reserves shall not exceed 12.



      (2)   Police Reserves shall be appointed by the Town Council,
upon recommendation.



      (3)   Police Reserves may not be members of the regular police
force, but shall have all of the same police powers of such Marshal and
Deputy Marshals, except as limited by the rules of the Department. The
Department is hereby authorized to adopt rules to limit the authority of
Police Reserves; provided that, before such rules shall take effect, they
shall have been approved by the Town Council and filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer.



      (4)   Police Reserves may not participate in any pension
program provided for regular members of the Department.



   (B)   To the extent that the funds for benefits are appropriated by
ordinance of the Town Council, Police Reserves may:



      (1)   Receive a uniform allowance;



      (2)   Receive compensation for time lost from other employment
because of court appearances; and



      (3)   Be insured for life, accident and sickness coverage.



   (C)   No Police Reserves shall be appointed until completing the
training and probationary period to be specified by rule of the Department,
which rule shall, prior to its implementation, be approved by the Town
Council and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XIV)



§ 32.06  TREE ADVISORY COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a commission to be
known and designated as the “North Manchester Tree Advisory Commission”.



   (B)   (1)   Membership. The Commission shall consist of five
official members, as follows: Town Manager, who shall serve ex-officio; a
member of the Town Council or another designated resident of the town, as
selected by the presiding officer of Town Council; and three citizen members,
each such appointee to be designated by majority vote of the Town Council.
Each member shall serve until a successor is appointed and assumes the
responsibilities of the position. From among the members of the Commission,
the Commission members shall designate a Chairperson. Citizen members of the
Commission appointed by the Town Council shall serve for a term of two years
and until a successor has been appointed; provided that, the initial
appointees shall serve for terms of two, three and four years, the term of
each initial appointee to be fixed by the appointing authority.



      (2)   Advisory members.



         (a)   The Commission is authorized to appoint advisory
members to the Commission at any meeting of the Commission at which a quorum
is present.



         (b)   Advisory members shall not have the right to vote.



      (3)   Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Commission shall be
selected at its first meeting and annually thereafter in the month of
January, upon nomination by a member of the Commission and election by a
majority of the Commission membership.



      (4)   Secretary. The Chairperson of the Commission shall
appoint the Secretary of the Commission, whose duty it shall be to deliver
written notices to members for special meeting of the Commission; keep and
preserve its minutes; and to place all documents and papers of the Commission
for safekeeping with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



      (5)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet during the month of
January and not less frequently than quarter annually at predetermined times
and places and shall convene in special meetings on the call of the
Chairperson or on call by a majority of its membership, upon 48 hours’
written notice.



      (6)   Quorum. Three members of the Commission shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of any business or the making of any
recommendation, and actions shall be deemed authorized if carried by a
majority of a quorum. Voting by proxy shall not be authorized.



   (C)   The Commission shall be responsible for advising the Town
Council:



      (1)   In matters concerning the maintenance, removal and
replacement of trees in tree lawns;



      (2)   In matters relating to the collection and disposal of
fallen leaves;



      (3)   Providing educational information to residents regarding
the value and care of trees;



      (4)   Of means and methods of improving the overall aesthetic
appearance of the town by recommending plans for visually appealing tree
canopies and town entrance ways;



      (5)   Means and methods of enhancing the quality of air for
persons in the town and to assist in the recycling of natural resources; and



      (6)   Means and methods of removing the danger from trees in
poor condition while improving the town’s visual appearance.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XV)



§ 32.07  DEPARTMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   I.C. 8-1.5-5-1 et seq. authorizing ways and means for
municipalities to effectively address storm water management is hereby
adopted as the law of the town.



   (B)   A Department of Storm Water Management is hereby established.



   (C)   The Department of Storm Water Management shall be controlled
by a Board of Directors, consisting of three Directors, each of whom shall be
appointed by the Town Executive, and not more than two of whom may be of the
same political party. Not more than two of the Directors may be appointed
from among the Town Manager, Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant
and duly elected member of the Town Council. The initial terms of the first
Directors appointed shall be one year, two years and three years, as fixed by
the Town Executive. The term of each appointee commences on the first day of
the calendar month following the appointment. All subsequent appointments
shall be for a term of three years subject to earlier removal of a Director
from office by the Town Executive when, in the judgment of the Executive,
such removal is for the best interest of the Department.



   (D)   (1)   The Board of Directors has general supervisory powers
over the Department of Storm Water Management and the specific powers
prescribed (for a municipally-owned utility board) by I.C. 8-1.5-3-4(a).



      (2)   In addition to the foregoing, the Board may: hold
hearings following public notice; make findings and determinations; install,
maintain and operate a storm water collection and disposal system; make all
necessary or desirable improvements of the grounds and premises under its
control; and issue and sell bonds of the district in the name of the
municipality for the acquisition, construction, alteration, addition or
extension of the storm water collection and disposal system or for the
refunding of any bonds issued by the Board.



      (3)   The Board has exclusive jurisdiction over the collection
and disposal of storm water within the district.



   (E)   The Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant shall act
as Superintendent of the Storm Water Management Department, and shall have
and possess the powers and duties, prescribed by I.C. 8-1.5-3-5(a), as well
as the powers specifically set forth in I.C. 8-1.5-5-6; provided, however,
compensation of the Superintendent shall be fixed by the Town Council.



   (F)   There is hereby created a special taxing district for the
purpose of providing for the collection and disposal of storm water to the
district which includes all territory within the corporate boundaries of the
town.



   (G)   The Fiscal Officer for the Department of Storm Water
Management shall be the Clerk-Treasurer of the town, who shall receive and
disburse all funds of the Department. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be custodian
of all department records and shall designate a Deputy Clerk to act as
Secretary for the Board.



   (H)   The Board may not issue any bonds authorized by I.C. 8-1.5-5
until it has secured the approval for the issuance of the bonds from the Town
Council.



   (I)   All other provisions of I.C. Title 8, Art. 1.5, Ch. 5, not
inconsistent with the specific provisions of this section are adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVII)  (Ord. passed 10-7-1992)



§ 32.08  DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT; REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Department of Redevelopment of the
town, which shall be entitled to exercise all the rights, powers, privileges
and immunities accorded to such department by the Act, being I.C. 36-7-14 and
36-7-14.5.



   (B)   Such Department of Redevelopment of the town shall be under
the control of the Board of five members to be known as the “North
Manchester Redevelopment Commission”.



   (C)   (1)   There is hereby created a Board to be known as the
“North Manchester Redevelopment Commission”. Three of said Commissioners
shall be appointed by the President of the Town Council and two members of
said Commission shall be appointed by the Town Council. Each Redevelopment
Commissioner shall serve for one year from the first day of January after his
or her appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and has
qualified; except that, the original Commissioners shall serve from the date
of their appointment until the first day of January in the second year after
their appointment. If a vacancy occurs, a successor shall be appointed in the
same manner as the original Commissioner and the successor shall serve for
the remainder of the vacated term.



      (2)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before beginning his or
her duties, shall take and subscribe an oath of office, to be endorsed on the
certificate of his or her appointment, which shall be promptly filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



      (3)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before beginning his or
her duties, shall execute a bond payable to the state, with surety to be
approved by the President of the Town Council. The bond must be conditioned
on the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office and the
accounting for all moneys and property that may come into his or her hands or
under his or her control. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the
Redevelopment District.



      (4)   There shall be appointed, by the President of the Town
Council, a non-voting advisor appointed to the Redevelopment Commission from
the Manchester Community School Board. The advisor is not considered a member
of the Commission, but is entitled to attend and participate in the
proceedings of all meetings of the Redevelopment Commission. The advisor
serves at the pleasure of the entity that appointed the advisor. The advisor
shall serve a term that is the same as the Redevelopment Commissioners.



   (D)   Such Commissioners shall have the qualifications prescribed by
the laws of the state as from time to time amended and shall qualify as
therein provided; and shall exercise and enjoy the rights and powers and
assume the duties and obligations conferred and imposed by said Act,
including, but not limited to, the following qualifications.



      (1)   A Redevelopment Commissioner must be at least 18 years
of age and must be a resident of the town. If a Commissioner ceases to be
qualified under this section, he or she forfeits his or her office.



      (2)   No Redevelopment Commissioner of the town shall receive
a salary, but such Redevelopment Commissioners are entitled to reimbursement
for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.



      (3)   A Redevelopment Commissioner may not have a pecuniary
interest in any contract, employment, purchase or sale made under the
provisions of this section and the Act, being I.C. 36-7-14 and 36-7-14.5.
However, any property required for redevelopment purposes in which a
Commissioner has a pecuniary interest may be acquired, but only by gift or
condemnation. A transaction made in violation of this section of this section
is void.



      (4)   The President of the Town Council or the Town Council
that appointed a Commissioner may summarily remove that Commissioner from
office at any time.



   (E)   The Redevelopment Commission shall hold a meeting for the
purpose of organization not later than 30 days after the Commissioners are
appointed and, after that, each year on the first day in January that is not
a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. The Commissioners shall choose one of
their members as President, another as Vice President and another as
Secretary. These officers shall perform the duties usually pertaining to
their offices and shall serve from the date of their election until their
successors are elected and qualified. In addition to the annual meeting, the
Commissioners may, by resolution or in accordance with their rules and
by-laws, prescribe the date and manner of notice of other regular or special
meetings.



   (F)   The Redevelopment Commissioners may adopt the rules and
by-laws they consider necessary for the proper conduct of their proceedings
and carrying out their duties. Three of the Commissioners constitute a quorum
and the concurrence of three Commissioners is necessary to authorize any
action.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVIII)  (Ord. 8, passed 10-1-2008)



§ 32.09  TAX ABATEMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Tax Abatement Review Committee
for the town. The Committee shall consist of five members, each of whom shall
be appointed by the President of the Town Council, to serve at the pleasure
of a majority of the Town Council and until a successor is appointed and
qualified by the taking of an oath of office. One Committee appointment shall
be made from the membership of each of the Economic Development Commission,
the Plan Commission and Town Council. The remaining two members of the
Committee shall be appointed from the membership of the town’s Chamber of
Commerce Executive Board, one of whom shall represent the Industrial Division
thereof. All Committee members shall reside within the corporate limits of
the town.



   (B)   Within 30 days after its appointment, the Tax Abatement Review
Committee shall be convened in meeting by call of the President of the Town
Council, at which meeting the Committee shall organize by its selection of a
Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall thereafter preside at
meetings of the Committee and the proceedings of the Committee shall be
reduced to writing by the Secretary and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of the
town. The Committee shall thereafter organize annually at its first regular
meeting on or after January 1 of each calendar year.



   (C)   Jurisdiction of the Tax Abatement Review Committee shall be as
defined in certain ordinances listed in the Table of Special Ordinances
portion of this code of ordinances.



   (D)   Proceedings of the Tax Abatement Review Committee shall be
subject to the provisions of I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq., commonly known as the
“Indiana Open Door Law”, as now or hereafter amended. Each applicant for
tax abatement shall publish notice of the public hearing thereon by
publishing notice thereof one time, at least ten days before the date of the
hearing in a newspaper, as required and as defined in I.C. 5-3-1-1 et seq.
The cost of publication of notice shall be borne by the applicant, proof of
payment of which shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Committee prior
to the commencement of the hearing on the tax abatement application.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. IV)



§ 32.10  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Community Development Block Grant
Commission to consist of three members, to be selected by majority vote of
the Town Council from among bonafide residents of the town, not less than one
of whom shall be a member of the Town Council, and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Town Council and until their respective successors have been
appointed by action of the Town Council.



   (B)   (1)   The Commission shall administer and prescribe the
terms and conditions of community development block grants received by the
town in accordance with all requirements prescribed by law of the United
States of America and of the state in accordance with procedures prescribed
by law and in accordance with the instructions contained in the Grantee
Implementation Manual prepared by the Division of Internal Audit of the
state’s Department of Commerce, revised February, 1988, which manual is
incorporated herein by reference.



      (2)   The Commission shall screen applicants for loans of
recaptured funds and shall recommend to the Town Council those applicants
selected by the Commission to receive loans from recaptured funds.



      (3)   Loans of recaptured funds shall meet all requirements
for loans of original grant funds as prescribed by applicable federal and
state law and in accordance with the additional standards as may from time to
time be prescribed by the Town Council.



      (4)   Meetings of the Community Development Block Grant
Commission shall be convened and held as needed and as determined by the
Commission, or on call by the President of the Town Council, and shall be
subject to the requirements of I.C. 5-14-1.5 et seq.



   (C)   Subject to the requirements of federal and state law, proceeds
of loans shall be held and accounted for as miscellaneous revenues of the
town dedicated to economic development of the community and such other lawful
purposes as may be prescribed by applicable state law, as may from time to
time be prescribed by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. VII)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section



   33.01   Public purchasing



   33.02   Credit card policy



§ 33.01  PUBLIC PURCHASING.



   (A)   The town’s Park and Recreation Board and the Common Council
of the town are each constituted as purchasing agencies.



   (B)   The purchasing agent for the town’s Park and Recreation
Board is its Executive Director appointed by its Board, and the purchasing
agent for the town is the Town Manager; provided, however, prior to the
solicitation of bids or proposals for the purchase of supplies by the Park
and Recreation Board, the request for proposals (or RFP), as defined by I.C.
5-22-2-28, shall be approved by the Town Manager.



   (C)   Each RFP for the purchase of supplies shall be prepared by the
head of the department in which the supplies will be used or consumed and
shall be submitted to the Town Manager for approval before solicitation, as
defined by I.C. 5-22-2-32, is commenced.



   (D)   Prior to approving a RFP, the Town Manager shall make a
reasonable effort to determine that the RFP is complete, does not contain a
requirement that excludes a potentially qualified contractor and, with the
assistance of the Clerk-Treasurer, determine that sufficient appropriated and
unexpended funds are available to fund the RFP.



   (E)   The purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an estimated
cost of less than $25,000 on the open market without inviting or receiving
quotes or bids; provided, the purchasing agent first determines that such
supplies purchased will be of higher quality and for lesser cost than the
same supplies available from a competing contractor. Each purchasing agent
shall review proposals for purchase of supplies available through cooperative
purchasing organizations and, with approval of the Town Council, may purchase
from or through such organizations.



   (F)   Each designated purchasing agent shall comply with the
provisions of I.C. 5-22-5-1 with regard to specifications.



   (G)   All other provisions of I.C. Title 5, Art. 22, are adopted as
applicable to the purchase of supplies by purchasing agencies of the town.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. II, Art. III)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1998)



§ 33.02  CREDIT CARD POLICY.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer and President of the Town Council are
authorized to apply for and establish a credit card (hereinafter called
“card”) account in the name of the town.



   (B)   A sufficient number of duplicate cards shall be obtained to
provide one card for use and control by each of the Clerk-Treasurer, Town
Manager, Directors of the Departments of Parks and Recreation and Public
Safety, Superintendent of Public Works and, collectively, members of the Town
Council, the latter of which cards shall be in custody of the
Clerk-Treasurer. Each named official, except members of the Town Council, is
vested with discretion to entrust the use of his or her card to full-time
employees working under his or her direct or indirect supervision, to incur
credit for goods and services authorized and appropriated in the budget of
the town; provided, however, no materials, equipment, tools or supplies shall
be purchased by use of a card. The card shall not be used for food or
beverages, except when expressly authorized by the Town Manager. When
authorization is given by the Town Manager employees shall be permitted to
purchase food or beverages only in an amount which does not exceed the per
diem amount as set by the Town Council. The word BEVERAGES does not include
alcoholic beverages. Employees shall provide receipts for the authorized
purchase of food and beverages as required by division (C) below. Part-time
employees are not authorized to use a card of the town, but shall be
reimbursed for authorized expenditures by filing a claim with the
Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with procedures approved by the state’s Board
of Accounts and the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   Within 72 hours of a card account purchase, or return to work
assignment, the person authorized to use the card shall return the card to
the custody of the official authorized to hold the card, along with a copy of
all card use receipts identifying the creditor from whom the purchase was
made, the purpose of the purchase, identification of the budget and line
item(s) appropriating funds for the purchase, an itemized listing of all
charges incurred and such other information as may be required by the
Clerk-Treasurer in order to fully comply with rules and regulations of the
state’s Board of Accounts.



   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall pay authorized card charges promptly
so that no interest or carrying charges or penalties will be incurred due to
late payment. An official or employee who causes interest, carrying charges
or a pecuniary penalty to be added to the card account by a failure to timely
provide the information required by division (C) above shall be personally
liable for payment of the interest, carrying charges or pecuniary penalty.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. II, Art. IV)  (Ord. passed 4-12-2000)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      51.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



      52.   WATER



      53.   SEWERS



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Emergency medical services; fees



   50.02   Tree planting




Billing and Collection Practices




   50.15   Billings and fees



   50.16   Methods of acceptable payment




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES; FEES.



   (A)   Effective 1-1-2003, there is hereby imposed, monthly, an
availability fee on each dwelling unit, commercial unit, business unit,
public and governmental unit, and each separate location thereof, in the town
to provide funds for the town to contract for the availability of ambulance
and emergency medical services to residents and other persons residing in, or
being within, the town.



   (B)   (1)   Effective with all billings issued on or after
1-2-2003, the following monthly charges shall be collected and deposited by
the Clerk-Treasurer in the Ambulance and Emergency Medical Services Fund:



         (a)   All dwelling units, commercial entities, business
entities, public and governmental units, and each separate location thereof,
in the town: $2.50;



         (b)   Manchester College: $850*;



         (c)   Timbercrest Church of the Brethren Home, Inc.:
$1,400*; and



         (d)   Peabody Retirement Community: $1,700*.



      (2)   *These charges are based on an economic study of
historical usage of ambulance and emergency medical services made by H. J.
Umbaugh & Associated LLP of Plymouth, IN.



   (C)   (1)   Each unit within the town, as per division (A) above,
shall be subject to the applicable charge stated in division (B)(1) above,
based upon a factual determination made and approved by the Town Council.



      (2)   Charges billed under this section shall be billed,
collected and deposited in the Ambulance and Emergency Medical Services Fund.



   (D)   (1)   A person or other entity subjected to the fee imposed
under division (B)(1) above may appeal its liability for payment of the fees
to the Town Council by filing with the Clerk-Treasurer, in writing, an
objection to its inclusion and stating the reasons why it should not be
subjected to the emergency ambulance services availability fee imposed by
this section.



      (2)   The appeal shall be heard and considered by the Town
Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting to be held ten days after the
date the objection is filed, at which meeting the objector or its
representative must be present for the appeal to be considered.



      (3)   The Town Council may grant exemption from the fee if the
objector established facts that demonstrate that imposition of the fee is
manifestly unreasonable as to the objector.



   (E)   Funds from the Ambulance and Emergency Medical Services Fund
shall be collected by the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, along with late
payment fees and penalties heretofore established for the applicable billing,
and shall be disbursed under the same procedures and approval as provided by
law for other utility funds; provided, however, ambulance and emergency
medical services funds shall be used only for medical services, equipment or
personnel directly related to emergency medical services.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. VII. Art. I)  (Ord. passed 12-18-2002)



§ 50.02  TREE PLANTING.



   (A)   The town does hereby accept the funds from time to time to be
made available by North Manchester Community Foundation, Inc., for the
planting of trees within the corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   The Town Council shall from time to time, by resolution, adopt
criteria for the selection of plantings and for the location thereof, to be
administered by the Town Manager.



   (C)   The tree planting program shall hereafter be known and
designated as the “Dr. Worth M. Walrod Memorial Tree Program”.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. III, Art. I)




BILLING AND COLLECTION PRACTICES




§ 50.15  BILLINGS AND FEES.



   (A)   Enabling ordinances contained in this title fixing water and
sewage rates and charges, and sanitation user fees, and the resolutions of
the Storm Water Management Board fixing storm water user fees have precedence
and, in case of conflict, control the provisions of this subchapter and this
title.



   (B)   Water and sewage billings are computed or estimated on the
basis of water meter readings or estimates of water consumption where charges
are made, but a meter is not in place, to conform to the date of the reading
or estimate. These charges are billed for each period the meter is in
operation or in which water is consumed at the premises.



   (C)   Sanitation and storm water billings are issued for the
calendar month preceding the month in which the billing is mailed and are not
prorated. Sanitation charges shall be prorated to exclude scheduled pick-up
days falling within the month on which the billed user did not occupy the
pick-up location, as evidenced by water utility records. Storm water charges
shall be pro-rated on the basis of actual occupancy days of the user at the
premises during the calendar month for which the billing is issued, as
evidenced by water utility records, and as if each calendar month contains 30
days.



   (D)   Storm water user fees accrue from the date the water meter is
activated at the premises or the first day of the seventh month after the
improvement location permit is issued, whichever occurs first.



   (E)   Billings for water and sewage rates and charges and for
sanitation and storm water user fees are due on the fifteenth day of the
month following the mailing date and a penalty equal to 10% of the charges
unpaid after the due date shall be added to each subsequent billing until the
charges have been paid in full.



   (F)   The Utility Office Supervisor may accept partial payments
provided the payment is at least 50% of the total combined billings and shall
apply the partial payment to emergency medical ambulance charges, water,
trash pick-up, storm water user fees and wastewater treatment charges, in
that order. In case of demonstrated hardship, to be determined by the utility
Office Supervisor, on the basis of credible information, the utility Office
Supervisor may accept lesser partial payments provided a payment agreement is
signed by the debtor(s).



   (G)   Sewage rates and charges and sanitation and storm water user
fees imposed by the town are hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot,
parcel of land, building or premises at or upon which such charges and fees
are incurred and, if the same are not paid within three calendar months after
the same are due and payable, shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder
and certified to the Auditor of the county who shall place the same on the
tax duplicate of said county with the interest and penalties allowed by law
to be collected as ad valorem property taxes are collected.



   (H)   Not later than 30 days after the issuance of any improvement
location permit the Building Inspector shall forward a copy of same to the
Storm Water Superintendent, as well as a copy of the building plans, except
for single-family residence construction where only the improvement location
permit shall be furnished. The Storm Water Superintendent shall certify to
the utility Office Supervisor all new determinations of HISA (horizontal
impervious surface area) for Class B properties, changes in HISA and
reclassification of property from Class A to Class B, approved by the Storm
Water Management Board, a list of newly constructed single-family residences,
along with the addresses of each property and the name of the owner(s)
thereof, on a periodic basis so as to enable the utility Office Supervisor to
issue bills for water and sewage rates and charges and sanitation and storm
water user fees.



   (I)   Charges incurred at a property or premises sold on conditional
sales contract where title is held by a person other than the purchaser or
occupant may be billed to the contract purchaser or occupant provided the
record title holder furnishes acceptable proof of sale to the utility Office
Supervisor.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. V, Art. I)  (Ord. passed 2-2-1995; Ord. passed
11-12-1998; Ord. passed 3-5-2003)



§ 50.16  METHODS OF ACCEPTABLE PAYMENT.



   (A)   It is the fiscal policy of the town to accept payment of
utility rates and charges and user fees by payment in or by:



      (1)   Cash;



      (2)   Check;



      (3)   Bank draft;



      (4)   Money order;



      (5)   Electronic funds transfer (EFT); and



      (6)   Credit/debit card.



   (B)   It is the fiscal policy of the town not to accept payment of
utility rates and charges and user fees by bank card or other credit card, as
that term is defined by I.C. 36-1-8-11.



   (C)   Checks delivered payable to the town in payment of any debt or
other lawful obligation owed to the town or to any unit or department of the
town shall be subject to a service charge of $34 if, after deposit of the
check in or to any account of the town, the check is returned to the town by
the paying institution marked “NSF”, a stop payment order made by the
drawer or is unpaid for any other reason necessitation the reversal of a
payment entry previously made.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. V, Art. II)  (Ord. passed 11-3-2004; Ord. passed
2-2-2006)



CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



Section




General Provisions




   51.01   Storage, collection and disposal; collectors




User Fees for Pick-Up Services and Collections




   51.15   Definitions



   51.16   Minimum monthly charge



   51.17   Computation of user charges



   51.18   Billing of charges



   51.19   Rules and regulations



   51.20   Lien for unpaid charges



   51.21   Exclusions and exemptions




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 51.01  STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL; COLLECTORS.



   (A)   The Town Council shall provide for the storage, collection and
disposal of garbage and rubbish in said town, either by employees of said
town or by contact with individuals, firms or corporations for such services.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      GARBAGE. All and every refuse accumulation of animal, fish, fowl,
fruit or vegetable matter that results from the preparation, use, cooking,
retail or wholesale dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetable and shall include garbage wrapped in paper or its equivalent. It
shall further mean and include tin cans, glass, bottles and broken crockery
which have been used as food or beverage holders, also old bottles, glass,
china and crockery.



      RUBBISH. Material other than garbage, resulting from ordinary
household operations, including such items as tin cans, glass, bottles,
ashes, papers, magazines and newsprints, boxes, rags, old shoes, small
cartons and lawn cuttings and the like in covered containers or plastic bags.
Burning barrels will not be emptied. Empty burning barrels will be taken if
desired. Shrubbery and tree trimmings (no trees) are included; provided, said
trimmings are tied in bundles, which lengths do not exceed three feet long
and two feet in depth, nor less than one cubic foot. Excluded are such items
as furniture, large boxes, articles or cans too large for a packer type
truck; and all types of debris resulting from repairing or remodeling any
building such as dirt, wood, plaster, roofing and the like.



   (C)   In the event said Town Council shall determine to contract for
the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish, then said Council, before
advertising for bids, shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer of said town terms
and conditions on which such bids shall be made, and such notice and bids
shall be in form as prescribed by law, and in accordance with rules and
regulations of the local and state Health Boards.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to collection
and disposal of industrial waste, but the successful bidder shall be
permitted to make private contracts with industries for such services.



   (E)   In the event said Town Council shall enter into a contract for
the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish in said town, then no
other private individual, firm or corporation shall be permitted to furnish
such services in said town during the term of such contract.



   (F)   All business and residential garbage to be collected shall be
placed for collection by the owners or producers thereof in water-tight
covered receptacles not exceeding 20-gallon capacity and not to exceed 60
pounds in weight, the said receptacles to be placed conveniently for the
collection at ground level, within five feet adjoining an improved and
passable alley, where there is an alley or, if there is no alley, at an
easily accessible spot within five feet of the front curb.



   (G)   All business and residential rubbish to be collected shall be
placed by owners or producers thereof in secure, covered containers not to
exceed 60 pounds in weight for each container; containers to be placed by
building occupants for collection as specified above on collection days to be
established by town and contractor. In event of any refusal on part of
contractor’s employees to make a specific collection, a written report,
including reason for rejection, affixed to the refuse with a copy delivered
to Town Clerk-Treasurer and decision as to handling this or similar future
circumstances shall be subject to Town Council judgment. The contractor shall
be liable for special disposal of the offering, if it is so ordered by
Council under the terms of this contract.



   (H)   Collection of all garbage and rubbish material provided for
herein shall be made by contractor in steel, water-tight, non-leakable tanks,
such as garb wood or leach packer bodies or equivalent, and said trucks shall
be kept at all times in sanitary condition and well painted.



   (I)   All garbage and rubbish collected by the contractor shall be
disposed of by the sanitary landfill method. The contractor shall furnish
suitable site for sanitary fill, which site shall have the prior and
continued approval of the state’s and county’s Boards of Health. If any
emergency arises in connection with disposal operations, the contractor may,
upon authorization by the Town Council and health authorities, dispose of
collected garbage and refuse in a manner agreed upon between the contractor
and the Council.



   (J)   The contractor shall make a collection of garbage and rubbish
regularly once each week. In the event the contractor wholly fails to collect
and remove or properly dispose of garbage or other materials herein provided
for, in accordance with the terms of this contract, for a period of five days
(strikes, act of God or other causes beyond the contractor’s control
excepted), the town may, at its option, after 30 days’ written notice to
contractor of specific complaint, terminate this contract.



   (K)   It shall be a condition of each garbage and rubbish contract
that the town may at any time after the execution of such contract, and
during the term of said contract, at its option, terminate the same upon a
30-day written notice to the contractor.



   (L)   The contractor shall furnish to the town a good and sufficient
bond with surety or sureties thereon to be approved by the town in a sum
equal to 10% of the annual amount, conditioned that the contractor shall well
and truly perform the agreements and terms of this contract in accordance
with these specifications.



   (M)   (1)   Compensation. The contractor shall take out and
maintain during the life of this contract, worker’s compensation insurance
for all employees engaged in carrying out any work related to this contract.
This insurance shall conform to the requirements set forth in the state’s
Worker’s Compensation Act, being I.C. 22-3, approved 3-14-1929, and any
amendments thereto.



      (2)   Public liability and property damage. The contractor
shall effect and maintain in force during the term of this contract bodily
injury and property damage insurance in amounts not less than $100,000 per
person and $300,000 per occurrence, bodily injury, and $50,000 property
damage.



      (3)   Certificate of insurance compliance. The contractor
shall furnish to town a certificate of compliance with the foregoing
insurance requirements. Failure to do so is cause for cancellation of the
contract by the town.



   (N)   In all work performed, contractor expressly agrees to comply
strictly with all town ordinances now in force or that may hereafter be
adopted, applicable to contractor’s operation, to comply with and be
subject to the order and regulations of the Board of Health and all other
departments and agencies of town, and in all things to conform to and abide
by the laws of the state.



   (O)   It is further agreed and understood that the consideration
herein is based upon the removal of garbage and rubbish from approximately
1,900 residences, including mobile homes and multi-family, business, churches
and schools, excluding industry, and should any territory be annexed to the
town, a figure equal to the actual number of dwelling units therein on the
basis of a physical count thereof, jointly made or caused to be made by the
contractor and town, shall be added to the above figure upon the date that
said annexation is complete and final, and compensation for the additional
work shall be forthwith increased accordingly.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. I)




USER FEES FOR PICK-UP SERVICES AND COLLECTION




§ 51.15  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      DWELLING UNIT. A room or other space in which cooking facilities
are located.



      OTHER UNITS. All business and special exception uses, other than
residential and industrial, and home occupations, as defined by the Master
Plan and Zoning Ordinance of the town; provided, however, a home occupation
which does not utilize a sign identifying or advertising the home occupation
shall not be deemed to be ANOTHER UNIT for user charges.



      OWNER. A person, partnership, corporation, association, estate,
trust or other organization which holds title to real estate in the town.



      PICK-UP LOCATION. Each improved lot and improved parcel of real
estate within the town to which service is available under this subchapter,
except improved lots and parcels served by a three- inch or larger town water
meter, and further excepting contiguous improved lots or parcels, owned by a
common owner, containing more than 12 dwelling units, more than four of which
dwelling units are under a common roof.



      SCHOOL. Each separate place which is the subject of a commission
issued by the Department of Public Instruction of the state.



      SERVICE. Garbage and rubbish pick-up within the town and its
sanitary disposal in a sanitary landfill site licensed by the state’s Board
of Health, under any contract to which the town is a part.



      TOWN. All territory within the corporate limits of the municipal
corporation known as North Manchester, Indiana, as well as the municipal
corporation by the name, as the context requires.



      USER. The owner and occupant of each dwelling unit and other unit
within the town, and each such use by an owner or occupant shall be deemed a
separate USER.



      VACANT PICK-UP LOCATION. A dwelling unit which was unoccupied as
a habitation and was for sale, rent or lease during a complete billing cycle.



   (B)   Use of the singular includes the plural and vice versa.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. passed 10-2-1996)



§ 51.16  MINIMUM MONTHLY CHARGE.



   Effective with all billings issued on or after 10-1-2001, a user of
service at each pick-up location shall pay to the town a minimum monthly
charge of $12; provided, however, a vacant pick-up location shall not be
subject to a minimum monthly charge while vacant, as defined by § 51.15 of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 2)  (Ord. passed 9-5-2001)



§ 51.17  COMPUTATION OF USER CHARGES.



   (A)   Charges for service stated in § 51.16 of this chapter shall
be minimum monthly charges per each user at each pick-up location.



   (B)   In the event the following provisions of this subchapter
apply, the minimum monthly charge to a user for service shall be computed as
follows:



      (1)   For service rendered to the town, the town shall be
subject to a minimum monthly charge for each pick-up location; and



      (2)   In the event a pick-up location provides service to more
than one dwelling unit or to a combination of dwelling units and other units,
then, in such case, billing shall be for a single user in the manner set out
in § 51.16 of this chapter; except that, such minimum monthly charge shall
not be less than the multiple of the dwelling units and other units times the
minimum monthly charge of $12 for each dwelling unit and other units served
by the pick-up location.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 3)  (Ord. passed 9-5-2001)



§ 51.18  BILLING OF CHARGES.



   User charges shall be billed by the Water Department of the town
monthly to users as their names and addresses appear on the metered consumer
record of the town or, in the case of users who are not metered water
consumers of the town, to the user by name, if known, but if unknown, to the
“owner and occupant” addressed to the pick-up location. Charges for
service shall be due and payable concurrently with water and sewage charges.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 4)



§ 51.19  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Water Department of the town, under the supervision of the
Clerk-Treasurer and Town Manager, shall make and enforce such by-laws and
regulations as may be deemed necessary for the economical and efficient
billing for service and for the regulation, collecting, rebating and
refunding of rate charges all of which said user fees shall be paid into the
Sanitation Revenue Fund of the town, not less frequently than monthly, for
sanitation services within the town.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 5)



§ 51.20  LIEN FOR UNPAID CHARGES.



   Unpaid charges for service shall be a lien upon the real estate and
improvements at the pick-up location where service is available in the same
manner and to the same extent that unpaid and delinquent sewer use charges
may become a lien upon real estate, as and when certified by the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town, under the procedure applicable for certifying
delinquent sewer use charges. Where service charges are billed to a user who
is not the owner of the real estate at the pick-up location, upon application
by the owner, charges for services shall be billed to such owner.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 6)



§ 51.21  EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   The owner and occupant of a pick-up location which did not at any time
receive service in the period from 9-1-1979 through 2-29-1980 and who
provides evidence to the Water Department of the existence of a private
agreement for the services as herein defined, which agreement has existed
continuously from 9-1-1979 through 2-29-1980, and is ongoing for such
service, shall not be deemed to have service available under this subchapter
and such owner and occupant shall not be subject to charges for service under
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 7)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   Water utility



   52.02   Water line extensions



   52.03   Water service and safety generally




Rates and Charges




   52.15   Rates and charges



   52.16   Water tap charges



 



   52.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 52.01  WATER UTILITY.



   (A)   The town’s water utility is removed from the jurisdiction of
the state’s utility Regulatory Commission for approval of rates, charges
and evidences of indebtedness. This chapter shall take effect as provided by
I.C. 8-1.5-3-9.1.



   (B)   (1)   Control of the town’s water utility for all
purposes, including approval of rates, charges and evidences of indebtedness,
is vested in the Town Council of the town on the effective date of this
chapter.



      (2)   With respect to the town’s water utility, the Town
Council shall have all of the powers and duties set forth in I.C. 8-1.5-3-4,
as now or hereafter amended.



   (C)   (1)   The rates and charges made by the town’s water
utility for a service rendered or to be rendered, either directly or
indirectly in connection therewith, shall be non-discriminatory, reasonable
and just.



      (2)   The Town Council shall fix reasonable and just rates and
charges for services of the town’s water utility in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 8-1.5-3-8, as now or hereafter amended, from time to time
as may be necessary to fix and maintain reasonable and just rates and charges
for services.



   (D)   (1)   The office of Superintendent of the town’s water
utility is hereby created.



      (2)   The Superintendent shall bear responsibility for the
detailed supervision of the town’s water utility and shall be responsible
to the Town Council for the business and technical operation of the utility.



      (3)   Under the supervisory powers and authority of the Town
Council, the Superintendent shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
reasonably required to enable the town’s water utility to furnish
reasonably adequate services and facilities, which powers and duties shall
include those prescribed by I.C. 8-1.5-3-5.



   (E)   The notices required to be given under I.C. 8-1.5-3-9.1 shall
be given by the Clerk of the town’s water utility under the supervision of
the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. I, Art. IV)  (Ord. passed 6-5-1989)



§ 52.02  WATER LINE EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The Waterworks Department of the town may, upon written
request by a prospective customer or a group of prospective customers located
in the same neighborhood, make free of charge an extension necessary to give
service when the estimated total revenue, for a period of three years, from
the prospective customer or customers is approximately equal to the cost of
the extension; provided that, the prospects agree that the patronage or
demand will be of such permanence as to warrant the capital expenditure
involved.



   (B)   (1)   If the extension required in order to furnish service
at any point within the corporate limits, or any adjacent territory, is
greater than the free extension specified herein, such an extension shall be
made under the following conditions: the town shall require a deposit of the
cost of the extension above the free limit and shall in such case, for each
additional customer connected to the said extension within a period of eight
years from the making of such extension, refund an amount of which six times
the estimated annual revenue of the new customer exceeds the cost of
connecting such new customer, but at no time shall the aggregate amount of
refund made to any customer exceed the original deposit of such customer.



      (2)   If the extension is of such length, and the prospective
business which may be developed by it is so meager as to make it doubtful
whether the business from the extension would ever pay a fair return on the
investment involved in such extension, or in the case of real estate
development enterprise with slight or no immediate demand for service, or in
the case of industrial installation requiring extensive equipment with slight
or irregular service, the facts shall be reported to the Town Council for
investigation and determination of the reasonableness of such extension or
installation and the conditions under which it shall be made.



   (C)   In estimating the cost of an extension, the estimate shall be
based on the diameter of the pipe to be used; provided, however, the
estimated cost to the customer or customers shall not be based on a pipe
diameter in excess of four inches, unless actual consumption estimated for
the proposed customer or customers shall require a larger pipe.



   (D)   Water main and line extensions located, or to be located in
streets or alleys, or to be maintained by the town, shall be of cast or
ductile iron pipe equal to or better than Class 50, of a size determined by
the Superintendent of Public Works to be adequate to serve the planned
expansion.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. I, Art. III)



§ 52.03  WATER SERVICE AND SAFETY GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall open, enter or otherwise access a curb stop,
meter setting or meter or manhole unless authorized by the Superintendent.



   (B)   (1)   No new water service shall be connected to the
distribution system unless the applicant shall have installed on the property
or within the improvements thereon an operable main line shut off valve which
completely interrupts the water supply to the property.



      (2)   Subject to allowance of a reasonable time for existing
users of the system to complete installation of an operable main line shut
off valve or to repair an existing inoperable shut off valve the
Superintendent, for good cause, after notice to the user, is authorized to
discontinue water service to the property.



   (C)   The Superintendent is authorized and directed to minimize the
risk of the flow of contaminants into the town’s public water supply from
any user thereof by prohibiting a user from installing or using a
cross-connection or booster pump connection and by creating standards for
acceptable cross-connection control, reduced pressure principle back flow
preventer and pressure type vacuum breaker devices and, as a condition to
receiving continued service by the water utility, to require any user to
install any such device or devices of discontinue any practice which, in the
judgment of the Superintendent, increases the risk of contaminating the
town’s public water supply.



   (D)   Actions taken or ordered by the Superintendent under this
section shall be subject to review by the Town Council upon written request
of the effected customer or user, filed with the Clerk-Treasurer not later
than 30 days after the date of the Superintendent’s final action or order
and shall be heard following reasonable notice to the complainant.



   (E)   No water connection shall be permitted, nor completed, until
the owner of the property connected pays the connection charge and, if
located outside the corporate limits of the town, executes a written waiver
of objection to any pending or future proceeding which could result in
annexation of the property to the town.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. I, Art. VI)  (Ord. passed 4-1-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 52.99




RATES AND CHARGES




§ 52.15  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   There shall be and there is hereby established for the use of
and the service rendered by the waterworks system of the town, the schedule
of rates and charges, based on the use of water supplied. Rates and charges
to users whose meter installation is outside the corporate limits of the town
shall be 150% of the rates and charges fixed. The rates herein approved shall
provide for a reasonable return on the water utility plant of the town and
such other legal and necessary expenses as provided in I.C. 8-1.5-3-8.



      (1)   Usage per month.



 



 

Rates per 1,000 Gallons




Effective 1st Full Billing Period After Adoption

 

Effective 1-1-2019

 

Effective 1-1-2020





First 3,000 gallons
 

$6.11

 

$7.30

 

$8.16



Next 6,000 gallons
 

$5.51

 

$6.58

 

$7.36



Next 12,000 gallons
 

$4.80

 

$5.73

 

$6.41



Next 29,000 gallons
 

$4.11

 

$4.91

 

$5.49



Next 150,000 gallons
 

$3.49

 

$4.17

 

$4.67



Over 200,000 gallons
 

$3.04

 

$3.63

 

$4.06





 



      (2)   Minimum charge. Each user shall pay a minimum charge in
accordance with the following applicable size of meter installed, for which
the user will be entitled to the quantity of water as determined in the above
schedule of rates.



 

Size of Meter
 

Effective 1st Full Billing Period After Adoption

 

Effective 1-1-2019

 

Effective 1-1-2020





1-3/4 inch meter
 

$18.33

 

$21.90

 

$24.48



1 inch meter
 

$39.59

 

$47.31

 

$52.89



1-1/2 inch meter
 

$60.85

 

$72.72

 

$81.30



2 inch meter
 

$91.31

 

$109.12

 

$121.99



3 inch meter
 

$151.90

 

$181.51

 

$202.93



4 inch meter
 

$273.66

 

$327.03

 

$365.62



6 inch meter
 

$456.15

 

$545.10

 

$609.42





 



      (3)   Fire protection service.



 

 

Effective 1st Full Billing Period After Adoption

 

Effective 1-1-2019

 

Effective 1-1-2020



Municipal hydrants, per hydrant - per annum
 

$576.45

 

$576.45

 

$576.45



Private hydrants, per hydrant - per annum
 

$576.45

 

$576.45

 

$576.45




 



      (4)   Private sprinklers.



 

 

Effective 1st Full Billing Period After Adoption

 

Effective 1-1-2019

 

Effective 1-1-2020



4-inch line
 

$712.19

 

$712.19

 

$712.19



6-inch line
 

$1,069.62

 

$1,069.62

 

$1,069.62



8-inch line
 

$1,429.53

 

$1,429.53

 

$1,429.53



10-inch line
 

$1,786.90

 

$1,786.90

 

$1,786.90




 



      (5)   Service outside corporate limits. Rates and charges to
users whose meter installation is outsides the corporate limits of the town
shall be 150% of the rates and charges above. The rates herein approved shall
provide for a reasonable return on the water utility plant of the town and
such other legal and necessary expenses as provided in I.C. 8-1.5-3-8. The
Town Council hereby elects to pay the town from water rates and charges
payment in lieu of property taxes as provided in I.C. 8-1.5-3-8.



      (6)   Charges for connection and reconnection.



         (a)   Applications for connection or reconnection to the
waterworks system operated and maintained by the town shall complete an
application on forms provided by the water utility at its office and shall at
the time of application, pay a reasonable fee for such connection or
reconnection, equal in amount to the direct and indirect labor and material
costs incurred by the water utility in completing the connection or
reconnection.



         (b)   The minimum charge for connection of a 3/4" or
smaller meter service to the waterworks system shall be $1,671.



         (c)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall compute
the cost on a semi-annual basis, or more frequently if in his or her judgment
the costs have changed significantly enough to cause the minimum to fluctuate
from the last determined cost by plus or minus 5%, and the cost so determined
shall be the minimum charge for connection of a 3/4" or small meter service
to the waterworks system.



         (d)   Applicants for connection to the waterworks system
for meter exceeding 3/4" shall, at the time of application, pay the greater
of the minimum fee or actual cost computed. In the event the actual cost
exceeds the minimum connection charge, the excess cost shall be due and
payable not later than the due date of the first billing of water service for
water provided through the meter.



         (e)   Reconnection charges to the waterworks system
shall be determined in amount by the same formula and computations as
provided above for connection charge, and until such average cost is
determined, a reasonable reconnection charge is determined to be $40.



      (7)   Service installation and tap charge.



         (a)   Service shall be run from the distribution system
to a point just inside the property line or fence line.



         (b)   The utility will install a curb stop, meter
setting, and meter in the service line outside the property line.



         (c)   The charge for a five-eighths-inch meter tap shall
be $1,671.



         (d)   The charge for a tap larger than the
five-eighths-inch meter shall be the cost of labor, materials, power
machinery, transportation and overhead incurred for installing the tap, but
shall not be less than the charge for a five-eighths-inch meter tap.



      (8)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.



         MUNICIPAL HYDRANTS. All fire protection hydrants, wherever
located, not herein defined as private hydrants.



         PRIVATE HYDRANTS. All fire protection hydrants, wherever
located, which are placed exclusively for service to nonresidential property
or to property exempt from property taxation under Pub. Law No. 47, Indiana
Acts of 1975 (I.C. 6-1.1-10-1 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended, and
including, but not limited to, the exemption provisions in other laws to
which reference is made therein.



   (B)   Checks delivered payable to the town in payment of any debt or
other lawful obligation owed to the town or to any unit or department of the
town shall be subject to a service charge of $25 if after deposit of the
check in or to any account of the town the check is returned to the town by
the paying institution marked “NSF”, a stop payment order made by the
drawer or is unpaid for any reason necessitating the reversal of a payment
entry previously made.



   (C)   Security deposits required  from  users of the waterworks
system:



      (1)   Single-family residential units: $70;



      (2)   Multiple-family residential units where each unit is
served through a separate water meter: $100;



      (3)   Multiple-family residential units served through a
single water meter: $50 for each residential unit served through the single
meter;



      (4)   All other users, the amount calculated by the
Superintendent of Public Works which will equal two times the estimated
monthly charge which the user will incur based on the size of the meter and
the uses planned to occur on the premises which require metered water;



      (5)   A permanently numbered dated receipt for each security
deposit received shall be issued to the applicant user who shall be
identified on the receipt by name, Social Security number and mailing
address. A duplicate copy of each receipt shall be retained as a permanent
record, to which subsequent monetary transactions related to the deposit
shall be posted. Actual interest earned by the utility on the total of all
security deposits held shall be credited on a pro-rata basis to each security
deposit held by the utility, not less frequently than annually following the
end of each calendar year. The deposit shall not earn interest after the
disconnection of service; and



      (6)   A deposit and accrued interest on the deposit may be
used by the utility to cover any unpaid balance following a disconnection of
service; provided, however, that, any surplus shall be returned to the user,
along with a statement of accounting for each transaction affecting the
deposit and interest earned, within 30 days after payment of the final bill.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. I, Art. III)  (Ord. passed 4-10-1996; Ord. passed
12-5-2002; Ord. passed 2-2-2006; Ord. passed 5-2-2007; Ord. passed 11-5-2008;
Ord. 1, 2014, passed 4-2-2014; Ord. 4, passed 8-2-2017)



§ 52.16  WATER TAP CHARGES.



   (A)   Applicants for connection or reconnection to the waterworks
system operated and maintained by the town shall complete an application on
forms provided by the water utility at its office and shall, at the time of
application, pay a reasonable fee for such connection or reconnection, equal
in amount to the direct and indirect labor and material costs incurred by the
water utility in completing the connection or reconnection.



   (B)   The minimum charge for connection of a three-fourths-inch or
smaller meter service to the waterworks system shall be the average cost as
computed by the Department of Public Works.



   (C)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall compute the average
cost in accordance with the formula prescribed under division (B) above on a
semi-annual basis, or more frequently if, in his or her judgment, the costs
have changed significantly enough to cause the minimum charge to fluctuate
from the last determined average by plus or minus 5% and the average so
determined shall be the minimum charge for connection of a three-fourths-inch
or smaller meter service to the waterworks system.



   (D)   Applicants for connection to the waterworks system for meters
exceeding three-fourths inch shall, at the time of application, pay the
minimum fee for connection; provided, the actual fee shall be the greater of
the minimum fee or actual cost computed using the formula prescribed under
division (B) above without averaging. In the event the actual cost exceeds
the minimum connection charge, the excess cost shall be due and payable not
later than the due date of the first billing of water services for water
provided through the meter.



   (E)   Reconnection charges to the waterworks system shall be
determined in amount by the same formula and computations as provided above
for connection charges and until such average cost is determined, a
reasonable reconnection charge is determined to be $40.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. I, Art. V)  (Ord. passed 4-12-2000; Ord. passed
9-6-2006)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violation of the access restriction, as per § 52.03 of this
chapter, is constituted a civil violation and, for the first offense
conviction, shall be subject to a minimum penalty of $50. Conviction of a
second or subsequent violation shall be subject to a penalty not in excess of
the maximum amount authorized by this code.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. I, Art. VI)  (Ord. passed 4-1-1998)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Unsanitary disposal of waste; connections required



   53.03   Extensions, connections of sewers outside corporate limits



   53.04   Enforcement generally



   53.05   Damage to town property



   53.06   Dilution; accidental discharges



   53.07   Confidential information



   53.08   Control manholes; grease and sand traps



   53.09   Waste sampling; analysis




Rules and Regulations




   53.20   State law adopted by reference



   53.21   Extension of town sewers



   53.22   Limitation of concentrations permitted



   53.23   Septic tank cleanings; treatment plant



   53.24   Significant industrial users



   53.25   Equipment; damages



   53.26   Enforcement




Commercial and Industrial Wastes and Discharges




   53.40   Prior approval for certain wastes



   53.41   Pretreatment facilities



   53.42   Categorical pretreatment standards



   53.43   Prohibitions and limitations



   53.44   Responsibility for obstructing or damaging sewers



   53.45   Control of admissible wastes




Rates and Charges; Billings




   53.60   Service charges based on water usage



   53.61   Rates and charges



   53.62   Bulk waste charges



   53.63   Annual review of service charges



   53.64   Strength-of-wastes surcharges



   53.65   Service charge billing



 



   53.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Means:



      (1)   Slate presentment standards as established in 327 I.A.C.
5-18-8;



      (2)   Presentment standards for prohibited discharges, as
established in 327 I.A.C. 5-18-2; and



      (3)   National categorical presentment standards incorporated
by reference in 327 I.A.C. 5-18-10.



   AVAILABLE. Abutting the property, crossing the property, within any
easement or public right-of-way abutting the property or within 300 feet of
the property.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of dissolved oxygen, in
milligrams per liter, required during the stabilization of the decomposable
organic matter by aerobic biochemical action of sewage, sewage effluent,
polluted waters or industrial wastes under standard laboratory procedures for
five days at 20°C. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance
with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.



   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a building drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste or
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to a
point outside the foundation wall of the building.



   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) DRAIN CONNECTION. The point where the building (or
house) sewer is connected to the building drain at a location approximately
three feet outside the foundation wall of the building.



   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) SEWER. The pipe which is connected to the building
(or house) drain at a point three feet outside the foundation wall of the
building and which conveys the building’s discharge from that point to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.



   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) SEWER CONNECTION. The point where the building
sewer is connected to the public sewer. This connection to the public sewer
may be accomplished as follows:



      (1)   Where a tap-in connection is employed, the point of
connection shall be where the end of the building sewer meets the inside face
of the sewage system and the tapping “saddle and/or joint” shall be
considered part of the building sewer; and



      (2)   Where fittings (Ts or Ys) are employed the connection
shall be where the end of the first pipe meets the end of the fitting and the
said T or Y fitting shall be considered a part of the building sewer.



   BULK WASTE. Any containerized solid, liquid or gaseous substance
discarded or to be discarded as worthless, defective or of no use to the
person discarding said substance.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). A measure of the oxygen equivalent to
that portion of the organic matter in a sample of sewage, sewage effluent,
polluted waters or industrial wastes that is susceptible to oxidation by a
strong chemical oxidant. The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.



   CLASSIFICATION OF USERS.



      (1)   DOMESTIC CLASS USER. A user discharging only normal
domestic sewage, as herein defined, into the system.



      (2)   COMMERCIAL CLASS USER. A user falling within Division G
of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, United States Office
of Management and Budget as currently amended and supplemented.



      (3)   INDUSTRIAL CLASS USER. A user falling within Division A,
B, D, E or I of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, United
States Office of Management and Budget, as currently amended and
supplemented. A user described in the divisions listed herein may be excluded
if it is determined by the town, that such user will introduce primarily
segregated domestic waste or waste from sanitary conveniences. Users not
listed therein may be included in this class of customers because of the
production of excess strength of waste or toxics in excess of limits
described hereinafter.



   CONTROL AUTHORITY (CA). The commissioner of the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management.



   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, under one roof used primarily
as the abode of one or more persons, but not including hotels, motels,
lodging or boarding houses or tourist homes.



   EFFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be present,
flowing out of a drain, sewer receptacle or outlet.



   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen circumstance or combination of circumstances
that may cause an eminent endangerment to the health and/or welfare of
persons, the environment or which may interfere with the operation of the
sewer collection system or the water pollution control plant.



   GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing
of food or from the handling, storage or sale of produce.



   GROUND GARBAGE. Garbage that is shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under the conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle being greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGER. A nondomestic discharger introducing pollutants
into a POTW, regardless of whether the discharger is within the governmental
jurisdiction of the permittee.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. An indirect discharger.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid, gaseous substance or form of
energy discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an industrial,
manufacturing, commercial or business operation or process from the
development, recovery or processing of any natural resource carried on by any
person.



   INFLUENT. The water together with any wastes that may be present,
flowing into a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharge from other sources, does one of the following:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, its sludge processes, or its selected sludge use or disposal
methods.



      (2)   Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.



      (3)   Prevents the use of the POTW's sewage sludge or its
sludge disposal method selected in compliance with the following statutory
provisions, regulations, or permits issued thereunder or more stringent state
or local regulations:



         (a)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §
1345).



         (b)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §
6901), including:



            1.   Title II, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and



            2.   The rules contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA (42 U.S.C. §
6941).



         (c)   The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7401).



         (d)   The Toxic Substance Control Act (15 U.S.C. §
2601).



   MAJOR INDUSTRIAL USER. A user of the town-owned treatment works that:



      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons of water or more per
average work day;



      (2)   Has a flow of waste greater than 5% of the flow carried
by any part of the town system receiving the waste;



      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in amounts as
defined in standards issued under § 507(a) of the Federal Act; or



      (4)   Is found by the state’s Department of Environmental
Management, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the
town-owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact
whether singularly or in combinations with other contributing industries, on
that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment
works.



   MAY. The act referred to is permissible.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage having any average daily suspended
solids concentration of not more than 250 milligrams per liter, an average
daily BOD concentration of not more than 250 milligrams per liter and an
average daily phosphorus concentration of not more than ten milligrams per
liter and an average daily ammonia concentration of not more than ten
milligrams.



   NPDES PERMIT. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit issued by the state’s Department of Environmental Management for
discharges of wastewaters to navigable waters of the United States pursuant
to § 402 or 33 U.S.C. § 466.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs direct and indirect, other
than debt services including replacement costs, as defined herein, necessary
to insure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing basis conforming with
federal, state and/or local requirements and to ensure long-term facilities
management.



   OUTLET. Any outlet, natural or constructed, which is the point of final
discharge of sewage or of treatment plant effluent into any watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface ground water.



   PASS-THROUGH. A discharge proceeding through a POTW into waters of the
state in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, company, municipal or
private corporation, commercial establishment, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other legal unit or entity.



   pH. The logarithm (to the base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration of a solution expressed in gram-atoms per liter of solution.



   POLLUTANTS.



      (1)   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Waste containing biochemical
oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus, pH and
(fecal coliform) bacteria and ammonia NH3.



      (2)   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Wastes containing pollutant
that is not a compatible pollutant such as “slug load” that would cause
damage to the sewage system and/or treatment plant.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to presentment, other than a presentment standard, imposed on an
industrial user, including applicable local limits.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works owned by the
state or a municipality, except that it does not include pipes, sewers, or
other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term
includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or compatible industrial wastes. The term
also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only it they convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. "POTW" also means the municipality that
was jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such
treatment works.



   RECEIVING STREAM. The watercourse, stream or body of water receiving
the waters finally discharged from the sewage treatment plant.



   REPLACEMENT COST. The cost, stated in current monetary values, as an
operating cost which represents and measures the day-to-day consumption and
attrition of physical assets in rendering service to users.



   SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage discharged from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings, apartment houses, condominiums, motels, hotels, lodging or
boarding houses, office building, factories or institutions and free from
storm waters, surface waters and industrial wastes.



   SERVICE CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewerage system for wastes, which do not exceed in strength the concentration
values above which a strength-of-waste surcharge will be made.



   SEWAGE. The water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments, singular or in any combination,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or WATER POLLUTION
CONTROL PLANT. The arrangement of devices, structures and equipment used for
treating and disposing of sewage and sludge.



   SEWAGE UTILITY, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or WATER POLLUTION CONTROL
WORKS. All facilities and systems for collecting, transporting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and sludge, including the sewerage
collection system and the sewage treatment plant, whether or not in active
use.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and other waste liquids as
differentiated below.



      (1)   COMBINED OR COMBINATION SEWER. A sewer which carries
storm, surface and ground water runoff as well as sewage.



      (2)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer to the use of which all owners of
abutting property has equal rights and is controlled and maintained by the
town or other public authority.



      (3)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary sewage
and to which storm, surface, ground water and unpolluted industrial
wastewaters are not intentionally admitted.



      (4)   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm, surface and
ground water drainage, but excludes sanitary sewage.



   SEWER ENGINEER. The Superintendent of the sewage treatment plant of the
town or his or her duly authorized representative; the term is synonymous
with the term WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ENGINEER and WASTEWATER SUPERINTENDENT.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The network of sewers and appurtenances used for
collecting, transporting and pumping sewage to the sewage treatment plant.



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).



      (1)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 327 I.A.C. 5-1 8-10.



      (2)   An industrial user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater) to the POTW;



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream that makes up 5%
or POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as a significant industrial user by
the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential to:



            1.   Adversely affect the POTW's operation;



            2.   Violate a presentment standard; or



            3.   Violate a requirement of 327 I.A.C. 5-19-3.



      (3)   The control authority may, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user or a POTW and in
accordance with 327 I.A.C. 5-19-3(6), determine that an industrial user is
not a significant industrial user if it does not meet Part III.A.9.b.(3) of
the current NPDES permit.



   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the most recent edition of Standard Methods - the examination and
analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the
American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, a
copy of which is on file in the office of the Superintendent of the Water
Pollution Control Plant.



   STRENGTH-OF-WASTE SURCHARGE. The additional charges for sewage service
collected from users discharging sewage into the system having a strength
measurement in excess of the limits imposed by the provisions of this chapter.



   UTILITY SUPERVISOR. The Utility Supervisor of the Sewage Treatment
Plant, Water Pollution Control Plant and Wastewater Treatment Plant of the
town, or his or her duly authorized representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids which either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration. Their concentration is expressed in milligrams per
liter. Quantitative determinations are made in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods.



   UTILITY. Unless the context requires another meaning, the Town of North
Manchester.



   WASTE SURVEILLANCE CHARGE. A monthly charge collected from users,
qualifying as industrial or commercial class users, to defray the cost of
evaluating the user’s waste by metering, sampling, laboratory analysis
and/or other methods deemed necessary. Said charges are set forth in §§
53.60 through 53.65 of this chapter and are subject to review annually as
provided in § 53.65(A) of this chapter.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992; Ord. 4, 2012, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 53.02  UNSANITARY DISPOSAL OF WASTE; CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Every property in the town shall be required to
connect to the municipal sewage system whenever a sanitary sewer is available
for use. The connection to the municipal sewage system shall be made within
90 days after such sanitary sewer is available. The construction of new
combined sewers is prohibited. (See § 53.01 of this chapter for the
definition of a combined sewer.) All new construction that is tributary to a
combined sewer shall be designed to minimize or delay inflow contribution to
the existing combined sewer. The method used to delay the inflow contribution
to the existing combined sewer must first be approved by the Superintendent
of the town.



      (2)   Those properties not abutting a town sewer, but within
300 feet of a sewer, shall make arrangements through the Superintendent’s
office to determine if sewer can be extended to their property. Connection to
the new sewer may not be made until the main is accepted by the town.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Superintendent may,
on application and proof of economic hardship, extend the time within which
such property shall be connected to the municipal sewage system.



      (4)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent.



      (5)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the town for any loss or damage directly or indirectly occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer, including backwater damages from
the public sewer system.



      (6)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and where no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.



      (7)   A building sewer shall not cross the property of another
private owner unless such private owner has granted an easement for such
building sewer, which is duly recorded in the office of the County Recorder.



      (8)   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test, to meet
the current code requirements for building sewers.



      (9)   The installation of a building or house sewer shall
comply with the General Specifications and Conditions, Detail Specifications
and Construction Standards for the Installation of Storm and Sanitary Sewers,
approved by and on file with the Superintendent.



      (10)   The town shall have no responsibility for the
installation, maintenance and repair of building sewers, including joints and
fittings.



      (11)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought
to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow into the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.



      (12)   No person shall connect any roof downspout, exterior
foundation drain or other source of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain, which is connected either directly or
indirectly to a sanitary sewer of the town.



      (13)   The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the applicable rules and regulations of the town. All
such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation of
the prescribed procedure or material must be approved by the Superintendent
before installation.



      (14)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall
be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
town.



      (15)   Sewer tap permits shall be obtained from the utility
Office and shall be issued only to qualified sewer tap contractors, who shall
pay to the Sewage utility a fee for each sewer tap permit. Not later than 48
hours after making each sewer tap and building of the sewer installation, the
tap contractor or property owner shall notify the utility office of such
connection so that an inspection may be made by the utility prior to
backfilling the said sewer installation.



      (16)   In cases of requests for connections to newly
constructed mains, prior to acceptance by the Town Council, a prime
contractor’s release must be executed and granted through the
Superintendent’s office. Upon satisfaction of all other requirements, a
permit for connection may be issued.



      (17)   No person shall make use of a sewer tap or backfill or
otherwise conceal a sewer installation unless and until the same has been
inspected and approved by the utility. In addition to all other remedies, the
utility may cause the said installation of sewer tap to be excavated and
exposed, may terminate the connection, and may require the owner or occupant
to pay or reimburse the utility for its costs and expenses in such
excavation, exposure, termination, reconnection and restoration. Such costs
and expenses shall be considered as charges for sewerage treatment services
and may be collected in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-23-31
through 36-9-23-34.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 2)



   (B)   (1)   No owner or occupant of any real property shall tap
or drain either directly or indirectly into any public sewer until a sewer
tap permit has been obtained from the town and until owner has satisfied the
obligation to pay all assessments, reimbursements and pro rata shares of
sewer extension costs laid against that property for public sewers which
serve it. A sewer tap permit given in error shall not operate to nullify any
such obligation that has been duly recorded or stop the town from charging
and collecting such costs at any subsequent time.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the utility may, in
accordance with policies and procedures adopted by the Town Council from time
to time, permit an owner or occupant to tap or drain into a public sewer and
to defer in whole or in part payment of the obligation, mortgage, lien
document or other evidence of obligation acceptable to the utility.



      (3)   All such deferred obligations shall be considered for
the purposes of I.C. 36-9-23-31 through 36-9-23-34 to be fees assessed
against real property.



      (4)   Installments of deferred obligations, including any
finance changes or interest chargeable thereon, shall be deemed to be charges
for sewerage service for the purposes hereof.



      (5)   (a)   Sewer tap permits shall be obtained from the
(town’s utility office) and shall be issued only to licensed sewer tap
contractors, who shall pay to the sewage utility a fee of $300 for each sewer
tap permit and a $25 tap inspection fee.



         (b)   Not later than 48 hours after making each sewer
tap and building of the sewer installation, the tap contractor or property
owner shall notify the Sewer Engineer’s office of such connections so that
an inspection may be made by the utility prior to backfilling the said sewer
installation.



      (6)   No person shall connect any roof downspout, exterior
foundation drain or other source of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain, which is connected either directly or
indirectly to a sanitary sewer of the town.



      (7)   The Town Council shall have the authority to require an
owner of real property to disconnect any downspouts, yard drains or other
drains, which carry the runoff of natural precipitation from a building
sewer, which drains into a sanitary sewer. Property owners shall have 30 days
after notice thereof to comply with any such requirement.



      (8)   A new connection may be made to a town sewer or sewers
connected to the town system only after there has been adequate assurance by
the town that the downstream facilities of the sewage works have adequate
capacity to transmit and treat the new waste loadings.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 3)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.03  EXTENSIONS, CONNECTIONS OF SEWERS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.



   (A)   The installation, construction or extension of sanitary sewers
by private developers or by the town outside the corporate limits of the town
and the connection of said sanitary sewers into the town’s sewage system
from, by, to or for properties located outside such limits is prohibited,
except with the approval of the Town Council by duly enacted resolution,
provided that a resolution ratifying an agreement and/or contract for such
construction and connection, shall be deemed to constitute such approval.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 4)



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the Town
Council shall have the authority to permit a property located outside the
corporate limits of the town to connect to an existing sanitary sewer which
is part of the town’s sewerage system, when the property abuts, adjoins, or
is immediately contiguous to the street, alley or easement in which such
sewer is located and provided the property owner or occupant has complied
with the requirements prescribed by § 53.02(A) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 5)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.04  ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Superintendent
and such deputies as he or she, with approval of the Town Council, may
appoint for such purposes. Whenever said Superintendent or any such deputy
shall deem it appropriate to charge a landowner with a violation(s) of this
chapter, he or she shall issue to such landowner, a notice of violation
and/or summons, which shall be processed according to the provisions of I.C.
34-28-5.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 6)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.05  DAMAGE TO TOWN PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, firm or corporation
to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, remove,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part
of the town sewage system or belongs to the water pollution control plant of
the town.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 8)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.06  DILUTION; ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
increase the use of potable water or process water in any way, or mix
separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial
or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
applicable standards.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 9)



   (B)   (1)   Each discharger must provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances to
sewers of the town. Where necessary procedures and facilities to prevent the
accidental discharge of prohibited materials must be provided and maintained
at the discharger’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
town for review, and be approved by the town before construction of the
facility. Review and approval of plans and operating procedures by the town
shall not relieve the discharger from responsibility to modify its facility
as necessary to meet applicable federal, state and local requirements.



      (2)   The discharger shall notify the Superintendent or his or
her representative immediately when a “slug load” or accidental discharge
occurs. A written report shall be submitted within five days of incident. The
notification must include the location of the discharge, date, time of
occurrence, type of waste, concentration, volume and corrective actions
taken. Any industrial user who discharges a “slug load” of prohibited
materials will be liable for any expense, including loss or damage to the
water pollution control utility sewerage system in addition to the amount of
any fines imposed upon the town under state or federal law.



      (3)   Signs must be permanently posted in conspicuous places
on the discharger’s premises, advising employees whom to call in the event
of an accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may
cause or discover such a discharge as to the emergency notification
procedures.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 10)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.07  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data furnished to the town by a discharger, shall be
made available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate as per
40 C.F.R. § 2.203 and 327 I.A.C. 5-11-4 that the release of such information
would divulge information, methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets, or proprietary information of the discharger. However, under
no circumstances, may the volume or the components of the discharge be
considered confidential. All requests, by the discharger, for confidentiality
of information shall be made in accordance to and governed by the provisions
of 327 I.A.C. 12 and 40 C.F.R part 2.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 19)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)



§ 53.08  CONTROL MANHOLES; GREASE AND SAND TRAPS.



   (A)   Any owner who discharges or may discharge industrial wastes
into a public sewer via any means such as floor drains, sinks, catch basins
and the like shall be required by the Superintendent to construct and
maintain, at his or her own expense, one or more control manholes at a
specified location or locations to facilitate the observation, measurement
and sampling of owner’s waste. Such manholes shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the town. The
Superintendent may also require the person to install and maintain in any
such manhole, at said person’s expense, an approved volume-measuring
device. Plans and/or shop drawings for the installation of control manholes
and related equipment shall be approved by the Superintendent before any
construction is begun.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 20)



   (B)   Whenever the Superintendent determines that interceptors or
traps are needed to protect the sewerage collection system or the sewage
treatment plant from grease, oil, sand or similar substances occurring in the
user’s sewage and so notifies the user, then such traps shall be promptly
installed by the user, on owner’s lines, at owner’s expense and shall be
so maintained by owner that none of such substances can be carried over into
the public sewers. All traps or interceptors shall meet the town’s
standards as to construction, location and installation.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 21)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.09  WASTE SAMPLING; ANALYSIS.



   (A)   (1)   Any industrial user shall be subject to periodic
inspections by the town for the purpose of determining compliance with
compliance limits, solvent management plans or spill prevention plans,
identifying dilution streams or to categorize regulated processes. These
inspections may consist of monitoring waste streams, inspection of the
premises, inspection and/or copying of production records, pretreatment
operating records and other records or data deemed necessary by the Inspector
for the purposes stated above.



      (2)   The installation, operation and maintenance of the
sampling facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner discharging the
wastes and shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent. Access to
the sampling facilities shall be granted, at all times, to the Superintendent.



      (3)   Where an owner’s operations have security measures in
force which require proper identification and clearance before entry onto
said owner’s property is granted, such owner or owners shall make the
necessary arrangements with their security personnel that upon showing of
proper identification personnel from the town shall be permitted to enter
without delay for the purpose of observing or monitoring of wastes being
discharged at a given point or points or that owner or owners shall install
suitable control manholes outside of the security area or areas, which at all
times will be immediately available to town personnel.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 22)



   (B)   Laboratory procedures used in the examination of industrial
wastes shall be those set forth in Standard Methods or Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis or Pollutants, as set forth in 40
C.F.R. part 136.



      (1)   Charges to users. Alternate methods for certain analysis
of industrial wastes may be used subject to mutual agreement between the
Superintendent and the user. In the event of a dispute between the
Superintendent and the user as to the characteristics, strength, toxic nature
or other particulars of the sample taken and analyzed by the town, either
party may request that the sample in dispute be analyzed by a mutually
acceptable referee whose charges shall be paid by the party requesting the
analysis. Costs of analysis made by the town at the request of the user shall
be charged to the user according to the utility’s standard work order
billing procedures. All such analysis shall be binding in determining
strength-of-character and concentration of wastes.



      (2)   Charges to governmental agencies. Analysis run by the
Water Pollution Control Plant Laboratory for any governmental agency, or
political subdivision of a town, county or state shall be billed to such
agency or subdivision for direct labor and expenses according to the
utility’s standard work order billing procedure. Analyses run for other
agencies shall not have priority unless the judgment of the Superintendent
and the urgency of the analysis should have such priority.



      (3)   Charges collected. All waste analysis charges collected
under divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above shall be recorded as credits to the
operating costs of the water pollution control plant and a quarterly
accounting thereof shall be forwarded to the Superintendent. All such charges
are to be used to defray the operations and maintenance expenses incurred by
the water pollution control plant in performing said analysis.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 23)



   (C)   Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of
user’s wastes has been obtained, the town may for the purpose of this
chapter make a determination of the character and concentration of the wastes
by using data based on analysis of similar processes or data for the same
type of business that are available from the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or from industry-recognized authoritative sources. This
method, if selected by the town, shall continue at the town’s pleasure or
until an adequate analysis has been made.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 24)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)




RULES AND REGULATIONS




§ 53.20  STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   In accordance with the statutes of the state, the Town Council has
established the following general rules and regulations for the safe,
economical and efficient management and operation of the town’s Sewage
utility, for the construction and use of sewers, building sewers,
appurtenances and connections to the sewerage system; for the regulation,
collection, and refunding of the rates and charges for sewerage service; and
refunding of the rates and charges for sewerage service; and for the
implementation of the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 52)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)



§ 53.21  EXTENSION OF TOWN SEWERS.



   (A)   If adequate public sewers do not exist, the developer shall
extend or cause to be extended adequate public sewers. Plans for any public
sewer extension must be approved by the Superintendent. All extensions must
be designed in accordance with the current sewer design criteria, town and
county, and must be constructed in accordance with the town’s standards and
specifications in compliance with Ten State Standards.



   (B)   Review of the plans and inspection prior to and during
construction by the Superintendent shall be at the expense of the developer.
The charge to the developer for review and approval of the sewer plans and
inspection during installation of the sewers shall be based on the actual
hours expended on such review and inspection, multiplied by the prevailing
hourly rates for such work.



   (C)   No person shall make use of a sewer extension or backfill or
otherwise conceal a sewer installation unless and until the same has been
inspected and approved by the utility. In addition to all other remedies, the
utility may cause the said installation to be excavated and exposed, may
terminate the connection and may require the developer or contractor to pay
or reimburse the utility for its costs and expenses in such excavation,
exposure, termination reconnection and restoration.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 56)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.22  LIMITATION OF CONCENTRATIONS PERMITTED.



   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in order to
protect the operation of the water pollution control plant, the disposal of
its sludges and its discharge to the receiving stream, the town hereby limits
the discharger of toxic ions, compounds and substances entering the town’s
sewage system not to exceed the concentrations listed below.



 

Constituent
 

Concentration (mg/l)





Arsenic
 

0.10



Barium
 

2.00



Cadmium
 

0.70



Chlorine
 

10.00



Chromium (hexavalent)
 

0.50



Chromium (total)
 

4.00



Copper
 

2.00



Cyanide
 

1.20



Fluoride
 

0.50



Lead
 

0.60



Manganese
 

1.00



Mercury
 

0.01



Nickel
 

2.00



Phenol
 

1.00



Selenium
 

0.02



Silver
 

0.30



Sulfide
 

10.00



Tin
 

2.00



Zinc
 

5.00





 



   (B)   The town has the legal authority to:



      (1)   Develop and enforce specific limits on prohibited
substances.



      (2)   Require compliance with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements by indirect dischargers.



      (3)   Impose fees, if necessary, to offset the cost incurred
by the permittee for administering the pretreatment program requirements
established in Part III of the current NPDES permit held by the town.



      (4)   Impose a fine of at least $1,000 per day, per violation,
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A), but no more than $2,500 per
day, per violation for a first violation nor more than $7,500 per day, per
violation for subsequent violations, in accordance with I.C.
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B).



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 57)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992; Ord. 4, 2012, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 53.23  SEPTIC TANK CLEANINGS; TREATMENT PLANT.



   (A)   Wastes that can be treated in digesters. Septic tank
cleanings, milk whey and other wastes acceptable to the Superintendent of the
Water Pollution Control Plant for treatment in the plant digesters from waste
hauler trucks will be handled by the treatment plant for charges fixed by the
Superintendent.



   (B)   Wastes that cannot be treated in digesters. Commercial or
industrial wastes acceptable to the Superintendent of the Water Pollution
Control Plant, but which are not acceptable for treatment in the plant
digesters (i.e., which must go to lagoon or other disposal), and which are
received from waste hauler tank trucks, will be handled by the treatment
plant on an individual contract basis as approved by the Superintendent at a
charge adequate to reimburse the utility for materials, labor and overhead
costs estimated to dispose of such wastes.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 58)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)



§ 53.24  SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.



   (A)   When an industry has been determined by the Superintendent to
be a “significant industrial user,” the Superintendent shall notify such
industry and require the installation, within 120 days, of flow metering
equipment for the purpose of determining the sewage flow or flows to the
municipal sewer.



   (B)   The specifications for any flow metering device and plans for
installation shall be submitted and approved by the Superintendent prior to
its installation.



   (C)   The cost of, and responsibility for, installation and
maintenance of such equipment shall be determined by the Town Council.



   (D)   The Town Council may, upon application and proof of economic
hardship or other reason, extend the time within which such equipment must be
installed.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 59)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992; Ord. 4, 2012, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 53.25  EQUIPMENT; DAMAGES.



   (A)   Control manholes.



      (1)   Any owner who discharges or may discharge industrial
wastes into a public sewer via any means such as floor drains, sinks, catch
basins and the like shall be required by the Superintendent to construct and
maintain, at his or her own expense, one or more control manholes, at a
specified location or locations, to facilitate the observation, measurement
and sampling of owner’s waste. Such manholes shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the town. The
Superintendent may also require the person to install and maintain in any
such manhole, at said person’s expense, an approved volume-measuring
device. Plans and/or shop drawings for the installation of control manholes
and related equipment shall be approved by the Superintendent before any
construction is begun.



      (2)   Any building sewer which will have or has the potential
of discharging prohibited wastes and/or wastes in excess of normal domestic
sewage shall have a control manhole installed in accordance with either the
Specifications and Standard Drawings of the Superintendent or an approved
equal.



      (3)   The utility has deemed it necessary to require the
installation of a control manhole in all building sewer lines where the
Superintendent has determined that any of the following conditions exist:



         (a)   Abnormal maintenance of the sewer has been
required to prevent and/or correct the occurrence of blockages, back-ups and
the like, which have resulted in property damage; and evidence indicates that
the abnormal maintenance is the result of the discharge of wastes in excess
of limitations set forth in this code of ordinances;



         (b)   There exists a concentration of persons
discharging wastes into a public sewer through a building sewer or sewers not
having control manholes;



         (c)   The results of laboratory analysis have
demonstrated that the strength of wastes being discharged into the public
sewer is in excess of limitations set forth in this code of ordinances;



         (d)   The Superintendent shall notify, in writing, any
person who has been identified to be in violation of any of the above
mentioned conditions and shall require such person or persons to install one
or more control manholes;



         (e)   Following notification, a control manhole shall be
installed within 120 days;



         (f)   Control manholes shall be located upon private
property, shall receive all wastes from the property and shall be readily
accessible to representatives of the utility in order to facilitate
observations, measurement and sampling of the waste being discharged;



         (g)   The cost of and responsibility for installation
and maintenance of control manholes and flow-metering equipment shall be
determined by the Superintendent; and



         (h)   The Town Council may, upon application and proof
of economic hardship or other reason, extend the time within which such
equipment must be installed.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 6)



   (B)   Grease and sand traps.



      (1)   Whenever the Superintendent determines that interceptors
or traps are needed to protect the sewerage collection system or the sewage
treatment plant from grease, oil, sand or similar substances occurring in the
user’s sewage and so notifies the user, then such traps shall be promptly
installed by the user, on the owner’s lines, at the owner’s expense and
shall be so maintained by owner that none of such substances can be carried
over into the public sewers. All traps or interceptors shall meet the
town’s standards as to construction, location and installation.



      (2)   Any building sewer which will have or has the potential
of discharging waste containing grease, oil, sand or similar substances,
having quantity and characteristics above that of a normal single- family
residence waste, shall have a grease and/or sand trap installed in a manner
to provide, at all times, the effective removal of grease, oil, sand or
similar substances before discharge to the public sewer.



      (3)   The utility has deemed it necessary to require the
installation of a grease and/or sand trap in either the building sewer or
within the building’s plumbing system in accordance with the Uniform
Plumbing Code, latest edition, Ch. 7, minimum requirements where the
Superintendent has determined that any one of the following conditions exist.



         (a)   The Superintendent shall notify, in writing, any
person who has been identified to be in violation of any of the above
mentioned conditions and shall require such person or persons to install
grease and/or sand trap.



         (b)   Following notification, the grease and/or sand
trap shall be installed within 120 days.



         (c)   The cost of, and responsibility for, installation
and maintenance of grease and sand traps shall be determined by the Town
Council.



         (d)   The Superintendent may, upon application and proof
of economic hardship or other reason, extend the time within which such
equipment must be installed.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 61)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.26  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The power to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be
vested in the Superintendent who may:



      (1)   Issue notices of violation;



      (2)   Call administrative hearings for the purpose of
establishing compliance schedules;



      (3)   Show cause hearing;



      (4)   Cause court summons to be issued; and



      (5)   Forward complaints of non-compliance to the Town
Attorney.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 62)



   (B)   Contractually specified enforcement procedures which conflict
with any portion of this section shall take precedence over the conflicting
portion of this section.



      (1)   Notice of violation. All persons found to be in
violation of any portion of this chapter, shall be served with a written
notice of violation by the Superintendent, stating the nature of the
violation or violations and providing a reasonable period of time within
which corrective action shall be taken, except where continuation of the
violation or violations may endanger operating or maintenance of the sewers
and sewerage system or may become a public nuisance.



      (2)   Administrative hearing.



         (a)   Violators failing to response to the notice of
violation shall be called before an Administrative Board of Hearing.



         (b)   Any attempt will be made to resolve the matter in
an equitable fashion and an administrative order will be drawn up specifying
a schedule of compliance and/or a compliance date.



         (c)   The Administrative Board shall consist of the Town
Manager, Superintendent and Utility Clerk.



      (3)   Show cause hearing. A meeting to show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed action,
the reason for the action, and a request that the user show cause why this
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user, whether or not the user appears
as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing
date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other
action against the user.



      (4)   Court action. Violations of administrative orders shall
be referred immediately to the Town Attorney, for enforcement in a court of
jurisdiction. The referral shall include a request for the pursuit of the
maximum penalty applicable under this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 63)



   (C)   Any party aggrieved by an order or determination under this
section may, within 15 days after receipt of a notice informing such party of
the decision or order, appeal such decision or order to the Town Council by
filing a petition seeking such appeal, with the Clerk-Treasurer, stating the
basis of such appeal, including the alleged error in the decision or order.
After receipt of such petition the Town Council, after due and proper notice
to all parties, shall hold a hearing on said petition and, at the conclusion
thereof, or within 30 days thereafter, enter a decision either affirming,
denying, revising, amending, altering or modifying such decision or order as
the Town Council, by majority vote, shall so rule. A party or person
aggrieved by the Town Council shall have the right to judicial review of such
determination in accord with and pursuant to the same provision of the
state’s Administrative Procedures Act (I.C. 4-21.5-3-7) as are applicable
to appeals and review of decisions of agencies of the state.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 64)



   (D)   Public notification. Under the provisions of 40 C.F.R.
403.8(f)(2)(viii), the town shall annually publish in the local newspaper, a
list of industrial and/or commercial users who have significantly violated
this chapter or any state or federal pretreatment standard. A significant
noncompliance (SNC) shall mean a violation which:



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter.



      (2)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of all the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG), and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH).



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public).



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance.



      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date,
any required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules.



      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.



      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations the control
authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 65)



   (E)   In accordance with this chapter, all industries affected by
federal categorical standards shall file with the Superintendent a priority
pollutant scan for total toxic organics (TTOs) at least bi-annually or
whenever a process change occurs, whichever occurs first.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 66)



   (F)   All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the
utility governing the service supplied by the utility are superseded and
replaced by the foregoing rules and regulations and/or other specifications.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 67)



   (G)   The remedies provided to the utility by these rules and
regulations shall not be exclusive and shall be in addition to all other
remedies which the utility has in law or equity.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 68)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992; Ord. 4, 2012, passed 4-11-2012)




COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES AND DISCHARGES




§ 53.40  PRIOR APPROVAL FOR CERTAIN WASTES.



   Review and acceptance by the Superintendent shall be obtained prior to
the discharge into the public sewers by any commercial or industrial class
customers of sewage whose wastes have:



   (A)   Either a BOD content greater than 250 milligrams per liter or
a COD greater than 500 milligrams per liter;



   (B)   Suspended solids content greater than 250 milligrams per liter;



   (C)   Phosphorus content greater than ten milligrams per liter;



   (D)   Ammonia content greater than 15 milligrams per liter;



   (E)   Fats, oil, grease (F/O/G) greater than 100 milligrams per
liter; or



   (F)   Other contaminants which from either nature or quantity will:



      (1)   Interfere with the operation of any portion of the
sewage utility;



      (2)   Pass through the treatment works or otherwise be
incompatible with such works; and



      (3)   Prevent the reclamation and/or recycling of municipal
wastewaters and sludge.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.41  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   (A)   When after making such a review, the Superintendent concludes
that, before the owner discharges waste into the public sewers, the owner
must modify or eliminate those constituents which would be harmful to the
structures, processes or operations of any portion of the Sewage utility or
injurious to health, then that owner shall either modify the wastes at the
point of origin or shall provide and operate, at the owner’s expense, such
preliminary treatment and processing facilities as may be deemed necessary to
render owner’s waste acceptable for admission into the public sewers.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 12)



   (B)   Plan, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment or processing facilities shall be
submitted to the town for examination and approval. No construction of such
facilities shall begin until the Superintendent has given written approval.
Such approval shall not exempt the person from the obligation to make further
reasonable adaptations of such facilities when such adaptations prove
necessary to secure the results of acceptable waste concentrations desired.
The approval of proposed facilities and/or equipment by the town does not in
any way guarantee that these facilities and/or equipment will function in the
manner described by their constructor or manufacturer, nor shall it relieve
an owner, firm or corporation of the responsibility of enlarging or otherwise
modifying such facilities to accomplish the intended purpose.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 13)



   (C)   Where such preliminary treatment facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating
condition by the person at his or her own expense and shall be subject to
periodic inspection by the town. The person shall maintain suitable operating
records, which shall be open to inspection by the town, and shall submit to
the Superintendent, such monthly summary reports of the character of the
influent and effluent as the Superintendent may require. All records and
reports shall be retained for a minimum of three years. All industry whether
categorical or non-categorical industry shall comply with all requirements of
40 C.F.R. § 403.12.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 14)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.42  CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   As part of this chapter, the town shall enforce all federal categorical
pretreatment standards upon the categorical industries within its service
area or the service area of any contract customer.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 15)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)



§ 53.43  PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no owner shall discharge or
cause or permit to be discharged into the public sewer any of the following
described substances, wastes or waters:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor heat in amount that could:



         (a)   Inhibit biological activity in the POTW and result
in interference or damage to the POTW; or



         (b)   Exceed 40 degrees Celsius or 104 degrees
Fahrenheit at the POTW treatment plant unless the Commissioner, upon request
of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits.



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 100 milligrams
per liter of grease, oils, fats or waxes;



      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil or nay other flammable or explosive solid,
liquid or gas in an amount that could cause interference or pass through;



      (4)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which either
alone or by interactions with other wastes, is capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into the sewers for their
maintenance or repair;



      (5)   Any garbage that has not been properly pretreated and
reduced per this chapter;



      (6)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, wood,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, paunch manure, butcher’s offal
or any other solid, or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewerage system or the sewage treatment plant;



      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 6.0 or
greater than 9.0 pH, or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or posing hazards to the structures, equipment or personnel of
the Sewage utility;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic substances, as
defined under § 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1317(a) and (b), in sufficient quantity to interfere with the biological
process of the sewage treatment plant or that will pass through the plant
into the receiving stream in amounts exceeding the standards set by federal,
interstate, state or other competent authority having jurisdiction, or will
prevent the disposal of the sludges by the utility in accordance with § 405
of said Act;



      (9)   Any toxic radioactive isotopes without a special permit.
The radioactive isotopes of I131 and P32 used in hospitals are not
prohibited, if they are properly diluted before being discharged into the
sewerage system, as further defined herein;



      (10)   Any waters or wastes that for a duration of 15 minutes
or more have a concentration more than five times the average concentration
of BOD or suspended solids of the user’s sewage discharged during a 24-hour
period of normal operation;



      (11)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or
such character and quantity that unusual provisions, attention and expense
would be required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant, its
pumping stations or other facilities;



      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing incompatible pollutants
as herein described;



      (13)   Any waters or wastes containing any toxic substances in
quantities that are sufficient to interfere with the biochemical processes of
the sewage treatment plant, that will pass through the plant into the
receiving waters, or accumulate in the sludges in an amount exceeding the
limitations, set forth by any federal, state, interstate or local authority
which ever is more stringent. Specifically excluded are any substances in
concentrations or amounts exceeding the limitations, set forth by the Town
Council and published herein;



      (14)   Any bulk waste, either industrial or domestic, without
prior written approval of the Superintendent;



      (15)   Any substances with objectionable color not removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable
tanning solutions; and/or



      (16)   A pollutant that could create a fire or explosion or
hazard in the POTW, including waste stream with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test method
in 40 C.F.R. 261.21.



   (B)   The town reserves the right to refuse, deny or revoke the
connections of any user in the event the sewage service requirements of the
users, in the judgment of the Superintendent, could or would impose an
excessive burden on the utility or in the event the user is or has been in
repeated violation of this chapter. The town further reserves the right in
the event of any emergency to restrict the allowable discharge received from
any or all large users of the sewage system during the time of such emergency.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 16)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992; Ord. 4, 2012, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 53.44  RESPONSIBILITY FOR OBSTRUCTING OR DAMAGING SEWERS.



   If a public sewer becomes obstructed or damaged because any of the
aforementioned substances were improperly discharged, the person or persons
responsible for such discharges shall reimburse the town for the expenses
incurred by the town for cleaning out, repairing, rebuilding the sewer or for
any litigations or damaged claims resulting therefrom, including legal fees
and court costs.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 17)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)



§ 53.45  CONTROL OF ADMISSIBLE WASTES.



   (A)   Any owner who discharges industrial waste into the town’s
sewerage system either directly or indirectly, shall forthwith fill out and
file with the Superintendent an industrial waste questionnaire (the form for
which will be furnished by the town) in which he or she shall set out the
quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged into the town’s
sewerage system. Any owner desiring to establish a new connection to the
public sewer or to establish a new account with utility for the purpose of
discharging industrial or commercial wastes, shall first fill out and file
with the Superintendent such a questionnaire which shall set out the actual
or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the wastes
to be discharged.



   (B)   Any industry who changes or proposes to change manufacturing
or pretreatment processes shall first notify the Superintendent, in writing,
and submit a new or revised industrial waste questionnaire for review by the
Superintendent.



   (C)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement
representation, or certification in any application, report or other document
required by the municipal ordinance, or other applicable regulations, shall,
upon conviction, be punished by the imposition of a civil penalty as required
by local and/or state statutes.



   (D)   When special circumstances render it an unreasonable burden to
comply with the time schedule determined by the utility for the correction of
any industrial waste discharge problem an extension of time, not to exceed 90
days, may be granted by the Superintendent upon presentation in writing of an
application for such relief.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 18)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)




RATES AND CHARGES; BILLINGS




§ 53.60  SERVICE CHARGES BASED ON WATER USAGE.



   (A)   Water obtained from the town’s water utility. The charges
made for sewerage service rendered to each lot, parcel of real estate or
building having any connection with town’s sewerage system, or otherwise
discharging sewage into the system, either directly or indirectly, shall be
based upon the quantity of water presumed to enter the public sewers after
being used in or on the property, as the quantity is measured by the water
meter or meters in use by the town’s water utility, except as herein
otherwise provided.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 25)



   (B)   Water obtained from other sources. Where the property obtains
any part or all of the water used from sources other than the town’s water
utility, the owner or the tenant many be required by the town to install and
maintain, at his or her own expense, a meter or meters acceptable to the town
for the quantity of water obtained from these other sources, or the town may
determine the quantity of such water by whatever means and methods it may
find relevant and practicable.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 26)



   (C)   Exempt water, general. Where a significant portion of the
metered water does not and cannot enter the sewerage system, either directly
or indirectly, the person having charge of the property may request
permission from the town to install, at his or her own expense, either an
approved meter or meters to determine the quantity of water that cannot enter
the sewerage system or an approved sewage- measuring device or devices to
determine the volume of sewage that actually enters the sewerage system. The
town reserves the right to determine by whatever other means and methods it
may find practicable the percentage of the property’s metered water that
enters the sewerage system. In any case, the service charge shall be based on
the quantity of water that can or actually does enter the public sewers but
in no case shall it be less than the minimum charge for the class of user
served.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 27)



   (D)   Metering of sewage. The town may require a person to install
and maintain, at his or her own expense, an approved device to measure
directly the volumes of wastes discharged to the sewerage system, if these
volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered-water consumption
records. The town shall inspect and approve such installation and no such
service, once installed, shall be removed without the town’s approval.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 28)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.61  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the
quantity of water used on or in the property or premises subject to such use,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Sewage service rates, based
upon the amount of water used, shall be as follows.



         (a)   Metered rates.



 

 

Phase I

 

Phase II

 

Phase III



First 3,000 gallons
 

$7.05

 

$7.64

 

$8.22



Next 6,000 gallons
 

$6.34

 

$6.87

 

$7.39



Next 12,000 gallons
 

$5.64

 

$6.10

 

$6.57



Next 29,000 gallons
 

$4.93

 

$5.34

 

$5.74



Next 150,000 gallons
 

$3.88

 

$4.20

 

$4.52



Over 200,000 gallons
 

$2.47

 

$2.68

 

$2.88




 



         (b)   Minimum charge; meter size. The minimum charge for
sewage service, where the user is a metered water consumer, shall be based
upon the meter size as follows:



 

Meter Size
 

Phase I

 

Phase II

 

Phase III





5/8 - 3/4 inch meter
 

$21.15

 

$22.92

 

$24.66



1 inch meter
 

$63.79

 

$69.08

 

$74.33



1-1/4 inch meter
 

$85.09

 

$92.15

 

$99.15



1-1/2 inch meter
 

$120.48

 

$130.48

 

$140.39



2 inch meter
 

$226.61

 

$245.42

 

$264.07



3 inch meter
 

$353.97

 

$383.35

 

$412.48



4 inch meter
 

$566.34

 

$613.35

 

$659.96



6 inch meter
 

$1,058.68

 

$1,146.56

 

$1,233.69





 



      (2)   Phase I shall commence on the first full billing period
following the date of adoption of the ordinance implementing these rates and
remain in effect until 12-31-2018. Phase II shall commence 1-1-2019 and
remain in effect until 12-31-2019. Phase III shall commence 1-1-2020 and
remain in effect thereafter.



      (3)   Customers of the sewage works located outside the
corporate boundaries of the town shall pay a surcharge of 50% in addition to
the schedules of rates set forth above.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 30)



   (B)   Flat rate.



      (1)   There shall be a flat rate charge for residential sewage
service where the user is not a metered water consumer of:



         (a)   $28.20 in Phase I;



         (b)   $30.54 in Phase II; and



         (c)   $32.86 in Phase III (such phases occurring during
the periods set forth in division (A) above).



      (2)   Customers of the sewage works located outside the
corporate boundaries of the town shall pay a surcharge of 150% in addition to
the flat rate charge.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 31)



   (C)   Contract customers; unit and other charges. In the event the
town consummates a contract to serve a regional treatment plant or any other
municipality or private sewage utility, either contiguous to the town or in
its environs, said contract shall provide for the following unit charges.



      (1)   Volume charge (cents per 100 cu. ft.)



 

Treatment
 
$20


Capital charge
 
$13


 
 
$33



 



      (2)   Variable charge (cents per 100 cu. ft.). A variable
charge for conveyance and collection costs attributable to the portion of the
conveyance system and operating costs associated therewith used by the
contract customer shall be computed by the town and added to the volume
charge.



      (3)   Flat charge. In addition to the foregoing charges based
on volume of sewage treated and conveyed each contract customer will pay a
monthly billing charge of $0.60 and a monthly surveillance charge of $90.



      (4)   Excess strength-of-wastes surcharge. In the event a
contract customer contributes waste having a strength in excess of domestic
waste characteristics, as herein before defined, a surcharge based on the
following unit process charge will be in effect for all waste found to be in
excess of limitations:



 

 

Cents Per Pound



Ammonia - (NH3)
 

$0.12



Biochemical oxygen demand - (BOD)
 

$0.10



Chemical oxygen demand
 

$0.10



Phosphorus - (P)
 

$0.42



Suspended solids - (SS)
 

$0.05




 



      (5)   Capital surcharge. In the event contract customer
delivers sewage for treatment to town for a period of 90 consecutive days
which is in excess of base MGD contracted for, then customer will be subject
to an additional capital charge computed at the capital charge (per 100 cubic
foot) then in effect times the excess percentage of MGD represented by
dividing actual MGD by contracted MGD.



      (6)   Other provisions. In the event sewage received pursuant
to any contract entered into under this section exceeds any of the
limitations imposed by this chapter, the town shall have the right to impose
all charges, limitations and penalties applicable to any non-contract user by
the town. Each contract entered into by the town pursuant to the foregoing
rate shall agree to enact and maintain a sewer use ordinance and user charge
system acceptable to the town and in conformance with the town’s
obligations under § 204(b)(1) of Pub. Law No. 95-217, as amended and
supplemented, and guidelines and regulations promulgated thereunder by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and 40 C.F.R. §§ 35-905-8, 35-928-1,
35-928-2 and 35-935-13.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 32)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992; Ord. passed 4-12-2006; Ord. 5, passed 8-2-2017)



§ 53.62  BULK WASTE CHARGES.



   (A)   Industrial. For all industrial waste suitable for disposal
through the plant digesters which has been delivered by the customer to
town’s plant: $178.50 per load. For purposes of computing charges
hereunder, a LOAD is defined as 5,000 gallons of tank capacity or fraction
thereof.



   (B)   Domestic. For all domestic waste delivered to plant by
customer’s truck or tank: $30 per load. For purposes of computing charges
hereunder, a LOAD is defined as 1,000 gallons of tank capacity or fraction
thereof.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 33)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)



§ 53.63  ANNUAL REVIEW OF SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Prior to May 1 of each alternate year, beginning in 1994, the
Town Manager and an independent certified public accountant employed for that
purpose shall submit to the Town Council a comparison of the calculated unit
cost for flow, removal of BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus and ammonia per
year with unit charges currently in effect from which the Town Council shall
determine whether the current service charges and surcharges are adequate or
should be changed.



   (B)   The methodology utilized in developing this cost comparison
shall include:



      (1)   A system including the distribution of the cost of
operation and maintenance of the treatment works of the WPC utility to each
user class in proportion to such user’s contribution to the total waste
loading of the treatment works. Factors such as strength, volume and delivery
flow characteristics shall be considered and included as the basis for the
user’s contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and
maintenance and replacement costs to each user class; and



      (2)   Total annual service charges and surcharges collected
from each individual user class shall be deemed sufficient if said charges
have generated during the prior operating period sufficient revenue to offset
the cost of all treatment works operation and maintenance provided by the
utility, including cost of management, system repair and replacement, debt
retirement and other costs incidental to the utility operation attributable
to such class.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 34)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed -
-1992)



§ 53.64  STRENGTH-OF-WASTES SURCHARGES.



   (A)   Liability for surcharge. Each user discharging wastes into the
sewerage, in addition to other sewage service charges imposed by this
chapter, based on the following minimum strength characteristics to the
extent that such wastes are in concentrations greater than:



      (1)   Biochemical oxygen demand of 250 milligrams per liter;



      (2)   Chemical oxygen demand of 500 milligrams per liter;



      (3)   Suspended solids content of 250 milligrams per liter;



      (4)   Phosphorus content of ten milligrams per liter; and



      (5)   Ammonia content of ten milligrams per liter.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 35)



   (B)   Computation of surcharge.



      (1)   The surcharge shall be determined as follows: the excess
pounds of BOD or COD phosphorus, and ammonia will each be computed by first
multiplying the user’s billing sewage volume measured in units of 100 cubic
feet for the current billing period by the factor 0.0062321 and then
multiplying this product by the difference between:



         (a)   The concentrations measured in milligrams per
liter of the BOD or COD, suspended solids, phosphorus and ammonia
respectively in the user’s sewage; and



         (b)   The allowed concentrations set out in division (A)
above.



      (2)   The surcharge for each constituent will then be
determined by multiplying the excess pounds of each constituent by the
appropriate rate of surcharge set out herein. In the event COD measurement is
used, as herein before provided, 50% of the excess pounds measured will be
used to compute the equivalent BOD charge.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 36)



   (C)   Waste evaluation charges. All users discharging wastes into
the system requiring continuing surveillance sampling and waste evaluation
shall be subject to a monthly fixed charge to cover the costs of such
services in the amount of $90 per discharge point.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 37)



   (D)   Revision of rates of surcharge. Prior to May 1 of each
alternate year, commencing in 1994, the Town Manager and an independent
certified public accountant employed for that purpose shall submit to the
Town Council a comparison of the calculated unit costs for removing BOD,
suspended solids, phosphorus and ammonia from the sewage treatment plant
influent during the previous calendar year with the unit charges currently in
effect in order that the Town Council may determine whether the current rates
of surcharge are adequate or should be changed and request legislative
enactment of said changes by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 38)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.65  SERVICE CHARGE BILLING.



   (A)   Billing period.



      (1)   Charges for sewerage service shall be computed and
billed by the office of the Town Utilities. Bills shall be rendered
approximately monthly, unless additional billing is required to reflect
customer changes, meter changes, service termination, initial billings or is
otherwise required to adjust billing cycle.



      (2)   Billings for sewerage service shall be rendered with and
shall be due and payable on the same due date as billings for water service
to the same premises, if any; and, if none, then within such billing cycle as
the utility may determine.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 39)



   (B)   Liability for payment. Charges for sewerage service shall be
billed to the person being billed for water service, if any, unless by
contract with the utility, another person assumes responsibility for payment.
Notwithstanding billing to, and assumption of responsibility by any person,
charges for sewerage service shall remain the responsibility of the owner of
the real estate, who shall hold the utility harmless from any loss occasioned
by the delinquency of the person billed, including all penalties, recording
fees, attorney’s fees, interest and curt costs, if any.



      (1)   The owner of the real estate shall have the right to
examine the utility’s records of billing and collection to ascertain
whether such charges have been paid and the amount thereof.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall permit the owner, or any
person other than the person being billed, to inspect, examine or otherwise
obtain confidential information including the income, employment, finances or
Social Security number of the person being billed.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 40)



   (C)   First billings. The rates, charges and surcharges fixed in
this chapter shall extend to and cover any additional premises hereafter
served, without hearing or notice. If the first billing to a new user covers
a period other than a full billing month, then the charges for sewerage
service for such billing shall be made in accordance with standard practice
employed by the town’s water utility.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 41)



   (D)   Town subject to charges. For sewerage service rendered to the
town, or any department, structure or property thereof, the town shall be
subject to the same rates and charges herein established for other persons or
to rates and charges established in harmony herewith.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 42)



   (E)   Consolidation of accounts. Where an industrial, commercial or
other non-residential enterprise is operating in a unified manufacturing or
service area composed of two or more contiguous parcels of real estate and is
supplied with water through two or more meters, upon application by the owner
or his or her authorized agent, a consolidation of the water meter readings
may be made for the purpose of calculating the sewerage service charge.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 43)



   (F)   How delinquencies arise. Charges for sewerage service levied
pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable on or before the due date
stated on the bill. Any charges for sewerage service not paid by the due date
shall be delinquent, and may be collected, with any applied penalty,
recording fees, service charges, attorney’s fees, interest and court costs,
if any, in accordance with this chapter and with I.C. 36-9-23-31 through
36-9-23-34. A penalty of 10% of the amount of the charges for sewerage
service shall be added to the delinquent charges.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 45)



   (G)   Collection through shutting off water service. Where the
property having a delinquent account for charges for sewerage service is
served by the town’s water utility, the utility may, after reasonable
notice to the person being billed, as provided by the rules and regulations
of the utility adopted by the Town Council, shut off water service to the
property. Water service shall not be restored until the delinquent account,
together with the costs of turning off and turning on the water, shall have
been paid.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 46)



   (H)   Collection through terminating sewer service.



      (1)   In addition to all other remedies provided, the utility
may, after reasonable notice to the person being billed, as provided after
reasonable notice to the person being billed, as provided by the rules and
regulations of the utility adopted by the Town Council, terminate sewerage
service to the property.



      (2)   Sewerage service shall not be restored until the
delinquent account, together with costs of terminating and reconnecting the
sewer service, shall have been paid.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 47)



   (I)   List of delinquent fees and penalties; tax duplicates
collection. Delinquent charges for sewerage services and applied penalties,
recording fees and service charges may be made a lien upon the property and
may be collected in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-23-32 and
36-9-23-33.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 48)



   (J)   Collection through court actions. In addition to the foregoing
remedies, the utility may recover the amount of the charges for sewerage
services, penalty and a reasonable attorney’s fee in a civil action and may
foreclose a lien established by this chapter in accordance with I.C.
36-9-23-34.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 49)



   (K)   Accounting for sewerage service charges. The Clerk-Treasurer
shall establish and maintain for as long as user charges and surcharges are
collected under the rate schedule instituted herein, accounts for the Sewage
Works Improvement Fund as required by prior ordinances relating to the
issuance of sewage works revenue bonds now outstanding and further in
accordance with the laws of the state relative to the deposit and
disbursement of public funds.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 51)



(Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   Any landowner, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with
any provision of this chapter or of the rules and regulation of the Town
Council pertaining thereto shall be deemed to have committed a Class B
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of up to $1,000
per infraction as provided by I.C. 34-28-5-4. Each day that such violation(s)
or non-compliance continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. 14, 1992, passed - -1992)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



      72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      73.   PARKING RULES



      74.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      75.   PEDESTRIANS



      76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      77.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Load restrictions




Traffic Administration




   70.15   School crossing guard



   70.16   Police administration



   70.17   Traffic Division



   70.18   Traffic violations; records



   70.19   Accidents; investigations, studies and reports



   70.20   Drivers’ files to be maintained



   70.21   Annual traffic safety report



   70.22   Funeral processions; method of identification



   70.23   Traffic Engineer



   70.24   Emergency and experimental regulations



   70.25   Traffic Commission



   70.26   Traffic Violations Bureau




Obedience and Enforcement




   70.40   Police and Fire Department officials; authority



   70.41   Required obedience



   70.42   Persons propelling pushcarts; riding animals



   70.43   Public employees to obey



   70.44   Authorized emergency vehicles



   70.45   Accidents




Snow Emergencies




   70.60   Title



   70.61   Definitions



   70.62   Parking prohibition; declaration; termination



   70.63   Signs marking route



   70.64   Stalled vehicles



   70.65   Removal and impoundment



 



   70.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY or ALLEYWAY. A public right-of-way between abutting properties
reserved for public use and access to the property abutting the right-of-way.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A vehicle which is within the definition
of I.C. 9-13-2-6.



   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride having two tandem wheels, either of which is more than ten inches in
diameter.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
when, within any 600 feet along such highway, there are buildings in use for
business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks
or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at
least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides
of the highway.



   CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT. All streets and portions of
streets within the area described as follows: all that area bounded by the
Eel River on the south; from the intersection of Eel River and Front Street
extended; thence north on Front Street to the intersection of Front Street
and Second Street; thence east on Second Street to the intersection of Second
Street and Market Street; thence north on Market Street to the intersection
of Market Street and Third Street; thence east on Third Street to the
intersection of Third Street and Mill Street; thence south on Mill Street to
the intersection of Mill Street and Second Street; thence east on Second
Street to the intersection of Second Street and Sycamore Street; thence south
on Sycamore Street to the intersection of Sycamore Street and E. South
Street; thence west on E. South Street to the intersection of E. South Street
with the Eel River.



   CITY. The Town of North Manchester.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property.



   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect
to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no
legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street or roadway.



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the
edges of the traversable roadway; and



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface.



   CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.



   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or passengers).



   HIGHWAY and/or STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   INTERSECTION.



      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.



      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways, 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the
event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded
as a separate INTERSECTION.



   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle, which is self-propelled, and every
vehicle, which is propelled by electric power, obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.



   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they
shall mean standard time or daylight-savings time as may be in current use in
the town.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this traffic code placed or erected by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose
of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.



   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporary for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for
the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading or passengers.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.



   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the municipal Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.



   POLICE, OFFICERS, POLICE DEPARTMENT and TRAFFIC DIVISION. The Town
Marshal and Deputy Marshals of the town and the term CHIEF OF POLICE shall be
deemed to mean and refer to the Town Marshal.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and
used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having expressed or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.



   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, and operated upon rails.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and building in use for business.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to
danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.



   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used
herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such
roadways collectively.



   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.



   SKATING DEVICE. Includes skateboards, in-line skates, roller skates and
scooters of all types, whether self-propelled or motorized.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for use of
pedestrians.



   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.



   STOP or STOPPING.



      (1)   When required, means complete cessation from movement;
and



      (2)   When prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic-control sign or signal.



   THROUGH HIGHWAY OR STREET. Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways and streets is required by
law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway or street in
obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected
as provided in this traffic code.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars
and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.



   TRAFFIC DIVISION. The Traffic Division of the Police Department of the
town or, in the event a Traffic Division is not established, then said term
whenever used therein shall be deemed to refer to the Police Department of
the town.



   TRAFFIC ENGINEER or TRAFFIC COMMISSIONER. The Town Manager, who shall,
by virtue of appointment to that office, be the Traffic Engineer and Traffic
Commissioner.



   TREE LAWN. The portion of a street paralleling the roadway, which lies
between property line and the curb or improved gutter.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. I)  (Ord. passed 12-1-2004)



§ 70.02  LOAD RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Restrictions  upon  vehicles  using certain highways. When
signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle
with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified herein at any of the
streets or parts of streets described herein.



   (B)   Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
commercial vehicle exceeding (pounds) gross weight at any time upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described herein; except that, such vehicles
may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials
or merchandise and then only by entering such street at the intersection
nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding thereon no farther than
the nearest intersection thereafter.



   (C)   Restriction upon use of streets by certain vehicles. The
town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to determine and designate
those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the
roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles of other
non-motorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice
thereof. When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XVI)  Penalty, see § 70.99




TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION




§ 70.15  SCHOOL CROSSING GUARD.



   (A)   In the interest of the safety and well-being of school
children, a school guard is hereby established in the town.



   (B)   The Town Marshal is hereby authorized to appoint two persons,
male or female, to the position of school guard. Each person appointed shall
be of good moral character and acceptable personality and should be sworn to
the faithful performance of his or her duties as hereinafter set forth.



   (C)   The Town Marshal shall assign the school guards to such
locations as shall, in his or her judgment, afford the greatest protection to
school children and the hours of service shall be fixed by the Town Marshal.



   (D)   The Town Marshal shall define the duties of school guards and
shall supervise the performance of such duties. School guards shall be
responsible to the Town Marshal and shall serve as school guards for as long
as they perform their duties satisfactorily, in the sole judgment of the Town
Marshal. Vacancies shall be filled by the Town Marshal.



   (E)   School guards shall be furnished suitable badges and such
other equipment and supplies as shall be prescribed by the Town Marshal and
Town Council.



   (F)   The Town Council shall fix the compensation to be paid school
guards and shall designate the manner of payment.



   (G)   School guards shall have such limited police power in the
matter of traffic control as may be delegated to them by the Town Marshal.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. V)



§ 70.16  POLICE ADMINISTRATION.



   There is hereby established in the Police Department of the town a
Traffic Division to be under the control of the Town Marshal.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.1)



§ 70.17  TRAFFIC DIVISION.



   It shall be the duty of all members of the Police Department to enforce
the street traffic regulations of the town and all of the state vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in the town, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the town’s
Traffic Commission and other officers of the town in the administration of
the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said
Division by this traffic code and the traffic ordinances of the town.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.2)



§ 70.18  TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS; RECORDS.



   (A)   The Police Department or the Traffic Division thereof shall
keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the town or of
the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged together with a
record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record
shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of
each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and
from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the
most recent five-year period.



   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices of violations
shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall
be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.



   (C)   All such records and reports shall be public records.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.3)



§ 70.19  ACCIDENTS; INVESTIGATIONS, STUDIES AND REPORTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, assisted by
other police officers of the Department, to investigate traffic accidents, to
arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.4)



   (B)   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become
numerous, the Traffic Division shall cooperate with the town’s Traffic
Commission in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial
measures.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.5)



   (C)   (1)   The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system
of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to
them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be
available for the use and information of the town’s Traffic Commission.



      (2)   The fee to be charged for copying and providing a copy
of a police generated accident or “crash” report or of any filed motor
vehicle accident report shall be the maximum amount permitted by state law.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.6)



(Ord. passed 12-1-2004)



§ 70.20  DRIVERS’ FILES TO BE MAINTAINED.



   (A)   The Police Department or the Traffic Division thereof shall
maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests,
convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.



   (B)   Said Division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged
with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in
frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to
discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and
reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons
suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year
period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at
least the most recent five-year period.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.7)



§ 70.21  ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.



   The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report, which
shall be filed with the Town Council. Such report shall contain information
on traffic matters in the town.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.8)



§ 70.22  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS; METHOD OF IDENTIFICATION.



   The Traffic Division shall designate a type of pennant or other
identifying insignia to be displayed upon or other method to be employed to
identify the vehicles in funeral processions.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.9)



§ 70.23  TRAFFIC ENGINEER.



   (A)   The office of Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The Town
Manager shall serve as Traffic Engineer in addition to his or her other
functions and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as
provided in this traffic code.



   (B)   It shall be the general duty of the Traffic Engineer to
determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of
traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents
and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of
traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and
highways of the town, to cooperate with other town officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out
the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the town.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.10)



§ 70.24  EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations
necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the
town and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental
regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.



   (B)   The Traffic Engineer may test traffic-control devices under
actual conditions of traffic.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.11)



§ 70.25  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a commission to be
known and designated as the “North Manchester Traffic Commission”.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.12)



   (B)   The Commission shall be responsible for developing and
implementing coordinated traffic safety programs which meet local needs;
acting in an advisory capacity to the Town Council in the coordination of
traffic safety activities, including the initiation and formulation of
recommendations to the Town Council regarding new traffic safety ordinances
and amendment of existing traffic ordinances; establishing traffic safety
priorities for the town; reviewing and approving project applications for
funding; serving in a liaison capacity between the town and the state’s
Department of Traffic Safety in developing the state’s Highway Safety
Program and in meeting the National Highway Safety Program standards;
promoting public acceptance of official programs proposed or instigated by
the town; fostering public knowledge and support of traffic law enforcement
and traffic engineering problems; cooperating with schools in promoting
educational traffic safety aids; educating the public in traffic safety; and
generally aiding the overall reduction of traffic accidents, injuries and
deaths on town streets.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.13)



   (C)   (1)   Membership. The commission shall consist of nine
official members as follows: Town Marshal and Town Manager, ex-officio; a
member of the Town Council; a student representative of Manchester Community
Schools and Manchester College, each of whom shall be appointed by the Town
Council, to serve for a term of one calendar year or until his or her
successor is appointed; and four other members who are determined to be
representative of the town’s community, each of whom shall be appointed by
the Town Council, for a term of two years and until their respective
successors are appointed; provided that, two of the initial four appointees
shall be for a term of one calendar year. All appointive terms shall expire
December 31.



      (2)   Unofficial members. The Commission is hereby authorized
to appoint as unofficial members of said Commission any additional persons by
majority vote of the Commission at any meeting where a quorum is present.
Unofficial members shall not have voting privileges.



      (3)   Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Commission shall be
selected annually, in the January meeting, upon nomination by a member of the
Commission, and election by majority vote.



      (4)   Secretary. The Chairperson of the Commission shall
appoint the Secretary of the Commission, whose duty it shall be to: send all
notices for special meetings of the Commission; keep and preserve the
minutes; place all documents and papers of the Commission for safekeeping
with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town; advise and consult with the Town
Council as to the work and recommendations of said Commission; work with said
Commission and its subcommittees, if any; work with organized community
groups and others to carry forward all plans and policies of the Commission
as to accident prevention which may be approved by the Commission; and to
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by said Commission.



      (5)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet once each month at a
predetermined time and shall meet on the call of the Chairperson or on call
by the majority of its members.



      (6)   Quorum. Five official members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of any business or the making of any recommendation.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.14)



§ 70.26  TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   Traffic Violations Bureau created.



      (1)   The Town Court may establish a Traffic Violations Bureau
and appoint a Violations Clerk, who shall serve under the direction and
control of the Court in accordance with I.C. 34-28-5-7. In the absence of the
Violations Clerk or, if none is appointed, the Judge of the Town Court may
exercise and perform all of the functions of the Violations Clerk.



      (2)   The Magistrate or Magistrates who hear traffic cases
shall designate the specified offenses under the traffic ordinances of the
town and the state traffic laws in respect to which payments of fines may be
accepted by the Traffic Violations Bureau in satisfaction thereof, and shall
specify by suitable schedules the amount of such fines for first, second and
subsequent offenses; provided, such fines are within the limits declared by
law or ordinance, and shall further specify what number of such offenses
shall require appearance before the Magistrate.



   (B)   When person charged may elect to appear at Bureau or before
Magistrate.



      (1)   Any person charged with an offense for which payment of
a fine may be made to the Traffic Violations Bureau shall have the option of
paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the
Traffic Violations Bureau upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the
option of depositing required lawful bail and, upon a plea of not guilty,
shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law.



      (2)   The payment of a fine to the Bureau shall be deemed an
acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and the Bureau, upon
accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator
acknowledging payment thereof.



   (C)   Duties of Traffic Violations Bureau. The following duties are
hereby imposed upon the Traffic Violations Bureau in reference to traffic
offenses.



      (1)   It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and
represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead
guilty, waive court appearance and give power of attorney.



      (2)   It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from
the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their
appearance on the court docket, and notify the arresting officer and
witnesses, if any, to be present.



      (3)   It shall keep an easily accessible record of all
violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding 12
months, whether such guilt was established in court or in the Traffic Bureau.



   (D)   Traffic Violations Bureau to keep records. The Traffic
Violations Bureau shall keep record and submit summarized monthly reports to
the Town Marshal of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of
traffic laws and ordinances in the town and of all the fines collected by the
Traffic Violations Bureau or the court, and of the final disposition or
present status of every case of violation of the provisions of said laws and
ordinances. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of
violations and the totals of each. Said records shall be public records.



   (E)   Additional duties of Traffic Violations Bureau. The Traffic
Violations Bureau shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the
traffic ordinances of the town or as may be required by any laws of the state.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XVII)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1995)




OBEDIENCE AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 70.40  POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police
Department or such officers as are assigned by the Town Marshal to enforce
all street traffic laws of the town and all of the state vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in the town.



      (2)   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as
are assigned by the Town Marshal are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in
the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



      (3)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a
fire, may direct or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.1)



   (B)   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.3)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.41  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE.



   It is a civil violation for any person to do any act forbidden or fail
to perform any act required in this traffic code.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.42  PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS; RIDING ANIMALS.



   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject
to the provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions of this traffic code which, by their very
nature, can have no application.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.4)



§ 70.43  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY.



   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, the
state, county or town, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to
violate any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise
permitted in this traffic code or by state statute.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.44  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
traffic code:



      (2)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:



         (a)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of
this traffic code;



         (b)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign,
but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



         (c)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or
she does not endanger life or property; and/or



         (d)   Disregard regulations governing direction of
movement or turning in specified directions.



      (3)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion
sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, or electronic device
as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at
least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle; except that, an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in
front of the vehicle.



      (4)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for
the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from
the consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.7)



   (B)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws
of the state or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only.



      (1)   The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.



      (2)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of
any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the highway.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.8)



§ 70.45  ACCIDENTS.



   (A)   Immediate notice of accident. The driver of a vehicle involved
in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total damage
to all property to an apparent extent of $25 or more shall immediately by the
quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the Police
Department if such accident occurs within the town.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.9)



   (B)   Written report of accident.



      (1)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved
in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total
damage to all property to an apparent extent of $750 or more shall, within
five days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to
the Police Department.



      (2)   The provisions of this division (B) shall not be
applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police
officer while such driver was present thereat.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.10)



   (C)   When driver unable to report.



      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable
of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in division (A)
above and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given
the notice not given by the driver.



      (2)   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a
written report of an accident as required in division (B) above and such
driver is not the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident, the owner
of such vehicle shall within five days after the accident make such report
not made by the driver.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.11)



   (D)   Public inspection of reports relating to accidents.



      (1)   A written reports made by persons involved in accidents
or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and
shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department or other
governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention
purposed; except that, the Police Department or other governmental agency may
disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity
is not otherwise known or when such person denies his or her presence at such
accident.



      (2)   No written reports forwarded under the provisions of the
section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising
out of an accident except that the Police Department shall furnish upon
demand of any party to such trial, or upon demand of any court, a certificate
showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the
Department in compliance with law and, if such report has been made, the
date, time and location of the accident, the names and addresses of the
drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved and the investigating officers.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.12)




SNOW EMERGENCIES




§ 70.60  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Snow
Emergency Regulations” of the town.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.1)



§ 70.61  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or highway improved, designated or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.



   SNOW EMERGENCY. A condition declared to be such by the Traffic Engineer.



   SNOW ROUTES. Those streets marked as such in accordance with the
provisions of the chapter.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.2)



§ 70.62  PARKING PROHIBITION; DECLARATION; TERMINATION.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever the Traffic Engineer of the town finds, on
the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a
forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet
or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor
vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on town streets be prohibited
or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the Town Superintendent
shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of, or all, snow
emergency routes as necessary by declaring it in a manner prescribed by this
subchapter.



      (2)   Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall
remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the Traffic Engineer in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter; however, any street area
which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for
the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom. Six
hours after announcement of a snow emergency and while the prohibition is in
effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
portion of a snow emergency route to which it applies. However, nothing in
this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where
it is forbidden by any other provision of law.



      (3)   Any provision of this subchapter, which becomes
effective by declaration of the Traffic Engineer or upon occurrence of
certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take
precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect.
However, it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to
traffic accidents, emergency travel, authorized emergency vehicles or
emergency traffic directions by a police officer.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.3)



   (B)   The Traffic Engineer shall cause each declaration of snow
emergency made by him or her pursuant to this subchapter to be publicly
announced by means of available media broadcasts with a normal operating
range covering the town, and he or she may cause the declaration to be
further announced through print media circulated in the town. Each
announcement shall describe the action taken, the time it will be in effect
and shall specify the streets or areas affected; provided, however, the
declaration of emergency will take effect when it is declared.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.4)



   (C)   Whenever the Traffic Engineer finds that some or all of the
conditions which give rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter no longer exist, he or she may declare the
prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, in a manner prescribed by this
subchapter, effective immediately upon announcement.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.5)



§ 70.63  SIGNS MARKING ROUTE.



   On each street designated by this subchapter as a snow emergency route,
the Traffic Engineer shall cause to be posted appropriate special signs.
These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall be
plainly readable to persons traveling on the street or highway.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.6)



§ 70.64  STALLED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or
not in violation of this subchapter on any part of a snow emergency route on
which there is a covering of snow, sleet or ice, or on which there is a
parking prohibition in effect, the person operating the vehicle shall take
immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway of the
snow emergency route, or onto the public space of a nearby driveway.



   (B)   No person shall abandon or leave his or her vehicle in the
roadway of a snow emergency route (regardless of whether he or she indicates
by raising the hood or otherwise that the vehicle is stalled), except for the
purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a
nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station or other place of
assistance and return without delay.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.7)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.65  REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   (1)   The police officer are hereby authorized to remove or
have removed a vehicle from a street to the nearest garage or other place of
safety, including another place on a street, or to a garage designated by the
Marshal or otherwise maintained by the town, under the following
circumstances or conditions:



         (a)   The vehicle is parked on a part of a snow
emergency route on which a parking prohibition is in effect;



         (b)   The vehicle is stalled on a part of a snow
emergency route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet or ice or on
which there a parking prohibition in effect and the person who was operating
the vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the
provisions of § 70.64 of this chapter; and



         (c)   The vehicle is parked in violation of any parking
ordinance or provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with
snow removal operations.



      (2)   Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle
from a street as authorized in this section, and the officer knows or is able
to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and
address of the owner thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to
be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of the removal, the
reasons therefor and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In
the event the vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice
shall be given to the proprietor of the garage.



      (3)   Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle
from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give
the notice to the owner as provided in division (A)(2) above, and in the
event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days,
then the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report
of the removal by mail to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles whose duty it is to
register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of the notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The
notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time
and place from which it was removed, the reasons for the removal and the name
of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.



      (4)   It shall be the duty of the Town Marshal to keep record
of each vehicle removed in accordance with this section. The record shall
include a description of the vehicle, its license number, the date and time
of its removal, where it was removed from, its location, the name and address
of its owner and last operator, if known, its final disposition, and the
parking violation involved.



      (5)   This section shall be supplemental to any other
provisions of law granting the Town Marshal authority to remove vehicles.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.9)



   (B)   No person shall recover a vehicle removed in accordance with
division (A) above, except as provided herein. Before the recovery is
allowed, the owner or other person authorized to recover the vehicle, such
person shall present to the Department of Public Safety proof of identity and
right to possession of the vehicle; sign a receipt for return of the vehicle;
and pay the actual costs of removal and storage.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.10)



   (C)   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or
left in any provision of this subchapter, and is not removed and impounded as
provided for in this subchapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall take
its registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle
which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix a traffic summons.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.11)



   (D)   In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in
a place or in a condition in violation of any provision of this chapter,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or
left in violation of a provision of this subchapter, together with proof that
the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of
the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the
person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.12)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this traffic code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.



      (2)   Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests.



         (a)   The town’s Clerk-Treasurer shall provide books
to include traffic citation forms for notifying alleged violators to appear
and answer to charges of violating traffic laws and ordinances in the Traffic
Court of the town. Said books shall include serially numbered sets of
citations in quadruplicate in the form prescribed and approved by the Town
Marshal.



         (b)   The town’s Clerk-Treasurer shall issue such
books to the Town Marshal or his or her duly authorized agent and shall
maintain a record of every book so issued and shall require a written receipt
for every such book.



         (c)   The Town Marshal shall be responsible for the
issuance of such books to individual members of the police force. The Town
Marshal shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall
maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations contained
therein.



      (3)   Procedure of police officers. Except when authorized or
directed under state law to immediately take a person before a magistrate for
the violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for
such violation other than for the purpose of giving him or her a warning or
warning notice and does not take such person into custody under arrest shall
take the name, address and operator’s license number of said person, the
registered number of the motor vehicle involved and such other pertinent
information as may be necessary, and shall issue to him or her in writing on
a form provided by the town’s Clerk-Treasurer a traffic citation containing
a notice to answer to the charge against him or her in the Traffic Court of
the town at a time at least five days after such alleged violation to be
specified in said citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise
of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation, shall release
such person from custody.



      (4)   Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants
and complaints.



         (a)   Every police officer upon issuing a traffic
citation to an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of
the state or of any traffic ordinance of the town shall deposit the original
and a duplicate copy of the citation with his or her immediate superior
officer, who shall cause the original to be delivered to the Traffic Court of
the town and said duplicate copy to the Central Records Section of the Police
Department. The second duplicate copy of the citation shall be retained in
the traffic citation book and shall be delivered by such superior officer to
the town’s Clerk-Treasurer together with such book when all traffic
citations therein have been used.



         (b)   Upon the filing of such original citation in the
Traffic Court of the town as aforesaid, said citation may be disposed of only
by trial in said Court or by other official action by a Judge of said Court,
including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a fine to the Traffic
Violations Bureau of said Court.



         (c)   The Town Marshal shall require the return to him
or her of each traffic citation and all copies thereof; except that, copy
required to be retained in the book as provided herein, which has been
spoiled or upon which any entry has been made and has not been issued to an
alleged violator.



         (d)   The Town Marshal shall also maintain or cause to
be maintained in connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of
the Police Department a record of the disposition of the charge by the
Traffic Court of the town or its Traffic Violations Bureau.



         (e)   The Town Marshal shall also maintain or cause to
be maintained a record of all warrants issued by the Traffic Court of the
town or by any other court on said traffic violation charges and which are
delivered to the Police Department for service, and of the final disposition
of all such warrants.



         (f)   It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for
any member of the Police Department or other officer or public employee to
dispose or alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the
record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint or
warrant, in a manner other than as required in this section.



      (5)   Illegal cancellation of traffic citations. It shall be
unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic
citation in any manner other than as provided by this division (A).



      (6)   When copy of citation shall be deemed a lawful
complaint. In the event the form of citation provided under division (A)(2)
above includes information and is sworn to as required under the general laws
of the state in respect to a complaint charging commission of the offense
alleged in said citation to have been committed, then such citation when
filed with a court having jurisdiction shall be deemed to be a lawful
complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this traffic code.



      (7)   Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any
person to violate his or her written promise to appear given to an officer
upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which such citation was originally issued.



      (8)   Citation on illegally parked vehicle. Whenever any motor
vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the
restrictions imposed by ordinance of the town or by state law, the officer
finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any
other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation, on a form
provided by the town’s Clerk-Treasurer for the driver to answer to the
charge against him or her within five days during the hours and at a place
specified in the citation.



      (9)   Failure to comply with traffic citation attached to
parked vehicle. If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or
parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a
traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days,
the Police Department shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which
the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him or her of the
violation and warning him or her that, in the event such letter is
disregarded for a period of five days, a warrant of arrest will be issued.



      (10)   Presumption in reference to illegal parking.



         (a)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law
or regulation governing the standing or parking of vehicle, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any
such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima fascia presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which such violation
occurred.



         (b)   The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only
when the procedure as prescribed in § 70.26 of this chapter has been
followed.



      (11)   When warrant to be issued. In the event any person
fails to comply with a traffic citation given to such person or attached to a
vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an
appearance in the Wabash Superior Court, or if any person fails or refuses to
deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the
Wabash Superior Court may secure and issue a warrant for his or her arrest.



      (12)   Record of traffic cases; report of convictions to
state’s Department of Motor Vehicles.



         (a)   Every magistrate or judge of a court shall keep or
cause to be kept a record of every traffic complaint, traffic citation or
other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or presented to said court
or its Traffic Violations Bureau, and shall keep a record of every official
action by said court or its Traffic Violations Bureau in reference thereto,
including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction, forfeiture of
bail, judgment of acquittal and the amount of fine or forfeiture resulting
from every said traffic complaint or citation deposited with or presented to
said Court or Traffic Violations Bureau.



         (b)   Within ten days after conviction of forfeiture of
bail of a person upon charge of violating any provision of this act or other
law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways every said Magistrate of
the Court or Clerk of the Court of record in which such conviction was held
or bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to said state’s
Department of Motor Vehicles an abstract of the record of said court covering
the case in which said person was so convicted or forfeited bail, which
abstract must be certified by the person so required to prepare the same to
be true and correct. Report need not be made of any conviction involving the
illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.



         (c)   Said abstract must be made upon a form furnished
by said state’s Department of Motor Vehicles and shall include the name and
address of the party charged, the number, if any, of his operator’s or
chauffeur’s license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the
nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment or whether
bail was forfeited and the amount of the fine or forfeiture as the case may
be.



         (d)   Every court of record shall also forward a like
report to said state’s Department of Motor Vehicles upon the conviction of
any person of manslaughter or other felony in the commission of which a
vehicle was used.



         (e)   The failure, refusal or neglect of any such
judicial officer to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall
constitute misconduct in office and shall be ground for removal therefrom.



      (13)   Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. Except
for funds from parking violations and other funds required to be paid into
the Ordinance Enforcement Expense Fund of the town all fines and forfeitures
collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person
charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this traffic code shall
be paid to the town treasury and deposited in the General Fund.



      (14)   Authority to impound vehicles.



         (a)   Members of the Police Department are hereby
authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage
or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the
Police Department, or otherwise maintained by the town under the
circumstances hereinafter enumerated:



            1.   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any
bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic;



            2.   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled
as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in
charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such
an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; and



            3.   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a
street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.



         (b)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a
street as authorized in the section and the officer knows or is able to
ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address
of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be
given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the
reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In
the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such
notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.



         (c)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a
street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the
name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to
the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not
returned to the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event
the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of
such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register
motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of
any public garage in which the vehicle is stored, such written report to
include the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such
removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XVIII)



   (B)   (1)   Any vehicle found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of §§ 70.60 through 70.65 or 73.01 through 73.11 of this traffic
code by the enforcing officer shall have a parking violation ticket placed on
the vehicle or given to the operator.



      (2)   The penalty for violation of §§ 70.60 through 70.65 or
73.01 through 73.11 of this traffic code shall be the sum of $10 if the
violation is paid within 24 hours after the time of violations stated on the
ticket, or $15 if the violation is paid after 24 hours, but within five days
of the violation; provided, however, the penalty for violation of the parking
and standing prohibitions in hazardous or congested places in § 73.09 of
this code of ordinances and for violation of the handicapped parking
restrictions of Ch. 77, Schd. I, of this code of ordinances shall $50.



      (3)   Any parking violation ticket issued under §§ 70.60
through 70.65 or 73.01 through 73.11 of this traffic code and not paid within
five days after issuance shall be subject to a citation in a court having
jurisdiction to answer to said parking violation.



      (4)   Each two-hour period during which a vehicle is in
violation of §§ 70.60 through 70.65 or 73.01 through 73.11 of this traffic
code shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIX)



   (C)   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of §§
70.60 through 70.65 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine, as for a
parking where prohibited violation.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.13)



(Ord. passed 5-3-2000; Ord. passed 11-5-2003; Ord. passed 12-1-2004)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   71.01   Authority to install



   71.02   Manual and specifications



   71.03   Obedience



   71.04   When required for enforcement purposes



   71.05   Signal legend



   71.06   Pedestrian-control signals



   71.07   Flashing signals



   71.08   Lane direction-control signals



   71.09   Display of unauthorized signs, signals and markings



   71.10   Interference with official devices or railroad signs or
signals



   71.11   Play streets



   71.12   Traffic lanes



§ 71.01  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.



   The town’s Traffic Commission shall place and maintain
traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the
traffic ordinances of the town to make effective the provisions of said
ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control
devices as it may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic
ordinances of the town or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.1)



§ 71.02  MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform
to the manual and specifications approved by the state’s Highway Commission
or resolution adopted by the legislative body of the town.



   (B)   All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall, so far as practical, be uniform as to type and location
throughout the town.



   (C)   All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent
with the provisions of state law or this traffic code shall be official
traffic-control devices.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.2)



§ 71.03  OBEDIENCE.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in the ordinance.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.3)



§ 71.04  WHEN REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.



   (A)   (1)   No provision of the ordinance for which official
traffic-control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device
is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person.



      (2)   Whenever a particular section does not state that
official traffic-control devices are required, such section shall be
effective even though no devices are erected or in place.



   (B)   (1)   Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed
in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic
code, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official
act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be
established by competent evidence.



      (2)   Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to
the provisions of this traffic code and purporting to conform to the lawful
requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this traffic code, unless the contrary shall be established
by competent evidence.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.4)



§ 71.05  SIGNAL LEGEND.



   (A)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively
one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall
be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and
said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians
as follows.



      (1)   Green indication.



         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal
may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such
place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time such signal is exhibited.



         (b)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal,
shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter
the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such
other movements as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time.
Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully
within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.



         (c)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control
signal as provided in § 71.06 of this chapter, pedestrians facing any green
signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



      (2)   Steady yellow indication. Vehicular traffic facing a
steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is
being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection.
Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a
pedestrian-control signal as provided in § 71.06 of this chapter are thereby
advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red
indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.



      (3)   Steady red indication. Vehicular traffic facing a steady
red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall
remain standing until a green indication is shown. Unless otherwise directed
by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in § 71.06 of this chapter,
pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway.



   (B)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable, except as to those provisions of this section
which, by their nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be
made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made
at the signal.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.5)



§ 71.06  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   (A)   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the
words “Walk” or “Don’t Walk” are in place, such signals shall
indicate as follows.



      (1)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across
the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.



      (2)   Don’t Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his or her crossing on the signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or
safety island while the “Don’t Walk” signal is showing.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.6)



   (B)   The Town Traffic Commission is hereby authorized:



      (1)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks
or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where,
in its opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway and at such other places as it may deem necessary; and



      (2)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and
at such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.13)



§ 71.07  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used
in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows.



      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line
when marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right
to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.



      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.



   (B)   (1)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade
crossings.



      (2)   Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad
grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in § 72.36 of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.7)



§ 71.08  LANE DIRECTION-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   When lane direction-control signals are placed over the individual
lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over
which a green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over
which a red signal is shown.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.8)



§ 71.09  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public
authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.



   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (D)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over
the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.9)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.10  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS.



   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or
any other part thereof.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.11  PLAY STREETS.



   (A)   The town’s Traffic Commission shall have authority to
declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate
signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.11)



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or
part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or
whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.12)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.12  TRAFFIC LANES.



   (A)   The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to mark
traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular
alignment of traffic is necessary.



   (B)   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 72:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Pulling and hauling vehicles and the like



   72.02   Loading or unloading



   72.03   Moving buildings



   72.04   Obstructing traffic



   72.05   Turning movements



   72.06   Following fire apparatus prohibited



   72.07   Crossing fire hose



   72.08   Funeral or other procession; drivers



   72.09   Closing or obstructing streets; permission



   72.10   Driving on sidewalks



   72.11   Backing limitations



   72.12   Vehicle doors; opening and closing



   72.13   Motorcycles



   72.14   Clinging to vehicles



   72.15   Controlled access



   72.16   Safety zones




Stop and Yield Intersections




   72.30   Through streets designated; signs required



   72.31   Intersections where stop or yield required



   72.32   Stop and yield signs



   72.33   Vehicle entering stop and yield intersection



   72.34   Emerging from alley, driveway or building



   72.35   Stop when traffic obstructed



   72.36   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train



Cross-reference:



   Recreational Vehicles, see Ch. 74



   Streets, Sidewalks and Public Ways, see Ch. 151



   Traffic Schedules, see Ch. 77




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 72.01  PULLING AND HAULING VEHICLES AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to drive, operate or pull any
tractor, other vehicle or equipment in, over or upon any street in the town,
while said vehicle or equipment has a wheel or wheels with lug or lugs or
otherwise is designed to be injurious to the surface of a street or public
way.



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent
the taking of any tractor or equipment through the town if said tractor or
equipment is equipped with rubber tires or flat steel rims, or other devices
to prevent doing injury to the surface of the street or public way.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 1)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to haul or transport upon the streets or
alleys of the town ashes, paper, corn cobs, rubbish or other materials in
such manner that the same may blow or be spilled upon the streets, alleys or
private property in said town.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 2)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  LOADING OR UNLOADING.



   It shall be unlawful to let stand in any alley in the town any vehicle,
object or property, except while loading or unloading or moving said object
or property from one conveyance to another or from one building to another
building.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  MOVING BUILDINGS.



   It shall be unlawful to move any building or buildings on, over or upon
any of the streets and alleys in the town without first having obtained a
permit from said town prescribing the route over which said building or
buildings are to be moved, and furnishing a bond to said town with sufficient
surety approved by the Town Council members of said town and agreeing therein
to save the town harmless from any and all damage that might accrue by reason
of the moving of such building or buildings and to further agree to notify
all companies having wires crossing any street or alley over which building
or buildings are to be moved.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 4)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon any of the streets in
the town so as to obstruct motor traffic and endanger his or her own life,
and shall not walk singly or in groups so that any person is more than three
feet from the curb line.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 5)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.05  TURNING MOVEMENTS.



   (A)   Required position and method of turning at intersections. A
driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows.



      (1)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a
right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway.



      (2)   Left turns on two-way roadways.



         (a)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to
move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an
approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of
such centerline where it enters the intersection and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.



         (b)   Whenever practical, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.



      (3)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any
intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practical in the left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered.



   (B)   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.



      (1)   The town’s Traffic Commission is authorized to place
markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such
course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law or ordinance.



      (2)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications
are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.



   (C)   Authority to place restricted turn signs. The town’s Traffic
Commission is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which
drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn, and shall place
proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in
which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be
removed when such turns are permitted.



   (D)   Obedience to no-turn signs. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no driver of
a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.



   (E)   Limitations on turning around. The driver of any vehicle shall
not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a
vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without other traffic.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VI)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.



   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
500 feet or drive into or park such a vehicle within the block where fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  CROSSING FIRE HOSE.



   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire
Department when laid down on any street, or private driveway, to be used at
any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION; DRIVERS.



   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this
chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.3)



   (B)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.4)



   (C)   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a
pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be
determined and designated by the Traffic Division.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.5)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  CLOSING OR OBSTRUCTING STREETS; PERMISSION.



   (A)   A request to temporarily obstruct or close a street or other
public way for an activity or event shall be submitted in writing to the
Traffic Commission.



   (B)   After reviewing the request, the Traffic Commission shall make
a recommendation to the Town Council to approve or disapprove the request
and, if the recommendation is to approve, the Traffic Commission shall
recommend the time and any conditions imposed by it concerning the request.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the Traffic Commission recommendation, the
Town Council may approve or reject the request and, if the Council approves
the request, it may also modify the terms and conditions that apply to its
approval.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.10  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area,
except at a permanent or temporary driveway.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.7)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.11  BACKING LIMITATIONS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.12  VEHICLE DOORS; OPENING AND CLOSING.



   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.9)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.13  MOTORCYCLES.



   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may
ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.14  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.11)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.15  CONTROLLED ACCESS.



   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.12)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.16  SAFETY ZONES.



   (A)   Boarding or alighting from vehicles. No person shall board or
alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.



   (B)   Unlawful riding. No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any
portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This
provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge
of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.



   (C)   Railroad trains are not to block streets. It shall be unlawful
for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the
operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of
any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five
minutes; except that, this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in
motion other than those engaged in switching.



   (D)   Driving through safety zone prohibited. No vehicle shall at
any time be driven through or within a safety zone.



(Prior Code, Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. X)  Penalty, see § 70.99




STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS




§ 72.30  THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED; SIGNS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets described in Ch. 76, Schd.
II are declared to be “through streets” for the purposes of this traffic
code.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.1)



   (B)   Whenever any ordinance of the town designates and describes a
through street it shall be the duty of the town’s Traffic Commission to
place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation at any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street
intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that,
at the intersection of two such through street or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall
be erected at the approaches on either of said streets as may be determined
by the Traffic Engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.2)



§ 72.31  INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED.



   The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to determine and
designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than
through streets and to determine:



   (A)   Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any
such intersection, in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at
every such place where a stop is required; or



   (B)   Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersection as prescribed in § 72.33(B) of this
chapter, in which event it shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every
place where obedience thereto is required.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.3)



§ 72.32  STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required
for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersection
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.



   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or
traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no
crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at
the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.4)



§ 72.33  VEHICLE ENTERING STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTION.



   (A)   (1)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer
or traffic-control signal, every driver of vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by § 72.32 of
this chapter.



      (2)   And after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle, which has entered the intersection from another, highway or
which is approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the
intersection.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.5)



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in
obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the
intersection; provided, however, that, if such a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign
without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his
or her failure to yield right-of-way.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.34  EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.



   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.7)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.35  STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, not withstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.36  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN.



   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet,
from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he or she
can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:



      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device
gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;



      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagger gives
or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;



      (3)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500
feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and
such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is
an immediate hazard; and



      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is
in hazardous proximity to such crossing.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.9)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73:  PARKING RULES



Section




General Provisions




   73.01   Generally



   73.02   Parking not to obstruct traffic



   73.03   Parking in alleys



   73.04   All-night parking



   73.05   Parking for certain purposes prohibited



   73.06   Parking adjacent to schools



   73.07   Parking prohibited on narrow streets



   73.08   Standing, parking on one-way streets



   73.09   Standing, parking near hazardous, congested places



   73.10   Trucks; weights



   73.11   Loading and unloading




Method of Parking




   73.25   Standing or parking close to curb



   73.26   Angle parking; signs and signals; permits



   73.27   Lamps on parked vehicles




Tree Lawn Parking




   73.40   Definitions



   73.41   Converting tree lawns



   73.42   Procedure



   73.43   Terms of bond



   73.44   Permit renewal after one year



Cross-reference:



   Parking Schedules, see Ch. 77



   Streets, Sidewalks and Public Ways, see Ch. 151



   Traffic Regulations, see Ch. 72




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 73.01  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official
traffic-control device, no person shall:



      (1)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:



         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street;



         (b)   On a sidewalk;



         (c)   Within an intersection;



         (d)   On a crosswalk;



         (e)   Between a safety zone, and the adjacent curb or
within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a
safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicated a different length by
signs or markings;



         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
highway or within a highway tunnel;



         (h)   On any railroad tracks;



         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit
stopping;



         (j)   Parking with vehicle facing oncoming flow of
traffic on wrong side of street;



         (k)   Parking in area reserved for parking with vehicle
facing the wrong direction;



         (l)   At a time prohibited or for a continuous period
longer than the time permitted, when signs are erected giving notice of the
parking prohibition or the maximum length of time that parking is permitted;



         (m)   No parking on the north side of Third Street,
between Bond and Wayne Streets;



         (n)   No parking on either side of Market Street,
between S.R. 13 and the first alley north of Ninth Street; and/or



         (o)   No parking on the east side of Wayne Street, for
distance of 110 feet, from the south curb line of Wayne and Ninth Streets and
from the south curb line of Wayne Street and College Avenue.



      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:



         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;



         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;



         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any
fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance (when properly
sign posted); and/or



         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit
standing.



      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers:



         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest railroad crossing;
and/or



         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



      (4)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied, in a
parking space, parking lot or designated area with in a parking lot which has
been ordered closed by the Town Council for a specified time and purpose;
provided, the Town Marshal shall post the parking area with a sign warning
that the parking area is closed, designating the dates and times the
prohibition remains in effect.



      (5)   No person shall park a vehicle for a continuous period
of time exceeding two hours at the following locations:



         (a)   On the north side of Second Street, from Walnut
Street to the first driveway west of Walnut Street;



         (b)   On the west side of Walnut Street, from Second
Street to a point on the west curb line of Second Street 130 feet north of
Second Street; and/or



         (c)   In any of the six parking spaces on the west side
of Market Street, north of Ninth Street, in front of the Community Pool.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her
control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as
unlawful.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.1)  (Ord. passed 9-1-2004) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.02  PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.



   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.03  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.04  ALL-NIGHT PARKING.



   No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time
longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 3:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any
day where posted, except physicians of emergency calls.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.4)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.05  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:



      (1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; and/or



      (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except
repairs necessitated by an emergency.



   (B)   Except for official police vehicles and parking for less than
15 minutes while conducting business at Town Hall, no person shall park a
vehicle in the first three parking spaces on the south side of Main Street,
immediately west of Market Street.



   (C)   When signs are posted no person shall park a vehicle for
longer than ten minutes in the parking spaces on Second and Walnut Streets,
abutting the United States Post Office property.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.5)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.06  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   (A)   The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to erect
signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent
to any school property when such parking would, in its opinion, interfere
with traffic or create a hazardous situation.



   (B)   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon
either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein,
no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.07  PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS.



   (A)   The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to erect
signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway
does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.



   (B)   When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon
narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of any such sign.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.7)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.08  STANDING, PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   The town’s Traffic Commission is authorized to erect signs
upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or
parking of vehicles and, when such signs are in place, no person shall stand
or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.8)



   (B)   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways
and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway
unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The town’s
Traffic Commission is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.9)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.09  STANDING, PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS, CONGESTED PLACES.



   (A)   The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to
determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in
length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.



   (B)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested
places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in
any such designated place.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.10  TRUCK WEIGHTS.



   No truck or trailer as defined by the Motor Vehicle Code of the state
having a manufacturer’s rated load capacity of more than one ton and no
truck or trailer motor vehicle having more than four wheels and other contact
points on the highway shall be parked on any public street of the town,
except while being loaded or unloaded; provided, however, this prohibition
shall not include pick-up trucks with more than four wheels.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.11)  (Ord. passed
10-1-2003)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.11  LOADING AND UNLOADING.



   (A)   Town’s Traffic Commission to designate curb loading zones.
The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to determine the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and
maintain appropriate signs indicated the same and stating the hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable.



   (B)   Permits for curb loading zones. The town’s Traffic
Commission shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon
special request of any person unless such person makes application for a
permit for such zone and for two signs to indicate the ends of each such
zone. The town’s Traffic Commission upon granting a permit and issuing such
signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the town treasury a
service fee of $50 per year or fraction thereof and may by general
regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement of the town for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit.
Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year.



   (C)   Standing in passenger curb loading zone.



      (1)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any
purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading
of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during
hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are
effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.



      (2)   The 24-foot area adjacent to the curb, whose beginning
point is 118 feet north of the “STOP” sign located at the northwest
corner of the intersection of Ninth and Market Streets, on the west side of
Market Street, is designated as an “UNLOADING” zone only, and when posted
by the Traffic Engineer, shall be used only for the unloading of vehicular
passengers at the community swimming pool, in accordance with the provisions
of this section.



   (D)   Standing in freight curb loading zone.



      (1)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any
purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and
delivery or pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as freight
curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones
are in effect.



      (2)   In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of
materials exceed 30 minutes.



   (E)   Town’s Traffic Commission to designate public carrier stops
and stands. The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized and required
to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places
and in such number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand
or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.



   (F)   Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.



      (1)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such
vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as
provided herein.



      (2)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon
any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.



      (3)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand
or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus
when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than 18 inches from
the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly
impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.



      (4)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such
vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator
of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.



   (G)   Restricted uses of bus and taxicab stands. No person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a
taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially
designated and appropriately signed; except that, the driver of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus, (hackney) or taxicab waiting to enter or about to
enter such zone.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIV)  Penalty, see § 70.99




METHOD OF PARKING




§ 73.25  STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
12 inches of the right-hand curb.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.26  ANGLE PARKING; SIGNS AND SIGNALS; PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   The town’s Traffic Commission shall determine upon
what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such
streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid
or state highway within the town unless the state’s Highway Commission has
determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is
of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free
movement of traffic.



      (2)   Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any
place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon
the left side of the street.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.2)



   (B)   On those streets which have been signed or marked by the
Traffic Engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such
signs or markings.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.3)



   (C)   (1)   The town’s Traffic Commission is authorized to
issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the
purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms
and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner
or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to
such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person
to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.4)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.27  LAMPS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway
during the hours between one- half hour after sunset and one-half hour before
sunrise and, in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway, no lights
need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.



   (B)   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or
shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and there
is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of
500 feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be
equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: at least
one lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one other
lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear of the vehicle, and the location of said lamp or lamps shall always be
such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements
of this section is installed as near as practical to the side of the vehicle
which is closest to passing traffic. The foregoing provisions shall not apply
to a motor-driven cycle.



   (C)   Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed
or dimmed.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.5)  Penalty, see § 70.99




TREE LAWN PARKING




§ 73.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKING SPACE. A space designed for use or used for the temporary
parking of a motor vehicle and being not less than eight feet wide and 20
feet long exclusive of passageways.



   PUBLIC PARKING AREA. An area paved with a hard surface in accordance
with the town specifications, formerly a tree lawn which has been converted
to a parking area, designed for use or used for the temporary parking of
motor vehicles and available for public use.



   TREE LAWN. The unimproved and untraveled portion of a street
paralleling the roadway, which lies between the abutting property line and
the traveled portion of the street.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 1)



§ 73.41  CONVERTING TREE LAWN.



   Tree lawns may be converted to public parking area by permit issued by
the Clerk-Treasurer of the town if authorized in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 2)



§ 73.42  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Owners of property abutting a tree lawn may petition the Plan
Commission of the town for the issuance of a permit to convert a tree lawn to
public parking area. Upon receipt of a petition to convert a tree lawn to
parking area, the Plan Commission shall, without notice, determine whether or
not the issuance of such permit is consistent with the spirit, purpose and
intent of the Zoning Ordinance of the town and that the issuance of such
permit will not substantially and permanently injure the appropriate use of
neighboring property, and will serve the public convenience and welfare. If
such determination is favorable to the issuance of the permit as requested or
as modified by the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission shall certify such
findings to the Traffic Commission of the town. Upon receipt of such
application and certification from the Plan Commission, the Traffic
Commission shall consider such petition and any modifications made by the
Plan Commission and make a determination that the granting of such permit
will or will not:



      (1)   Create vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard;



      (2)   Interfere with the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic; and



      (3)   Diminish or detract from the appearance, value or access
to any adjacent property.



   (B)   If the Traffic Commission determination is favorable in all
particulars to the granting of such permit, the Traffic Commission shall
certify the application, the approval of the Plan Commission and its findings
to the Town Council, which said Council shall direct the issuance of such
permit by the Clerk-Treasurer, subject to such applicant furnishing to the
Clerk-Treasurer a cash or performance bond, with acceptable surety, in such
amount as the Town Council may determine to ensure that:



      (1)   Existing public improvements shall be removed as
specified in the petition or as modified by the Plan Commission;



      (2)   The public parking area will be paved with a hard
surface in accordance with town specifications; and



      (3)   The improvements shall be made under the supervision of
the Traffic Engineer.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 3)



§ 73.43  TERMS OF BOND.



   The bond for the completion of such improvements shall run to the town
in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of removing the existing
improvements, installing hard surfacing and repairing the street and
sidewalk, to be released promptly upon the acceptance of such improvements by
the Traffic Engineer; otherwise to be forfeited, the proceeds to be used or
applied for the restoration of the area or for the completion of the
improvement, as the Town Council may determine. Following the acceptance of
such improvements, the same shall thereafter be maintained as a part of the
improved public streets of the town.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4)



§ 73.44  PERMIT RENEWAL AFTER ONE YEAR.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall retain as a permanent record duplicate copies
of all permits issued under this subchapter. If improvements authorized under
a permit have not been commenced within one year after date of the permit,
such improvements shall not thereafter be commenced without a new permit, and
the original permit shall be voided on its face by the Traffic Engineer in
the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 5)



CHAPTER 74:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section




Bicycles and Skating Devices




   74.01   Effect of regulations



   74.02   Unsafe bicycles; inspections



   74.03   Traffic laws apply



   74.04   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   74.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths



   74.06   Speed



   74.07   Emerging from alley or driveway



   74.08   Carrying articles



   74.09   Parking



   74.10   Riding on sidewalks



   74.11   Lamps and other equipment



   74.12   Violations




BICYCLES AND SKATING DEVICES




§ 74.01  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is a civil violation for any person to do any act forbidden
or fail to perform any act required in this subchapter.



   (B)   The parent of any child and guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever
a bicycle is operated upon any public street, public way or public location.
For purposes of this subchapter, the term BICYCLE shall include three-wheel
pedal or motor propelled riding devices.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 1)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)



§ 74.02  UNSAFE BICYCLES; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   It is a civil violation to operate an unsafe bicycle in the
town. An UNSAFE BICYCLE is one which does not have a firmly attached seat or
seats, a tire on each wheel, an operable steering mechanism, and a
functioning breaking mechanism or, if operating during nighttime, is not
equipped with lamps and other equipment as required by § 74.11 of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 2)



   (B)   A police office who observes a bicycle which he or she has
cause to believe is an unsafe bicycle may stop the operator and inspect the
bicycle to determine if the same is unsafe within the terms of this
subchapter. If the officer finds the bicycle to be an unsafe bicycle, the
officer shall issue a warning citation to the operator for a first offense,
requiring the deficiencies found to be repaired before the bicycle is again
operated on or at a public street, public way or public location.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 3)



(Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord. passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.03  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.



   All rules and laws of the state pertaining to bicycles shall apply to
the riding of bicycles.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 4)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)



§ 74.04  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or U turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 5)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.05  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   It is a violation to ride a bicycle two or more abreast,
except on those pathways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.



   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent
to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the
roadway.



   (D)   Persons riding bicycles and skating devices on public
sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians, and a person riding a bicycle or skating device shall give an
audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian on such public
sidewalk or pedestrian pathway.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 7)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.06  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 8)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.07  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway of building
shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of- way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 9)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.08  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No package or article shall be carried on a bicycle that prevents the
operator from keeping both hands on the handlebars at all times.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 10)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.09  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 11)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.10  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride a bicycle or skating device on the public sidewalk
of any street where the abutting properties are zoned as being a part of the
Business District under the Zoning Ordinance of the town.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 12)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004; Ord. passed 12-7-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.11  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.



   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 13)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.12  VIOLATIONS.



   In the event of flagrant or repeated violations, involving persons
under the age of 16 years, the Police Department shall cause the bicycle,
operated by the minor violator, to be brought to the Police Department where
a parent or guardian of the child will be contacted to recover the bicycle.
In the event the violator is over the age of 16 years, a summons may be
issued for said violation causing the violator to appear in the Town Court.
In either event, a record of the violation shall be kept by the Police
Department.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 14)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord.
passed 12-1-2004)



CHAPTER 75:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   75.01   Subject to traffic-control laws



   75.02   Right-of-way in crosswalks



   75.03   Using right half of crosswalks



   75.04   Crossing at right angles



   75.05   When pedestrian shall yield



   75.06   Prohibited crossing



   75.07   Obedience to bridge and railroad signals



   75.08   Walking along roadways



   75.09   Soliciting rides or business



   75.10   Drivers to exercise due care



§ 75.01  SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL LAWS.



   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore
declared in §§ 75.04 and 75.05 of this chapter, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.1)



§ 75.02  RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it
is impossible for a driver to yield.



   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply under the conditions stated
in § 75.05(B) of this chapter.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.03  USING RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practical, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.3)



§ 75.04  CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb
except in a crosswalk.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.4)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.05  WHEN PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (C)   The foregoing rules in this section have no application under
the conditions stated in § 75.06 of this chapter when pedestrians are
prohibited from crossing at certain designated places.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.5)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.06  PROHIBITED CROSSING.



   (A)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place, except in
a crosswalk.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk
in the Business District.



   (C)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk
upon any named through streets or parkways.



   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized
to cross diagonally pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.07  OBEDIENCE TO BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.7)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.08  WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.



   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along
and upon a highway shall when practical walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.09  SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or
highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle
while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.9)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.10  DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver
of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding



the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing
any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 76:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Speed limits



      II.   One-way streets and alleys



      III.   Through streets



      IV.   Stop and yield intersections



      V.   Snow emergency routes



      VI.   Vacated alleys



SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   State speed laws applicable.



      (1)   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles
shall be applicable upon all streets within the town, except as this
schedule, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines, upon
the basis of engineer and traffic investigation, that certain speed
regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas;
in which event, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a
speed in excess of any speed so declared in this schedule when signs are in
place giving notice thereof.



 

Street/Location
 

Speed Limit





College Avenue, from Wayne Street to East Street, East Street, from College
Avenue to Indiana Highway 13
 

20



Market Street, from Seventh to College Avenue
 

25



Ninth Street, between Market and Beckley Streets
 

20, when children are present



River Road, between State Road 114 (Main Street) and Singer Road
 

20, when children are present



Shock Road, between River Road and a point 500 feet east thereof
 

20, when children are present



Singer Road, between Sycamore Street and River Road Extended (covered bridge)
 

15, when children are present



West Ninth Street, from Market Street to Beckley Street
 

25, when children are not present in the school zone





 



      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess
of 15 mph on the covered bridge or on Singer Road between its intersections
with Sycamore Street and River Road extended (formerly S.R. 113).



   (B)   Decrease of state speed limits at certain intersections. It is
hereby determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation, that the speed permitted by state law at the following street
intersections is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions
found to exist at such intersections and it is hereby declared that the
maximum speed limit within 100 feet upon every approach to every such
intersection giving notice of the maximum speed limit so declared thereat.



   (C)   Increasing state speed limits in certain zones. It is hereby
determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that
the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets is less than is
necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation
and sign posting of said streets as through highways and (or) by reason of
widely spaced intersections and it is hereby declared that the maximum speed
limit shall be as hereinafter set forth on those streets or parts of streets
herein designated at the times specified when signs are erected giving notice
thereof.



   (D)   Decrease of state law maximum speed. It is hereby determined,
upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the speed
permitted by state law outside of business and residence districts as
applicable upon the following streets is greater than is reasonable or safe
under the conditions found to exist upon such streets and it is hereby
declared that the maximum speed limit shall be the miles per hour as
hereinafter set forth in the schedule above, on those streets or parts of
streets thereon described, from and after the date signs are posted showing
the maximum speed determined to be reasonable and safe.



   (E)   Regulation of speed by traffic signals. The town’s Traffic
Commission is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to
permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds
slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district
or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. V, XXI)  (Ord. passed 8-1-2007) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. Whenever any
ordinance of the town designates any one-way street or alley the town’s
Traffic Commission shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and
no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.



   (B)   One-way streets and alleys.



      (1)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those
alleys described in division (B)(2) below, vehicular traffic shall move only
in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are
erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.



      (2)   In accordance with division (B)(1) above and when
properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon
the following streets:



 

Street/Location
 
Direction


East-west alley between Second and Third Streets from North Mill Street to
North Walnut Street
 
One-way west


Pony Creek Road, from Cecil Street to Market Street
 
One-way east


Traffic on South River Road (between S.R. 114 E and Shock Road), from 7:45
a.m. to 8:30 a.m., from 2:45 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on Monday through Friday,
when Manchester Community Schools are in session
 
Southerly direction


West Street onto State Highway 114
 
No left turn is permitted



 



   (C)   Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during
certain periods.



      (1)   The town’s Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to
determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon
upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period
and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place
and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give
notice thereof. The town’s Traffic Commission may erect signs temporarily
designation lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction,
regardless of the centerline of the roadway.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so
placed in accordance with this section.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VII)  (Ord. passed 6-6-2001; Ord. passed
12-7-2005; Ord. passed 4-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III. THROUGH STREETS.



   In accordance with the provisions of § 72.30 of this traffic code and
when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop
at every intersection before entering any of the following streets or parts
of streets:



 



East and West Streets


Fourth Street


Indiana Highways 13 and 114


Main Street


Ninth Street


Second Street


North and South Streets


Beckley Street


Indiana Highway 13


Market Street


Mill Street


Wayne Street




 



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV. STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Stop signs shall be erected and operators of vehicles shall
stop for oncoming vehicles before entering the following described
intersections:



 

Street/Intersection




Baker Street, stop for Beckley


Beckley Street, stop for Main


Beckley Street, stop for S.R. 13


Beckley Street, stop for Thorne


Beckley Street, stop for Ninth


Bond Street, stop for College


Bond Street, stop for Ninth


Bond Street, stop for Seventh


Bond Street stop for Sixth


Bond Street, stop for Fifth


Bond Street, stop for Miami


Buffalo Street, all traffic stop for Main


Buffalo Street, all traffic stop for Second


Buffalo Street, stop for West South


Buffalo Street, stop for Colfax


Buffalo Street, stop for Fourth


Campus Drive, stop for Wayne


Campus Drive, stop for East


Cecil Street, all traffic stop for Parke Avenue


Charlie Street, all traffic stop for Baker Street


Charlie Street, all Traffic stop for Ron Court


Colfax Street, stop for Half


Colfax Street, stop for Buffalo


Colfax Street, all traffic stop for First Street


Colfax Street, stop for Half


Colfax Street, stop for High


Colonial Lane, stop for Westchester


College Avenue, stop for Market


College Avenue, stop for Wayne


College Avenue, stop for East


Country Lane, stop for Westchester


Crestview Drive, all traffic stop for Villa Court


Crestview Drive, all traffic stop for Frantz Drive


Damron Drive, stop for Market


East Street, stop for College


East Street, stop for S.R. 13


Eighth Street, stop for Walnut


Elm Street, stop for Main


Elm Street, stop for Second


Elm Street, stop for Fourth


Elm Street, all traffic stop for Seventh Street


Fellowship Drive, southbound traffic stop for Indiana State Highway 114


Fifth Street, stop for Mill


Fifth Street, stop for Sycamore


Fifth Street, stop for Wayne


Fifth Street, west-bound traffic stop for Beckley


Fifth Street, stop for Maple


Fifth Street, stop for Buffalo


Fifth Street, all traffic stop for Elm Street


First Street, stop for Main


First Street, stop for West South


Fourth Street, stop for Beckley


Fourth Street, stop for Market


Fourth Street, stop for Wayne


Fourth Street, stop for Mill


Fourth Street, stop for Bond


Fourth Street, stop for Strauss-Provimi Road


Fourth Street; west-bound traffic stop for Kech


Front Street, stop for Second


Front Street, stop for Main


Front Street, stop for Third


Front Street, stop for Fourth


Grandview Court, all traffic stop for Grandview Drive


Grandview Drive, all traffic stop for Damron Drive


Grandview Drive, all traffic stop for Sunset Drive


Grant Street, stop for Buffalo


Grant Street, all traffic stop for First Street


Groff Avenue, stop for Wayne


Half Street, all traffic stop for West South Street


South Half Street, stop for West South


Heckathorn Drive, stop for Cook Road


Heeter Street, all traffic stop for Main Street


Heeter Street, stop for West Main Street


Hill Street, all traffic stop for Market Street


Hillsamer Drive, all traffic stop for Orchard Drive


Ivy Court, all traffic stop for River Cove Lane


Kessler Street, stop for West Third


Laurel Circle (N), all traffic stop for Hillcrest Drive


Laurel Circle (S), all traffic stop for Hillcrest Drive


Maple Street, stop for Main


Maple Street, all traffic stop for Third Street


Maple Street, stop for Fourth


North Maple Street, stop for West Second


Market Street, stop for Ninth


Market Street, stop for S.R. 13


Meadow Lane, all traffic stop for Seventh Street


Meadowdale Drive, all traffic stop for Frantz Drive


Meadowdale Drive, stop for Villa Court


Meridian Street, northbound traffic stop for Conrail railroad crossing


Merkle Street, all traffic stop for Second Street Extd.


Miami Street, stop for Wayne


Miami Street, stop for East


Mill Street, stop for Ninth Street


Before entering the intersection of Mill Street and Seventh Streets, all
traffic shall stop before proceeding through said intersection


Ninth Street, stop for Beckley


Ninth Street, stop for Market


Ninth Street, stop for Wayne


Ninth Street, stop for East


Old Wabash Road, eastbound traffic stop for Wabash Road


Orchard Drive, stop for East


Orchard Drive (W), all traffic stop for Orchard Drive


Parke Avenue, stop for Market


Pony Creek Road, stop for Market


River Cove Lane, all traffic stop for Main


River Road, stop for Singer Road


Ruse Street, stop for College Avenue


Ruse Street, stop for Miami


Ruse Street, all traffic stop for Seventh Street


Rustic Lane, all traffic stop for Villa Court


Rustic Lane, stop for Westchester


Rustic lane, all traffic stop for Villa Court


Second Street, stop for Washington


Second Street, stop for Market


Second Street, stop for Mill


Second Street, stop for Wayne


Second Street, stop for Wabash


Seventh Street, stop for Walnut


Seventh Street, stop for Mill


Seventh Street, stop for Wayne


Seventh Street, stop for East


Seventh Street, stop for Market


Singer Road, east bound traffic stop for River Road


Sixth Street, stop for Mill


Sixth Street, stop for Sycamore


Sixth Street, stop for Wayne


Sixth Street, stop for East


Sixth Street, stop for Buffalo


Sixth Street, all traffic stop for Maple


Sixth Street, all traffic stop for Elm


Snyder Street, stop for Fourth Street


South Street, stop for Maple


South Street, stop for Sycamore


South Street, stop for Wabash


South Street, all traffic stop for Buffalo


South Street, eastbound and westbound traffic shall stop before crossing
Norfolk Southern railroad crossing


East South Street, stop for Main


West South Street, stop for Half


West South Street, stop for South Half


West South Street, stop for Conrail Railroad crossing


Strauss-Provimi Road, stop for Thorne


Strauss-Provimi Road, all traffic stop for Third


Strauss-Provimi Road, stop for Fourth


Strauss-Provimi Road, stop for West Fourth


Strauss-Provimi Road, stop for Ninth Street


Sunset Court, all traffic stop for Sunset Drive


Sunset Drive, northbound traffic stop for Damron Drive


Surrey Lane, all traffic stop for Main


Sycamore Street, stop for Mill


Sycamore Street, stop for Main


Sycamore Street, stop for Second


Sycamore Street, stop for Fourth


Sycamore Street, stop for Seventh


Sycamore Street, stop for Ninth


Sycamore Street, stop for College Avenue


Sycamore Street, stop for Kohser Street


Sylers Lane, stop for Westchester


Taylor Street, stop for Hanley Road


Third Street, stop for Elm


Third Street, stop for Market


Third Street, stop for Mill


Third Street, stop for Buffalo Street


Third Street, stop for Sycamore


Third Street, stop for Wayne


Third Street, stop for Walnut


Third Street, stop for Beckley


Third Street, stop for Wabash Road


Weimer Street, all traffic stop for Fourth


West Street, all traffic stop for Thorne


West Third Street, stop for Washington


Thorne Street, stop for Wabash Street


Thorne Street, west-bound traffic stop for Strauss-Provimi Road


Thorne Street, stop for Wabash Street


Tippy Lane, stop for Briarwood Drive


Wabash Road, stop for Main


Wabash Road, stop for Fourth


Walnut Street, stop for Main


Walnut Street, stop for Second


Walnut Street, stop for Fourth


Walnut Street, stop for Ninth


Walnut Street, stop for College Avenue


Walnut Street, stop for Kohser Street


Washington Street, all traffic stop for Fifth Street


Washington Street, stop for Main


Washington Street, stop for Second


Washington Street, stop for Fourth


Wayne Street, stop for Main


Wayne Street, stop for S.R. 13


West Street, stop for Main


Westchester Drive, stop for Colonial Lane


Woodland Drive, all traffic stop for Sunset Drive


Woodland Drive, stop for Wayne


Yaney Drive, all traffic stop for Kohser




 



   (B)   Yield signs shall be erected and operators of vehicles shall
yield to oncoming vehicles before entering the following described
intersections:



 

Automatic Traffic stops and go signals at:


East Main Street and Mill Street


Market Street and Main Street



 



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI)  (Ord. passed 2-6-2002)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V. SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   The following streets or portion of streets within the town are hereby
designated as snow emergency routes:



 



Beckley Street


Fourth Street


Heeter Street from West Main Street to Indiana Highway 114


Indiana Highway 114 from the east town limits to the west town limits


Ninth Street


Second Street


South First Street to West South Street


South Maple Street from Main Street (Indiana Highway 114) to the sewage
treatment plant


Thorn Street


Wayne Street


West Main Street, from Indiana Highway 114 to Heeter Street




 



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.8)



SCHEDULE VI. VACATED ALLEYS.



 

Vacated Alleys




Portion of alley lying on north side of Lot 12 of Michael Henney’s Addition
to the town: beginning at a point in the north line of said Lot #12, 76.50
feet west of the northeast corner thereof; thence north 16.50 feet to the
north line of said alley; thence west along the north line of said public
alley and the south line of Lot #13 of said addition, 34.10 feet to the
southwest corner of said Lot #13; thence in a southeasterly direction 17.70
feet to the northwest corner of Lot #12 of said addition; thence east along
the north line of said Lot #12, 28.33 feet to the place of beginning.
Recorded 6-21-1940. (Civil Engineer and the Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Chicago
and St. Louis Railroad Company.) Part of east/west alley, between Lots 12 and
13 between Main and Second Streets.


Fourth Street and alley: commencing at the northeast corner of Lot #6 in said
Aug. C. Mills & Co. Addition to the town; thence west 446 feet, four inches
to the northwest corner of Lot #10 in said addition; thence north 12 feet;
thence east 446 feet and four inches to a point; thence south 12 feet to the
point of beginning, the same being a 12-foot alley on the north side of Lots
#6, #7, #8, #9 and #10 in said addition. Said applicant is the owner of all
of said lots and the tract on the north of such alley.


Also, commencing at the northwest corner of Lot #7 in said Aug. C. Mills &
Co. Addition to the town; thence west 12 feet to the northeast corner of Lot
#8; thence south 132 feet to the southeast corner of Lot #8; thence east 12
feet to the southwest corner of Lot #7; thence north 132 feet to the point of
beginning. This is the alley between lots #7 and #8 in said A. C. Mills & Co.
Addition, the same being 12 feet in width. Said applicant is the owner of
Lots #7 and #8 hereof.


Also, commencing at the northeast corner of Lot #18, thence west 252 feet to
the northwest corner of Lot #15; thence north 50 feet to the southwest corner
of Lot #9; thence east 252 feet to the southeast corner of Lot #6; thence
south 50 feet to the point of beginning, all of said lots being in the Aug.
C. Mills & Co. Addition to the town. Said area is otherwise described as that
part of Fifth Street extending from the west limits of Kessler Street through
and to the east limits of West Street in the town. (Peabody Seating Company.)


The portion of an alley running east and west between Maple and Buffalo
Street, further described as follows: commencing at the southwest corner of
Lot #13 in A.C. Mills Addition to the town; thence east 150 feet; thence
south 16.5 feet to the northeast corner of Lot #10, same Addition; thence
west 150 feet to the northwest corner of Lot #12, same addition; thence north
16.50 feet to the place of beginning. Petition filed 1959. Protests filed
2-2-1959. Summons issued to Council 2-4-1959. (Petitioners: Eldon M. Wright,
Frances Al Wright, Orval E. Baker.) Outcome unknown.


The portion of the east-west alley in August C. Mills & Company’s Addition
to the town, lying between Lots 34 and 59 in said Addition. (Sam Blocher.)


The south one foot of the public alley which runs in an east-west direction
lying between Half and Miami Streets and commencing at the easterly line of
the right-of-way of Wayne Street and running thence east to the first
north-south alley intersecting the same. Public hearing held 2-4-1963. (Clara
Crowell, Clerk-Treasurer.) Freed alley.


Portion of alley beginning at the northwest corner of Lot #137 in the
Original Plat of North Manchester, Indiana; thence north a distance of 16.50
feet to the southwest corner of Lot #126; thence east along the south line of
said Lot #126 a distance of 78.375 feet to the southeast corner of said lot;
thence south a distance of 16.50 feet to the northeast corner of said Lot
#137 of the Original Plat; thence west along the north line of said Lot #137
a distance of 78.375 feet to the place of beginning. (Bryan Manufacturing.)


Sixteen foot alley, running the complete length from Elm Street on the east
through to Maple Street on the west, from the northwest corner of Lot #35 in
the Oak Park Addition to the town; thence east to the northeast corner of Lot
#42 in said addition; thence north to the southeast corner of Lot #50 in the
aforesaid addition; thence west to the southwest corner of Lot #43 in the
same addition; thence south to the point of beginning. Legal ad filed
5-2-1967. (Peabody Memorial Home.) Outcome unknown.


Alley beginning at the southeast corner of Lot #21 in Fairview Addition to
the town; thence north along the west edge of a public alley to the northeast
corner of Lot #17 in said addition; thence east along the south line of
College Avenue to the northwest corner of Lot #8 in said addition; thence
south along the east line of a public alley to the southwest corner of Lot #4
in said addition; thence west to the place of beginning. (Glen Heckman.)


Alley located from the northwest corner of Lot #32 in the Fairview Addition,
to the town; thence south to the southwest corner of Lot #27 in the said
addition; thence west to the southeast corner of Lot #46 in the aforesaid
addition; thence north to the northeast corner of Lot #41 in the same
addition; thence east to the point of beginning. (Fred Kissinger, Margaret
Kissinger, Peggy Schmalzried, John Pottenger, Maude Pottenger, Dorothy
Hoover, Russell Tracy, Edna Tracy, Ethel Olinger, James Stewart, Barbara
Stewart, Ethel Guthrie, Ralph Boyer, Jessie Boyer, Orville Cole, Mrs. Oscar
Monce, John Weber, Hima Weber, Keith Ream, Elsie Ream.)


All in the same Fairview Addition, from the northwest corner of Lot #26;
thence south to the southwest corner of Lot #25; thence west to the southeast
corner of Lot #48 in the same addition; thence north to the northeast corner
of Lot #47 in the same addition, thence east to the point of beginning. (Fred
Kissinger, Margaret Kissinger, Peggy Schmalzried, John Pottenger, Maude
Pottenger, Dorothy Hoover, Russell Tracy, Edna Tracy, Ethel Olinger, James
Stewart, Barbara Stewart, Ethel Guthrie, Ralph Boyer, Jessie Boyer, Orville
Cole, Mrs. Oscar Monce, John Weber, Hima Weber, Keith Ream, Elsie Ream.)


Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 30 in the Original Plat of
Manchester, now called North Manchester, thence south along the west line of
Lot #30, 156.75 feet to the southwest corner thereof; thence west 16.50 feet
to the southeast corner of Lot #31 in said addition; thence north on the east
line of Lot #31, 156.75 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence east
16.50 feet to the place of beginning. Containing 0.0594 of an acre. (Indiana
Lawrence Bank and Trust Company.)


Public alley lying south of the south line of Lots #1, #2, #3, #4, #5 and #6
of John Ennis’ Addition to the town, with its westerly terminus being West
Street and its easterly terminus being Beckley Street. Petition recorded
3-7-1978. (The Warner Corp., George W. Clark, Max E. Clark and Joann Miller.)


Portion of a public alley which lies between Lots #38 and #39 in August C.
Mills and Company’s Addition; said alley being 12 feet by 132 feet and
bounded on the west by Lot 38; on the east by Lot 39; on the north by the
south side of Fourth Street; and on the south by the north line of an
east-west public alley lying between Third and Fourth Street in said
subdivision. Petition recorded 11-26-1980. (Sincroft Sales, Inc.)


Beginning at a cut off concrete post at the northwest corner of Block 1 in
Shively and Metzger’s Second Addition to the town; thence north 20 feet to
a point on the east line of Beckley Street; thence east 187.50 feet to a
point on the west line of a north-south alley; thence south 20 feet to a
point at the northeast corner of Block 1 in Shively and Metzger’s Second
Addition to the town; thence west along the north line of Block 1 187.50 feet
to the point of beginning; containing 0.086 acres, more or less. Petition
recorded 10-19-1985 by Glen L. Blocher, Eleanor L. Blocher, BKB
Manufacturing, Inc., by Barry K. Blocher, President.


The alley, 13 feet wide, north and south and 216 feet long east and west
between Lots #2 and #3 in Joshua Wood’s Addition to the town. (Ralph
McFarland.)


Alley abutting owned by R. Ned Brooks and Ronald D. Brooks for that portion
abutting on part of Lot #3 and Lot #4, Colleen Houser for that portion
abutting on Lot #1, and Paul Kissinger for that portion abutting on lot and
part of Lot #3. Begin at the northwest corner of Lot #1 in College View
Addition to the town; thence north to the southwest corner of Lot #2 in said
addition; thence east on the south line of Lots #2, #3 and #4 to the
right-of-way line of the Pennsylvania Railroad; thence southwesterly along
said right-of-way line to a point where said right-of-way line would
intersect the north line of Lot #1 if prolonged; thence west along the north
line of Lot #31 to the place of beginning. (R. Ned Brooks, Ronald D. Brooks,
Colleen Houser and Paul Kissinger.)


Certain alley contained in the original plat of Oak Park Addition and now
contained within the replat of Oak Park Addition, shall be and are now
vacated. Said vacated alleyway shall be added to Lots #5 and #7 of said
replat of Oak Park Addition as was shown on the replat approved by the town.
Further, the vacation shall extend a distance of 184 feet west from the
western right-of-way line of Elm Street, and shall include the entire width
of said alleyway. Recorded 6-8-1998. (Woodcrafts Company, Inc.)


Public alley lying between Lots #2 and #3 in Samuel Krieg’s First Addition
to the town. (Auto Zone, Inc. by Eldon Metzger.)


Washington Street, between Lots #27, #28 and #37, and that part lying north
of said lots, to the south line of Outlot 1, as show on the Plat. (Oaklawn
Cemetery Association.)


Sixth Street, west of Washington Street, lying between Lots #41, #42, #43,
#44 and Lots #37, #38, #39 and #40, as shown on the Plat. (Oaklawn Cemetery
Association.)


The alley, running north and south, between Lots #38, #39, #42 and #43, as
shown on the Plat. (Oaklawn Cemetery Association.)


The alley, running east and west, between Lots #41, #42, #43, #44 and Outlot
1, as shown on the Plat. (Oaklawn Cemetery Association.)


The alley, running north and south on the west side of the Plat, beginning at
the south line of Lot #40, if projected west to the west side of the Plat,
thence north to the south line of Outlot 1, as shown on the Plat. (Oaklawn
Cemetery Association.)


East/west alley, platted between East Street and Ruse Street, lying between
Lots #1 through #4 and Lots #20 through #23 in said College Additions;
subject, however, to existing and future utility easements within and upon
the said vacated alley. (Manchester College.)


The alley running east and west and bordered on the west by Mill Street, on
the north by Lots #124, #125, #126 and #127, on the east by Sycamore Street
and on the south by Lots #136, #137, #138 and Lot #139, all in the Original
Plat to the town. (Barbara Joann Hill, George T. Coon and Virginia L. Coon
and the Manchester Economic Development Corporation.)


The alley running north and south, bordered on the east by a vacated alley
and Lot #137, on the south by Main Street, on the west by Lot #138, and on
the north by a vacated alley between Lots #125 and #126, all in the Original
Plat of the town. (Barbara Joann Hill, George T. Coon and Virginia L. Coon
and the Manchester Economic Development Corporation.)


The 12 foot east-west alley, bordered on the east by Sycamore Street, on the
north by Lot #8 in Henrietta Shanafelt and Kennedy’s Addition to the town,
on the west by the north-south alley sought to be vacated and on the south by
Lots #4 and #5, in Henrietta Shanafelt’s Addition to the town.


The 12-foot north-south alley, bordered on the east by Lot #8 and #9 in
Henrietta Shanafelt and Kennedy’s Addition to the town, on the south by the
12-foot alley sought to be vacated, on the west by Lot #3 in Henrietta
Shanafelt’s Addition to the town, and on the north by Miami Street.


Miami Street, bordered on the east by Sycamore Street, on the south by Lot #9
in Henrietta Shanafelt and Kennedy’s Addition to the town, on the west by
the abandoned railroad right-of-way of the former Philadelphia, Baltimore and
Washington Railroad Company and on the north by Lot #10 in Henrietta
Shanafelt and Kennedy’s Addition to the town. (Heckman Bindery, Inc. and
Stephen P. Heckman.)


The alley running north and south and bordered on the east by Lot #67, on the
south by Third Street, on the west by Lot #66, and on the north by a vacated
alley, all in Harter’s Addition to the town, is hereby vacated. (C. Lavonne
Lautzenhiser.)


The platted ten-foot alley in said Riverside Addition, running west from
South Market Street between Lots #11 and #12, to the west line of said lots
is hereby vacated. (Kimberly S. Pruitt)


The platted ten-foot alley running north and south, from a point whose north
line is formed by a line between the southwest corner of said Lot #11 in
Riverside Addition and the northwest corner of Lot #1 in Warvel Park Addition
(of record in Plat Book 3, at pages 306 and 307, in the office of the County
Recorder) and from said line thence south to the north line of Parke Avenue
in said Warvel Park Addition, is hereby vacated. (Kimberly S. Pruitt)




 



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXII)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1940;  Ord.
passed 11-29-1958; Res. 2, 1961, passed 6-5-1961; Res. 4, 1963, passed
6-24-1963; Res. 5, 1967, passed 5-1-1967; Res. 8, 1967, passed 6-5-1967; Res.
passed 7-7-1971; Res. passed 7-2-1997; Ord. 4, 1998, passed 3-4-1998; Ord.
14, 1998, passed 11-12-1998; Ord. 3, 2000, passed 5-3-2000; Ord. 2, 2001,
passed 5-1-2002; Ord. 2, 2003, passed 2-6-2003; Ord. 2, 2003, passed
2-6-2003; Ord. 3, 2003, passed 4-2-2003; Ord. 7, 2007, passed 6-6-2007; Ord.
5, 2008, passed 7-2-2008)



CHAPTER 77:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Facilities for persons with physical disabilities



      II.   Prohibited parking



SCHEDULE I. FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES.



   (A)   General. The definition of terms and standards for users and
for an “accessible parking space”, as used in this schedule, shall be the
same as those contained in I.C. 5-16-9 et seq., and this schedule, and its
enforcement shall apply to both public and private parking facilities for
persons with physical disabilities; provided, however, enforcement on private
property and public property which is not under the control of the civil town
shall not commence until the owner of the private or public property with one
or more accessible parking spaces executes and files with the Town Marshal a
written request for ongoing enforcement of the provisions of I.C. 5-16-9 et
seq.



   (B)   Designation of accessible parking spaces and the number of
spaces. The Traffic Engineer shall select and designate by erecting the
standard signage accessible parking spaces at the locations and in
quantities, as follows:



 



2 in the municipal lot located at the southwest corner of the intersection of
Main and Market Streets


1 at the westerly most parking space on the south side of Main Street, in the
100 block thereof


2 on the south side of Main Street, in the 200 block thereof


2 on the west side of Market Street, north of Ninth Street, at the Community
Pool


5 in the parking lot of Glen W. Ruppel Park


The first parking space west of Walnut Street on the north side of Main Street


1 abutting the east side of 109 N. Market Street in the Medcor parking lot


2 on the west side of the east parking lot at the Public Safety Complex


2 spaces on the south side of Ninth Street, west of Market Street at the
water tower


1 additional space in the first two existing parking spaces in the northwest
corner of the Medcor parking lot


Up to 10 parking spaces in the parking lot north of the Manchester Aquatic
and Fitness Center




 



   (C)   Violations. Violation of these parking restrictions shall be
as defined by I.C. 5-16-9-5 and I.C. 5-16-9-8 and subject to penalty as
stated in this code.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.12)  (Ord. passed 6-6-2001;
Ord. passed 9-1-2004; Ord. passed 9-1-2006; Ord. passed 1-2-2008; Ord. 7,
2012, passed 9-5-2012)



SCHEDULE II. PROHIBITED PARKING.



   (A)   Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. In
accordance with Ch. 73 of this traffic code, and when signs are erected
giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of
the following streets or part of street:



 



East side of South Maple Street form West South Street to south end of South
Maple Street


South side of West Main Street from Buffalo Street to First Street


East side of North Maple Street from West Main Street to West Second Street


East side of Wayne Street from East Main Street to East Fourth Street


West side of Bond Street from College Avenue to Miami Street


North side of Second Street from Market Street to Front Street


South side of West Second Street from North Maple Street to Washington Street


West side of Ruse Street from College Avenue to Miami Street


South side of West Fourth Street from Wabash Street to Beckley Street


South side of Miami Street from Wayne Street to East Street


South side of East Fourth Street from North Mill Street to Wayne Street


East and west side of South Market Street bridge on north side of Eel River


North side of West Main Street between West Street and Heeter Street


West side of Sycamore Street from Second Street to Third Street


West side of Sycamore Street from Second Street to Ninth Street


East side of Mill Street between Third Street and Fourth Street


North side of Ninth Street from Wayne Street to Ruse Street


South side of Second Street, within 40 feet of the crosswalk at the southwest
corner of the intersection of Second and Walnut Streets


West side of Elm Street, between Fourth Street and Seventh Street


South side of Fourth Street, between Wayne Street and Bond Street


North side of South Street, between Elm and Half Streets


East side of Walnut Street, from the driveway of the Medical Clinic to the
south line of Seventh Street


East side of Wayne Street, for a distance of 70 feet from its south curb line
with Ninth Street and for a distance of 54 feet from its north curb line with
Ninth Street


East side of Weimer Street, between Indiana Highway 114 and Fourth Street.
North side of Third Street, between Bond and Wayne Streets


Either side of Market Street, between S.R. 13 and the first alley north of
Ninth Street


West side of Mill Street, for a distance of 25 feet south from the south line
of College Avenue


East side of Wayne Street for a distance of 36 feet from the north line of
the intersection of Wayne and Miami Streets


East side of Wayne Street for a distance of 60 feet south from the south line
of the entrance to the Schwalm Hall parking lot on the campus of Manchester
College


Either side of Half Street, south of South Street


West side of Ruse Street, from College Avenue to Miami Street


West side of Bond Street, from Ninth Street to College Avenue


Either side of Shah Drive (at the Ruppel Sports Complex)


East side of East Street, from College Avenue to Stadium Drive


West side of East Street, from College Avenue to north side of Holl-Kintner
Building, on Manchester College campus




 



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.3)



   (B)   Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. In
accordance with § 73.01 of this traffic code, and when signs are erected
giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours
specified herein within the district or upon any of the streets or part of
streets as follows:



 

No parking 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Friday, on the following:


North Mill Street, both sides - between Main and Second Streets


East Second Street - between North Mill and North Market Streets


North Market Street, both sides - between Main and Second Streets


No parking from 3:30 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on the following:


Both sides of Main Street between Front Street and Mill Street


Both sides of Walnut Street from Main Street to Second Street



 



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.4)



   (C)   Stopping, standing on certain streets prohibited. In
accordance with this traffic code, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours
specified herein of any day, except Sunday and public holidays within the
district or upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows: East
Second Street, between North Mill and North Sycamore Streets.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.5)



   (D)   Parking time limited on certain streets. In accordance with §
73.01 of this traffic code, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof,
no person shall park a vehicle at times and places as follows: on Main Street
between Front and Mill Streets, on Market Street from Main to Second Street;
on Walnut Street from Main to Second Street; and in the American Legion
parking lot, for longer than two hours Monday thru Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; provided, however, proprietors of
businesses within the defined area or their duly authorized employees may, on
the citation for violation, certify in writing that the person bearing the
citation was an invitee or customer within the business of the proprietor at
the time the citation was issued and return the citation to the Police
Department within 24 hours after the citation was issued, excluding Saturday,
Sunday and Holidays. The Town Marshal is granted the discretion to void
parking citations properly certified and returned.



(Prior Code, Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.6)



(Ord. passed 3-7-2001; Ord. passed 2-6-2002; Ord. passed 7-11-2002; Ord.
passed 11-5-2003; Ord. passed 9-1-2004; Ord. passed 9-1-2006)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



      91.   ABANDONED VEHICLES; JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES



      92.   ANIMALS



      93.   TOWN BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES



      94.   FAIR HOUSING



CHAPTER 90:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Garbage storage and handling



   90.02   Weeds




Nuisances




   90.15   Maintaining nuisances prohibited



   90.16   Certain nuisances designated



   90.17   Notice to abate nuisance; contents



   90.18   Request for hearing



   90.19   Failure to abate



   90.20   Collection of abatement cost



   90.21   Definitions



   90.22   Animal nuisances



   90.23   Unreasonably loud noises




Fire Hazards; Burning




   90.35   Definitions



   90.36   Burning in enclosed building prohibited



   90.37   Burning natural debris prohibited



   90.38   Recreational fires




Accumulation and Storage of Disposable Waste




   90.50   Definition



   90.51   Unlawful accumulation or storage



   90.52   Storage at pick-up locations; containers



   90.53   Annual spring clean-up



   90.54   Notice of violation; warnings



   90.55   Code Compliance Board




Smoke-Free Air Regulations for Workplaces and Public Places




   90.65   Title



   90.66   Findings and intent



   90.67   Definitions



   90.68   Application of subchapter to town-owned facilities and
property



   90.69   Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places



   90.70   Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places of employment



   90.71   Prohibition of smoking in private clubs



   90.72   Prohibition of smoking in enclosed residential facilities



   90.73   Prohibition of smoking in outdoor public places



   90.74   Prohibition of smoking in outdoor places of employment



   90.75   Where smoking not regulated



   90.76   Declaration of establishment or outdoor area as nonsmoking



   90.77   Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays



   90.78   Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights



   90.79   Enforcement



   90.80   Public education



   90.81   Governmental agency cooperation



   90.82   Other applicable laws



 



   90.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.01  GARBAGE STORAGE AND HANDLING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to store, haul or transport garbage in
the town in any receptacle which is not water-proof and/or which does not
have a cover sufficiently tight to keep flies, insects, rodents and dogs away
from the contents thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
permit any receptacle containing garbage to remain uncovered, except when
filling or emptying the contents thereof.



   (C)   GARBAGE, as used herein, shall mean animal and/or vegetable
matter collected for disposal.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XII, Art. I)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Cross-reference:



   Garbage and Rubbish, see Ch. 51



§ 90.02  WEEDS.



   (A)   Owners of real property within the town shall cut and remove
weeds and other rank vegetation growing on their property.



   (B)   The phrase WEEDS AND OTHER RANK VEGETATION means all plant
life, including grasses, grown to a height of eight inches or higher, except
as allowed in division (J) herein.



   (C)   Owners of real property found by the Town Marshal to be in
violation of this section shall be notified in writing of the violation, its
location and the means by which the violation may be abated. The property
owner shall abate the violation within five business days after issuance of
the notice by cutting and removing, as required by the notice, the weeds and
other rank vegetation or, within such five business days, appeal the
existence of a violation to the Town Manager who shall, within 72 hours after
receipt of the appeal, either confirm the violation and its requirements or
dismiss the violation if the violation is found to be non-existent.



   (D)   (1)   Notice of the violation, as well as notice of the
action taken on its appeal by the Town Manager, shall be given by:



         (a)   Sending a copy of the notice of violation or
decision by registered or certified mail to the residence or place of
business or employment of the person to be notified, with return receipt
requested;



         (b)   Delivering a copy of the notice or decision to the
person to be notified; or



         (c)   Leaving a copy of the notice or decision at the
dwelling place of abode of the person to be notified; or



         (d)   If, after a reasonable effort, service is not
obtained by a means described above, service may be made by publishing notice
of the violation in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in a newspaper of general
circulation within the county.



      (2)   When service is made by any of the means described in
this section, except by mailing or by publication, the person making service
must make an affidavit stating that he or she has made the service, the
manner in which service was made, to whom the notice or statement was issued,
the nature of the order or statement and the date of service. The affidavit
must be placed on file with the Town Marshal.



      (3)   For violations of this section occurring on unimproved
or improved real property not occupied by the person or persons who are
owners thereof, notice mailed to the entity and address shown on the records
of the County Auditor and Treasurer, for the tax duplicate related to such
real property, shall be sufficient notice.



      (4)   No more than one notice of violation need be given to
the same property owner during one calendar year, and repeated violations
occurring during the same calendar year in which a notice of violation has
been given shall be abated and billed as provided for an initial violation;
excepting only that, the Town Marshal shall document subsequent violations
and report their abatement for purpose of billing the property owner.



   (E)   If the owners of real property on which a violation exists do
not abate the weeds and other rank vegetation within the time allowed, the
Town Marshal shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works to enter the
property, abate the violation and report the actual costs of labor and
equipment required to abate the violation to the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (F)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a bill to the owner of real
property for the costs incurred in abating the violation, including
administrative costs equal to the cost of serving notice and removal.



   (G)   The bill shall be mailed to the owner of the real property or
served upon the owner in the same manner specified in division (D) above.



   (H)   The bill shall be due and fully payable to the Clerk-Treasurer
within ten days from the date of its issuance.



   (I)   If the owner of real property fails to pay a bill issued under
this section within the time specified, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify to
the County Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any additional administrative
costs incurred in the certification, and request that the Auditor place the
total amount certified on the tax duplicate for the property effected, and
collect the amount certified, plus interest, as delinquent taxes, and
collected and disburse the amount so collected to the General Fund of the
town.



   (J)   Naturalized landscape area.



      (1)   NATURALIZED LANDSCAPE AREA shall be defined as, the
utilization of native water conserving, drought tolerant landscaping or other
appropriate plant material that does not require special attention to grow
properly.



      (2)   A naturalized landscape area is permitted under the
following circumstances.



         (a)   A property owner may maintain a natural landscape
on property when a land management plan has been approved by the Plan
Commission. Application for a land management plan shall be made with the
Town Plan Commission.



         (b)   A land management plan shall include the following
information:



            1.   Statement of intent and purpose for the
property;



            2.   Site plan of the property showing all
buildings, paved areas, and location of all existing and proposed landscaping;



            3.   General description of the vegetation types
proposed; and



            4.   Statement of the management and maintenance
techniques to be used.



         (c)   Proposed land management plans will be reviewed
and evaluated based upon the following criteria;



            1.   Compatibility with adjacent properties and
street and alley right-of-way;



            2.   Preservation of existing plant communities;



            3.   Re-establishment of native plant communities;



            4.   Limitation of the area of lawn grass;



            5.   Landscaping and site development which
retains storm water run off;



            6.   Utilization of plant materials which are well
suited to the characteristics of the property; and



            7.   Elimination of weeds and rank vegetation.



         (d)   When an application for a naturalized landscape
has been made, the Town Plan Commission shall schedule a public hearing. The
applicant shall notify by mail all property owners who adjoin, or are within
400 feet of, the subject parcel. The Planning Commission may reasonably
require mail notice to be given to additional persons. Notice of the public
hearing shall be published at least ten days before the dale of the hearing.
The applicant shall pay all publication and notification costs and provide
proof of such publication and notices to the Plan Commission.



         (e)   A land management plan may be modified or revoked,
after notice and hearing before the Plan Commission, for failure to adhere to
the criteria listed in division (J)(2)(c) above, for failure to mow the area
as described in division (J)(2)(h) below, or for failure to comply with any
conditions placed upon (he properly by the Plan Commission during the
approval process.



         (f)   A land management plan may be modified or revoked,
after notice and hearing before the Plan Commission, upon petition executed
by three or more property owners entitled to mail notice set forth in
division (J)(2)(d), upon a showing by said property owner that there has been
a failure to adhere to the criteria listed in division (J)(2)(c) above or any
conditions placed upon the property by the Plan Commission during the
approval process, or upon a showing that:



            1.   The land management plan will be injurious to
the public health, safety, morals or general welfare of the community or
neighborhood; or



            2.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property or within a sight line to the land management plan area will be
affected in a substantially adverse manner.



         (g)   If the naturalized landscape area consists of
herbaceous, annual, biennial, or perennial plants that tend to have stems or
grasses that die down to ground level after the growing season, the area
shall be mowed no less than once per year. If only mowed once during the
year, mowing shall take place between April 1 and May 15 of each year.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IX, Art. I)  (Ord. passed 10-1-1998; Ord. passed
7-11-2002; Ord. 6, 2012, passed 7-11-2012; Ord. 10, 2012, passed 11-7-2012) 
Penalty, see § 90.99




NUISANCES




§ 90.15  MAINTAINING NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall erect, construct, cause, permit, keep or maintain
within the town anything whatsoever which is injurious to the public health
or safety, or offensive to the senses of inhabitants, or an obstacle to the
free use of property by such inhabitants. The existence of any of the above
is declared to be a nuisance and shall be regulated as set forth in this
chapter.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 1)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.16  CERTAIN NUISANCES DESIGNATED.



   The following are declared to be nuisances, but shall not be construed
to prevent any other thing from being declared a nuisance pursuant to the
standards of § 90.15 of this chapter:



   (A)   Use of any structure, building or other place for the exercise
of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, dense smoke or ash or other annoyances, becomes harmful to the
health, safety or property of individuals or the public;



   (B)   Causing or suffering any offal, filth or waste materials to be
collected or to remain in any place or the existence on any property of a
condition which violates the terms of §§ 90.50 through 90.55 of this
chapter;



   (C)   Obstructing or encumbering by any means whatsoever the private
ways and the public streets, alleys and places so as to create a physical
threat to the public;



   (D)   Permanent and temporary billboards, signboards and advertising
signs, which so obstruct and impair the view of any portion of a public
street or alley, including pedestrian walkways, of the town as to render
dangerous the use thereof;



   (E)   More than one motor vehicle, whether or not the same is
operable and licensed, and more than two transport vehicles, including, but
not limited to, campers, trailers and boats, outside a carport or enclosed
building, or public or private parking area, for a time period exceeding
seven consecutive days;



   (F)   A structure in danger of sudden collapse or any condition
existing on property which poses an unreasonable risk of physical injury to
persons in or near the structure or condition;



   (G)   To own, use, maintain or permit to exist a privy or outhouse
for the disposal of human bodily wastes with the town;



   (H)   To keep livestock or poultry within the town; and



   (I)   Using, maintaining or perpetuating the existence of a use of
property, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, which is neither permitted, nor
authorized, under the Zoning Ordinance by the Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan
Commission of the town.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 2)  (Ord. passed 7-2-2001; Ord.
passed 9-6-2006)



§ 90.17  NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE; CONTENTS.



   (A)   Police officers and designees of the Marshal shall, and
private persons may, request in writing that police officers investigate the
existence within the town of conditions constituting a nuisance under this
subchapter. Whenever a police officer or person designated by the Marshal,
after investigation, finds that a nuisance exists, the police officer or
person designated by the Marshal shall cause to be served upon the owner or
occupant of the property where the nuisance is alleged to exist, as shown on
the address records of the County Auditor, a written notice to abate the
nuisance within a reasonable specified date. If not served personally upon
the owner, occupant or an adult person at the location, as attested by the
police officer or other designated person’s return of service, such notice
shall be sent to the property occupant or owner by certified mail, return
receipt requested, in addition to which a copy of the notice shall be posted
by attachment on or near the front entrance to the property where the alleged
nuisance exists. In the case of non-owner occupied property, when the person
served is not the owner of the property as listed in the records of the
County Auditor, a copy of the notice shall be mailed by the Town Marshal to
the owner, regular United States mail at the address shown on the County
Auditor’s records.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 3)



   (B)   The notice to abate shall contain:



      (1)   The name of the occupant, owner or owner/occupant
determined to be operating, creating, continuing or otherwise responsible for
the nuisance;



      (2)   A narrative description of what constitutes the
nuisance; (In suitable fact situations dated digital negatives shall be
retained for printing and use, if required, for proof of the violation.)



      (3)   The location of the nuisance;



      (4)   A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the
nuisance;



      (5)   A reasonable specified date by which to complete the
abatement; and



      (6)   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as
directed and no request for hearing is made within three days after service
of notice, the town may abate the nuisance and assess the costs thereof
against the property occupant, owner or owner and occupant.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 4)



(Ord. passed 9-6-2006)



§ 90.18  REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   (A)   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have request a
hearing with the Town Marshal who shall determine whether or not reasonable
cause exists to conclude that the nuisance charged does exist. A request for
a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the office of the Town
Marshal within three days of the date of the notice, not counting Saturdays
and Sundays. If the Town Marshal confirms that a nuisance does exist, the
time period allowed for its abatement shall be extended by the number of
calendar days elapsed between the date of the original notice and the date of
the Town Marshal’s decision. If the Town Marshal determines that a nuisance
does not exist, the original notice shall be dismissed. If a hearing is not
requested or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists, that
must be abated as ordered.



   (B)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Town Marshal shall
render the decision in writing. If the Town Marshal confirms the existence of
the nuisance charged, it shall be abated as ordered within such reasonable
additional time as the Town Marshal may allow.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 5)  (Ord. passed 9-6-2006)



§ 90.19  FAILURE TO ABATE.



   If the person notified to abate a nuisance neglects or fails to abate
as directed, the town may perform the action required to abate as directed,
the town may perform the action required to abate the notice and shall
keeping an accurate account of the expenses incurred. An itemized expense
account shall be certified and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer or officer
designated by the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 6)  (Ord. passed 9-6-2006)



§ 90.20  COLLECTION OF ABATEMENT COST.



   The Clerk-Treasurer’s office shall send a statement by regular United
States mail of the total expense incurred in abating the nuisance to the
property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the
amount shown by the statement has not been paid within 30 days after mailing,
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, shall certify the costs to the County
Auditor. The amount due shall then be collected with, and in the same manner,
as general property taxes and disbursed into the General Fund of the town.
The cost of abating the nuisance shall constitute a lien upon the property
where the nuisance was abated, and such lien shall be collectable in any
manner or proceeding authorized by law. The lien shall attach when the
itemized expense account has been certified and filed with the Fiscal Officer
and shall bear interest thereafter at the same rate as prescribed for
judgments entered by courts of record in the state. Costs of collection,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred and expenses or recording the
lien may be recovered as a part of the town’s expenses in abating the
nuisance.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 7)  (Ord. passed 7-10-1996;
Ord. passed 9-6-2006)



§ 90.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   KEEP LIVESTOCK. The keeping or harboring of more than three domestic
animals, including poultry, upon any unit of real estate; provided, however,
the keeping or harboring of livestock in secured cages, in enclosed
buildings, for scientific or educational purposed shall not be construed as
being within the phrase KEEPING LIVESTOCK.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled land or water vehicle which can be
used for transporting a person or people or materials.



   PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PARKING AREA. An area paved with concrete, bituminous
or gravel materials, designed for the temporary or permanent parking or
storage of motor vehicles, not including a public street or alley.



   TRANSPORT VEHICLE. Includes all vehicles designed or used for the
transport of persons, property or both persons and property.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 10)



§ 90.22  ANIMAL NUISANCES.



   (A)   ANIMALS AS PUBLIC NUISANCES is defined as any animal which:



      (1)   Interferes with passers-by or passing vehicles;



      (2)   Attacks other animals or persons;



      (3)   Is at large;



      (4)   Damages private or public property;



      (5)   Causes frequent or long continued noises or other sounds
common to its species which disturb the repose of any person in the immediate
neighborhood;



      (6)   Causes foul or noxious odors which offend the senses of
residents in the neighborhood; or



      (7)   Trespasses on the private property of persons other than
the owner of the animal.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. II, § 1)



   (B)   (1)   The Town Marshal shall have reasonable plenary power
to immediately abate a continuing nuisance.



      (2)   In addition, whenever the Town Marshal determines that a
nuisance exists, he or she shall cause to be served on the owner or keeper of
the animal a written warning, requiring the immediate, or designated time
for, abatement of the nuisance. If the animal’s owner or keeper fails to
abate the nuisance immediately or within the designated time, or should the
offending animal repeat the nuisance, the Town Marshal shall immediately
abate the nuisance and serve or cause to be served on the owner or keeper of
the animal a citation to appear in Town Court and show cause why a civil
penalty should not be assessed.



      (3)   Continued failure to abate a nuisance may also result in
summoning the County Animal Control Officer to take control of the animal
until such time as the owner or keeper can take control of the animal and
complies with this section or until it is determined that the animal should
be disposed of in a humane manner.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. II, § 2)



(Ord. passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  UNREASONABLY LOUD NOISES.



   (A)   The production or causation of any noise that by the manner of
its production or its volume disturbs the peace or quiet enjoyment of any
person and is audible at a distance of more than 30 feet from its source is
hereby determined to be an “unreasonable loud noise” and a nuisance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to produce or cause to be
produced an unreasonably loud noise within the town.



   (C)   The following noises shall be exempted from the prohibitions
of this section:



      (1)   Sounds produced by sirens of authorized emergency
vehicles when operating in an emergency;



      (2)   Sounds produced by lawn mowers, garden tractors and
similar home power tools when properly muffled and produced between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;



      (3)   Sounds produced by burglar alarms or other signaling or
warning devices when properly installed on publicly- or privately-owned
property; provided that, the cause of such alarm, signal or warning device
sound is silenced within ten minutes after its initial activation;



      (4)   Sounds produced in connection with celebrations on legal
holidays; provided, this exemption does not include the detonation of
otherwise illegal fireworks;



      (5)   Sounds produced in connection with permitted parades,
festivals or concerts between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight;



      (6)   Sounds produced in connection with the actual
performance of athletic events and practices related to them;



      (7)   Sounds produced in connection with the performance or
practice of a band, orchestra or choir organized and maintained as part of
the curriculum of a publicly or privately operated educational institution or
other entity;



      (8)   Sounds produced for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency, or for the performance of emergency work; or



      (9)   Sounds produced in connection with normal conduction of
a legally established non-transient business when such sounds are customary,
incidental and within the normal range appropriate for such use.



   (D)   This section does not amend, nor is it to be construed as
applying to, the vibration and noise performance standards fixed by the
Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. III)  (Ord. passed 12-4-1996) 
Penalty, see § 90.99




FIRE HAZARDS; BURNING




§ 90.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. The waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food, whether for humans or for animals, and of waste from
the handling, storage and sale of food materials.



   NATURAL DEBRIS. Leaves, twigs, trees and tree limbs accumulating from
natural processes.



   REFUSE. All trash, combustible or not, including, but not limited to,
paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, furniture, bedding, mineral
waste, tires, shingles, waste oil and like disposables.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. passed 10-3-1984; Ord.
passed 3-1-1995; Ord. passed 4-14-1999)



§ 90.36  BURNING IN ENCLOSED BUILDING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to burn any garbage or refuse outside an enclosed
building within the corporate limits of the town.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 2)  (Ord. passed 10-3-1984; Ord.
passed 3-1-1995; Ord. passed 4-14-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.37  BURNING NATURAL DEBRIS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to burn natural debris within the
corporate limits of the town without a permit.



      (1)   If the Fire Chief finds that natural debris cannot
reasonably be collected for pick-up and disposal by the Street Department,
the Chief may issue a permit to burn natural debris between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.



      (2)   Application for a burning permit shall be made to the
Fire Chief on a form available from the Chief. The permit shall be holder-
and location-specific, require the fire be supervised and extinguished by
4:00 p.m. and may be further conditioned on wind and weather conditions
prevailing at the time burning occurs.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 3)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to burn natural debris on the paved
portion of any sidewalk, street or alley.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 4)



(Ord. passed 10-3-1984; Ord. passed 3-1-1995; Ord. passed 4-14-1999) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.38  RECREATIONAL FIRES.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall exclude the occasional use of
recreational fires (such as “bonfires” or “cooking fires”) conducted
for a maximum of two hours or less and supervised by a responsible adult
property owner or representative of a sponsoring community organization, in
conjunction with planned activities which enhance the quality of family and
community life, utilizing only natural debris as a fuel source.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 6)  (Ord. passed 10-3-1984; Ord.
passed 3-1-1995; Ord. passed 4-14-1999)




ACCUMULATION AND STORAGE OF DISPOSABLE WASTE




§ 90.50  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISPOSABLE WASTE. Garbage and rubbish as those terms are defined and
interpreted by § 90.01 of this chapter and Ch. 51 of this code of
ordinances. Hazardous wastes (as that phrase is defined by state law),
petroleum and petroleum based by-products, construction debris, tree stumps
and materials not containerized or bundled are not acceptable for disposal by
pick-up.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 1)



§ 90.51  UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATION OR STORAGE.



   Except as permitted by this subchapter, it shall be unlawful and a
civil offense to dump, place or accumulate disposable waste at, in or upon
any property, public or private, within the town.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 2)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.52  STORAGE AT PICK-UP LOCATIONS; CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Disposable waste accumulated at each pick-up location shall be
stored out of public view from any street or alley and shall be screened from
view by the occupants of all neighboring properties, except when lawfully
deposited for collection at the curb or other designated pick-up location for
the property.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 3)



   (B)   Disposable waste shall be placed in plastic or metal
containers or bundled securely in bundles. Each container or bundle shall not
exceed 80 pounds.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 4)



   (C)   (1)   Disposable waste shall not be placed in public view
for pick-up earlier than noon of the day preceding the scheduled pick-up day
for the property location and emptied containers and disposable waste not
accepted for pick-up shall be moved and relocated so as to comply with
division (A) above no later than noon of the day following the scheduled
pick-up day.



      (2)   Disposable waste shall not be placed for pick-up in the
traveled portion of any sidewalk, street, alley or other public way.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 5)



Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.53  ANNUAL SPRING CLEAN-UP.



   (A)   The annual spring clean-up shall commence on Monday of the
week in which May 1 occurs.



   (B)   All provisions of this subchapter apply to items placed for
disposal during spring clean-up, as well as the following additional
requirements.



      (1)   The Sanitation Department shall announce through print
media published in the town not later than April 15, preceding each spring
clean-up, and may announce through other media, the types of materials which
shall not be accepted for pick-up.



      (2)   Except for furniture and appliances, all other items
placed to be picked up shall not exceed an area four feet by eight feet at
each pick-up location.



      (3)   Items placed for disposal in the spring clean-up shall
not be placed at the curb or other pick-up location earlier than ten days
prior to the date spring clean-up begins, and items not accepted for pick-up
shall be moved and relocated so as to comply with § 90.52(A) of this chapter
not later than 14 days after spring clean-up commences.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 6)



§ 90.54  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; WARNINGS.



   For purposes of communication with the education of the affected
public, the Town Marshal may suspend the effective enforcement date of this
subchapter for a determinate period of not exceeding three months after
publication of this subchapter and, in the interim, before the imposition of
civil penalties for violations, authorize issuance of warnings of violation.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 10)



§ 90.55  CODE COMPLIANCE BOARD.



   (A)   The Town Marshal is authorized to appoint and deputize
citizens, employees of the town and employees of the contracted waste
disposal agent to serve as a Code Compliance Board for purposes of
identifying violations of this subchapter and for serving notice of
violations of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Code Compliance Board shall be instructed and supervised
by the Town Marshal.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 9)



SMOKE-FREE AIR REGULATIONS FOR WORKPLACES AND PUBLIC PLACES



§ 90.65  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Town of North Manchester
Smoke-free Air Law of 2018.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.66  FINDINGS AND INTENT.



   The Common Council of the town does hereby find that:



   (A)   The 2006 U.S. Surgeon General's Report, The Health
Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke, has concluded that (1)
secondhand smoke exposure causes disease and premature death in children and
adults who do not smoke; (2) children exposed to secondhand smoke are at an
increased risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), acute respiratory
problems, ear infections, and asthma attacks, and that smoking by parents
causes respiratory symptoms and slows lung growth in their children; (3)
exposure of adults to secondhand smoke has immediate adverse effects on the
cardiovascular system and causes coronary heart disease and lung cancer; (4)
there is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke; (5) establishing
smoke-free workplaces is the only effective way to ensure that secondhand
smoke exposure does not occur in the workplace, because ventilation and other
air cleaning technologies cannot completely control for exposure of
nonsmokers to secondhand smoke; and (6) evidence from peer-reviewed studies
shows that smoke-free policies and laws do not have an adverse economic
impact on the hospitality industry. According to the 2010 U.S. Surgeon
General's Report, How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease, even occasional exposure
to secondhand smoke is harmful and low levels of exposure to secondhand
tobacco smoke lead to a rapid and sharp increase in dysfunction and
inflammation of the lining of the blood vessels, which are implicated in
heart attacks and stroke. According to the 2014 U.S. Surgeon General's
Report, The Health Consequences of Smoking-50 Years of Progress, secondhand
smoke exposure causes stroke in nonsmokers. The report also found that since
the 1964 Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health, 2.5 million
nonsmokers have died from diseases caused by tobacco smoke.



   (B)   Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major
contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke
(also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy
nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung
cancer. The National Cancer Institute determined in 1999 that secondhand
smoke is responsible for the early deaths of approximately 53,000 Americans
annually.



   (C)   The Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program (NTP)
has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen.



   (D)   Based on a finding by the California Environmental Protection
Agency in 2005, the California Air Resources Board has determined that
secondhand smoke is a toxic air contaminant, finding that exposure to
secondhand smoke has serious health effects, including low birth-weight
babies; sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS); increased respiratory infections
in children; asthma in children and adults; lung cancer, sinus cancer, and
breast cancer in younger, premenopausal women; heart disease; and death.



   (E)   There is indisputable evidence that implementing 100%
smoke-free environments is the only effective way to protect the population
from the harmful effects of exposure to secondhand smoke.



   (F)   In reviewing 11 studies concluding that communities see an
immediate reduction in heart attack admissions after implementation of
comprehensive smoke-free laws, the Institute of Medicine of National
Academies concluded that data consistently demonstrate that secondhand smoke
exposure increases the risk of coronary heart disease and heart attacks and
smoke-free laws reduce heart attacks.



   (G)   A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in
the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25-50%
higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular
disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and
measurable decrease in lung function.



   (H)   Studies measuring cotinine (metabolized nicotine) and NNAL
(metabolized nitrosamine NNK, a tobacco-specific carcinogen linked to lung
cancer) in hospitality workers find dramatic reductions in the levels of
these biomarkers after a smoke-free law takes effect. Average cotinine levels
of New York City restaurant and bar workers decreased by 85% after the city's
smoke-free law went into effect. After the implementation of Ontario,
Canada's Smoke-free Indoor Air Law, levels of NNAL were reduced by 52% in
nonsmoking casino employees and cotinine levels fell by 98%.



   (I)   Smoke-free indoor air laws result in a significant reduction
in fine particulate matter and improved air quality. A Grand Rapids, Michigan
study that monitored six restaurants before and after implementation of the
state's smoke-free air law found that PM2.5 fine particulate matter was
reduced by 92% after the law went into effect, indicating that the vast
majority of indoor air pollution in all six venues was due to secondhand
smoke. The results in Grand Rapids were consistent with results in
Wilmington, Delaware; Boston, Massachusetts; and Western New York.



   (J)   Following a Health Hazard Evaluation of Las Vegas casino
employees' secondhand smoke exposure in the workplace, which included indoor
air quality tests and biomarker assessments, the National Institute of
Occupational Safety & Health (NIOSH) concluded that the casino employees are
exposed to dangerous levels of secondhand smoke at work and that their bodies
absorb high levels of tobacco-specific chemicals NNK and cotinine during work
shifts. NIOSH also concluded that the "best means of eliminating workplace
exposure to (secondhand smoke) is to ban all smoking in the casinos." A
subsequent study in Nevada, whose Clean Indoor Air Act permits smoking in
designated areas of casinos, bars, and taverns, indicates that strong 100%
smoke-free laws are the only effective way to protect indoor air quality. The
study sampled the air quality in 15 casino gaming areas and corresponding
nonsmoking areas, and the results indicated that the Clean Indoor Air Act
failed to protect air quality in the nonsmoking areas, including
children-friendly areas.



   (K)   Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people,
individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired
respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway
disease. The Americans with Disabilities Act, which requires that disabled
persons have access to public places and workplaces, deems impaired
respiratory function to be a disability. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention has determined that the risk of acute myocardial infarction
and coronary heart disease associated with exposure to tobacco smoke is
non-linear at low doses, increasing rapidly with relatively small doses such
as those received from secondhand smoke or actively smoking one or two
cigarettes a day, and has warned that all patients at increased risk of
coronary heart disease or with known coronary artery disease should avoid all
indoor environments that permit smoking.



   (L)   Given the fact that there is no safe level of exposure to
secondhand smoke, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air
Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation standards on totally
smoke-free environments. ASHRAE has determined that there is currently no air
filtration or other ventilation technology that can completely eliminate all
the carcinogenic components in secondhand smoke and the health risks caused
by secondhand smoke exposure and recommends that indoor environments be
smoke-free in their entirety.



   (M)   During periods of active smoking, peak and average outdoor
tobacco smoke (OTS) levels measured in outdoor cafes and restaurant and bar
patios near smokers, rival indoor tobacco smoke concentrations. Nonsmokers
who spend six-hour periods in outdoor smoking sections of bars and
restaurants experience a significant increase in levels of cotinine when
compared to the cotinine levels in a smoke-free outdoor area.



   (N)   Residual tobacco contamination, or "thirdhand smoke," from
cigarettes, cigars, and other tobacco products is left behind after smoking
occurs and builds up on surfaces and furnishings. This residue can linger in
spaces long after smoking has ceased and continue to expose people to tobacco
toxins. Sticky, highly toxic particulate matter, including nicotine, can
cling to walls and ceilings. Gases can be absorbed into carpets, draperies,
and other upholsteries, and then be reemitted (off-gassed) back into the air
and recombine to form harmful compounds. Tobacco residue is noticeably
present in dust throughout places where smoking has occurred. Given the rapid
sorption and persistence of high levels of residual nicotine from tobacco
smoke on indoor surfaces, including clothing and human skin, this recently
identified process represents an unappreciated health hazard through dermal
exposure, dust inhalation, and ingestion. The dangers of residual tobacco
contamination are present in hotels, even in nonsmoking rooms. Compared with
hotels that are completely smoke-free, surface nicotine and air 3EP are
elevated in nonsmoking and smoking rooms of hotels that allow smoking. Air
nicotine levels in smoking rooms are significantly higher than those in
nonsmoking rooms of hotels that do and do not completely prohibit smoking.
Hallway surfaces outside of smoking rooms also show higher levels of nicotine
than those outside of nonsmoking rooms. Partial smoking restrictions in
hotels do not protect non-smoking guests from exposure to tobacco smoke and
tobacco-specific carcinogens.



   (O)   Unregulated high-tech smoking devices, commonly referred to as
electronic cigarettes, or "e-cigarettes," closely resemble and purposefully
mimic the act of smoking by having users inhale vaporized liquid nicotine
created by heat through an electronic ignition system. After testing a number
of electronic cigarettes from two leading manufacturers, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) determined that various samples tested contained not
only nicotine but also detectable levels of known carcinogens and toxic
chemicals, including tobacco-specific nitrosamines and diethylene glycol, a
toxic chemical used in antifreeze. The FDA's testing also suggested that
"quality control processes used to manufacture these products are
inconsistent or non-existent." According to a more recent study, electronic
cigarette emissions are made up of a high concentration of ultrafine
particles, and the particle concentration is higher than in conventional
tobacco cigarette smoke. Electronic cigarettes produce an aerosol or vapor of
undetermined and potentially harmful substances, which may appear similar to
the smoke emitted by traditional tobacco products. Their use in workplaces
and public places where smoking of traditional tobacco products is prohibited
creates concern and confusion and leads to difficulties in enforcing the
smoking prohibitions.



   (P)   The Society of Actuaries has determined that secondhand smoke
costs the U.S. economy roughly $10 billion a year: $5 billion in estimated
medical costs associated with secondhand smoke exposure and $4.6 billion in
lost productivity.



   (Q)   Numerous economic analyses examining restaurant and hotel
receipts and controlling for economic variables have shown either no
difference or a positive economic impact after enactment of laws requiring
workplaces to be smoke-free. Creation of smoke-free workplaces is sound
economic policy and provides the maximum level of employee health and safety.



   (R)   There is no legal or constitutional "right to smoke." Business
owners have no legal or constitutional right to expose their employees and
customers to the toxic chemicals in secondhand smoke. On the contrary,
employers have a common law duty to provide their workers with a workplace
that is not unreasonably dangerous.



   (S)   Smoking is a potential cause of fires; cigarette and cigar
burns and ash stains on merchandise and fixtures causes economic damage to
businesses.



   (T)   The smoking of tobacco, hookahs, or marijuana and the use of
electronic cigarettes are forms of air pollution and constitute both a danger
to health and a material public nuisance.



   (U)   Accordingly, the Common Council of the town finds and declares
that the purposes of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting
smoking in public places and places of employment; and



      (2)   To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe
smoke-free air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air
shall have priority over the desire to smoke.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.67  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this subchapter,
shall be construed as defined in this section:



   BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving
of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including
but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets.



   BUSINESS. A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit,
including retail establishments where goods or services are sold;
professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental,
engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and
private clubs.



   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or any other similar substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or
aerosol from the product. The term includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar,
e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor.



   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his
or her services for a nonprofit entity.



   EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs
the services of one or more individual persons.



   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded
on at least two sides by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed.
A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical
barrier, whether temporary or permanent and whether or not containing
openings of any kind.



   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including
weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for
the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and
all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all
waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within
health care facilities.



   HOOKAH. A water pipe and any associated products and devices which are
used to produce fumes, smoke, and/or vapor from the burning of material
including, but not limited to, tobacco, shisha, or other plant matter.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. An area under the control of a public or private
employer, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices,
employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms,
employee cafeterias, hallways, construction sites, temporary offices, and
vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is
used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility.



   PLAYGROUND. Any park or recreational area designed in part to be used
by children that has play or sports equipment installed or that has been
designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar
facility located on public or private school grounds or on town grounds.



   PRIVATE CLUB. An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is
the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a
recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or
athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic
beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the
organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has
established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The
organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income
tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. § 501.



   PUBLIC EVENT. An event which is open to and may be attended by the
general public, including but not limited to, such events as concerts, fairs,
farmers' markets, festivals, parades, performances, and other exhibitions,
regardless of any fee or age requirement.



   PUBLIC PLACE. An area to which the public is invited or in which the
public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational
facilities, gambling facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels,
laundromats, parking structures, public transportation vehicles and
facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and
marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores,
shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private
residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult
day care, or health care facility.



   RECREATIONAL AREA. Any public or private area open to the public for
recreational purposes, whether or not there are any fees for admission,
including but not limited to, amusement parks, athletic fields, beaches,
fairgrounds, gardens, golf courses, parks, plazas, skate parks, swimming
pools, trails, and zoos.



   RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public-school
cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term RESTAURANT shall
include a bar area within the restaurant.



   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store: (1) utilized primarily for the
sale of tobacco and tobacco-related products and their accessories including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, pipes, cigarette paper and
lighters; (2) that is not licensed for the consumption of meals or alcoholic
beverages on the premises or operated in conjunction with another business
that is licensed for the on-premises consumption of meals or alcoholic
beverages; and (3) in which the sale of tobacco and tobacco-related products
account for not less than 75% of the store's gross sales. RETAIL TOBACCO
STORE does not include a tobacco department of a larger commercial
establishment such as a grocery store, department store, or discount store.



   SERVICE LINE. An indoor or outdoor line in which one or more persons
are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service
involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to, ATM lines,
concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event
lines.



   SCHOOL BUS STOPS. Locations where children are gathered for school bus
pick-up.



   SHOPPING MALL. An enclosed or unenclosed public walkway or hall area
that serves to connect retail or professional establishments.



   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether
natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. SMOKING also includes the
use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any
manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose
of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this subchapter.



   SPORTS ARENA. A place where people assemble to engage in physical
exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other
events, including sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing
arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and bowling alleys.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.68  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER TO TOWN-OWNED FACILITIES AND PROPERTY.



   All enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or
operated by the town as well as all outdoor property adjacent to such
buildings and under the control of the town, shall be subject to the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.69  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the
town, including but not limited to, the following places:



   (A)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.



   (B)   Areas available to the general public in businesses and
non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to,
banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service establishments.



   (C)   Bars.



   (D)   Bingo facilities.



   (E)   Child care and adult day care facilities.



   (F)   Convention facilities.



   (G)   Educational facilities, both public and private.



   (H)   Elevators.



   (I)   Gambling facilities.



   (J)   Health care facilities.



   (K)   Hotels and motels.



   (L)   Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes,
and other multiple-unit residential facilities.



   (M)   Parking structures.



   (N)   Polling places.



   (O)   Public transportation vehicles, including buses and taxicabs,
under the authority of the town, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of
public transportation facilities, including bus, train, and airport
facilities.



   (P)   Restaurants.



   (Q)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other
common-use areas.



   (R)   Retail stores.



   (S)   Retail tobacco stores.



   (T)   Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly,
including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee or council of the town or a political subdivision of
the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the town.



   (U)   Service lines.



   (V)   Shopping malls.



   (W)   Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.



   (X)   Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting
motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar
performances.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.70  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of places of
employment without exception. This includes, without limitation, common work
areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private
offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee
lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities.



   (B)   This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all
existing employees by the effective date of this subchapter and to all
prospective employees upon their application for employment.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.71  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PRIVATE CLUBS.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all private clubs.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.72  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential
facilities:



   (A)   All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes.



   (B)   All hotel and motel guest rooms.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.73  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OUTDOOR PUBLIC PLACES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places:



   (A)   Within a reasonable distance of 15 feet outside main
entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where
smoking is prohibited, so as to prevent tobacco smoke from entering those
areas.



   (B)   On all outdoor property that is adjacent to buildings owned,
leased, or operated by the town and that is under the control of the town.



   (C)   In, and within 15 feet of, outdoor seating or serving areas of
restaurants and bars. Marked outside designated areas with cigarette butt
receptacles away from main entrances are allowed.



   (D)   In outdoor shopping malls, including parking structures.



   (E)   In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters. Smoking
shall also be prohibited in, and within 15 feet of, bleachers and grandstands
for use by spectators at sporting and other public events.



   (F)   In town parks and outdoor recreational areas, including
parking lots.



   (G)   In, and within 15 feet of, all outdoor public events and
festivals.



   (H)   In, and within 15 feet of, all outdoor public transportation
stations, platforms, and shelters under the authority of the town.



   (I)   In, and within 15 feet of, all school bus stops.



   (J)   In outdoor common areas of apartment buildings, condominiums,
trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit
residential facilities, except in designated smoking areas, not to exceed 25%
of the total outdoor common area, which must be located at least 15 feet
outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed
areas where smoking is prohibited.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.74  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OUTDOOR PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Smoking shall be prohibited in all outdoor places of
employment where two or more employees are required to be in the course of
their employment. This includes, without limitation, work areas, construction
sites, temporary offices such as trailers, restroom facilities, and vehicles.



   (B)   This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all
existing employees by the effective date of this subchapter and to all
prospective employees upon their application for employment.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.75  WHERE SMOKING NOT REGULATED.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the contrary,
smoking shall not be prohibited in private residences, unless used as a
childcare, adult day care, or health care facility.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.76  DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT OR OUTDOOR AREA AS NONSMOKING.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, an owner,
operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility,
or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor
area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which
a sign conforming to the requirements of § 90.77 is posted.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.77  POSTING OF SIGNS AND REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS.



   The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a place of
employment, public place, private club, or residential facility where smoking
is prohibited by this subchapter shall:



   (A)   Clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs or the
international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation
of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) in
that place.



   (B)   Clearly and conspicuously post at every entrance to that place
a sign stating that smoking is prohibited or, in the case of outdoor places,
clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs in appropriate locations as
determined by the Parks Department or an authorized designee.



   (C)   Clearly and conspicuously post on every vehicle that
constitutes a place of employment under this subchapter at least one sign,
visible from the exterior of the vehicle, stating that smoking is prohibited.



   (D)   Remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited
by this subchapter, except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on
the premises.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.78  NONRETALIATION; NONWAIVER OF RIGHTS.



   (A)   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in
any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, customer,
or resident of a multiple-unit residential facility because that employee,
applicant, customer, or resident exercises any rights afforded by this
subchapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this
subchapter. Notwithstanding § 90.79, violation of this division shall be a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each violation.



   (B)   An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows
smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee
may have against the employer or any other party.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.79  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Office of the Town
Manager, or an authorized designee.



   (B)   Notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be given to
all applicants for a business license in the town.



   (C)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this
subchapter may initiate enforcement with the Office of the Town Manager.



   (D)   The Building Department, Fire Department, or their designees
shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections,
inspect for compliance with this subchapter.



   (E)   An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an enclosed area
regulated by this subchapter shall direct a person who is smoking in
violation of this subchapter to extinguish or turn off the product being
smoked. If the person does not stop smoking, the owner, manager, operator, or
employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the person to leave
the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave the premises, the
owner, manager, operator, or employee shall contact a law enforcement agency.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, an
employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this subchapter.



   (G)   In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this
section, the town or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner,
operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of
employment to comply with the provisions of this subchapter may apply for
injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.80  PUBLIC EDUCATION.



   The town may engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the
purposes and requirements of this subchapter to citizens affected by it, and
to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The
program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and
individuals explaining the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.81  GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY COOPERATION.



   The town may annually request other governmental and educational
agencies having facilities within Wabash County to establish local operating
procedures in cooperation and compliance with this subchapter. This includes
urging all federal, state, county, and School District agencies to update
their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current
health findings regarding secondhand smoke.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.82  OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.



   This subchapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. All prior
ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with any provision of this
subchapter are hereby repealed.



(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violation of § 90.02 of this chapter is a civil offense. A
person found to be in violation of § 90.02 of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty for each day the violation continues in accordance with the
general penalties provided for by § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IX, Art. I)



   (C)   (1)   In addition to the abatement remedies available,
failure to abate a nuisance shall be a penal civil violation of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 8)



      (2)   Sections 90.15 through 90.20 of this chapter shall
neither limit, nor otherwise curtail, the right of the town or of any private
person from commencing and maintaining an action in a court of requisite
jurisdiction for legal or equitable relief against a public or private
nuisance, including those specific nuisances identified in §§ 90.15 through
90.20 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 9)



   (D)   (1)   The penalty for failure to abate a nuisance, per §
90.22 of this chapter, shall be not less than $25 and not in excess of the
maximum general penalty of $2,500 for each violation of § 90.22 of this
chapter.



      (2)   A person who violates the provisions of § 90.22 of this
chapter shall be issued a warning ticket for the first offense.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. II, § 3)



   (E)   Upon conviction for a violation of §§ 90.35 through 90.38 of
this chapter, the person who ignited or supervises the fire or the occupant
of the property where the burning occurred shall be assessed a civil penalty
of not less than $25, nor more than $100, to which shall be added the cost of
repairing damage to any public way caused by the violation.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 5)



   (F)   (1)   Each adult occupant of each pick-up location shall be
responsible for compliance with the requirements of §§ 90.50 through 90.55
of this chapter and a failure by any adult occupant of a pick-up location to
comply with §§ 90.50 through 90.55 of this chapter shall be a civil
offense, subject to a civil penalty of $10 for the first violation and $25
for the second and each subsequent violation. Each day a violation §§ 90.50
through 90.55 of this chapter continues shall be a second or subsequent
additional violation.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 7)



      (2)   A notice of violation of §§ 90.50 through 90.55 of
this chapter describing the violation shall be served upon an adult person or
persons at the pick-up location where the violation occurred. The civil
penalty for the violation may be paid in the same manner as traffic citations
are paid. The Town Court shall have jurisdiction to review a notice of
violation at the written request made within ten days of the service of the
notice of violation, filed by the person served with the notice of violation.
It shall not be a defense to a violation that another adult person, other
than the person served with the notice of violation, who also occupies the
pick-up location and could have been charged with the violation.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 8)



   (G)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by
the provisions of §§ 90.65 through 90.82 shall be guilty of an infraction,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.



   (H)   Except as otherwise provided in § 90.77(A), a person who
owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of
employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this subchapter
shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:



      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation.



      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within
one year.



      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation
within one year.



   (I)   In addition to the fines established by this section,
violation of this subchapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, or
otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the
suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for
the premises on which the violation occurred.



   (J)   Violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated by the Office of the Town Manager by
restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means
provided for by law, and the town may take action to recover the costs of the
nuisance abatement.



   (K)   Each day on which a violation of this subchapter occurs shall
be considered a separate and distinct violation.



(Ord. passed 3-1-1995; Ord. passed 4-14-1999; Ord. passed 7-2-2001; Ord.
passed 9-6-2006; Ord. 3, 2018, passed 8-1-2018)



CHAPTER 91:  ABANDONED VEHICLES; JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES



Section




Abandoned Vehicles and Impoundment




   91.01   Purpose



   91.02   Designation; removal



   91.03   Storage



   91.04   Towing and storage fees



   91.05   Declaration of nuisance



   91.06   Adoption of state law



   91.07   Enforcement of Police Department




Junk Motor Vehicles




   91.20   Declaration of nuisance



   91.21   Definitions



   91.22   Prohibited storage



   91.23   Permitted storage



   91.24   Removal; procedure



 



   91.99   Penalty




ABANDONED VEHICLES AND IMPOUNDMENT




§ 91.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   I.C. 9-13 et seq. authorizes the town to enact provisions
concerning the disposition of abandoned vehicles.



   (B)   (1)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the term
ABANDONED VEHICLES shall be defined as set forth by I.C. 9-13-2-1.



      (2)   ABANDONED, when used in conjunction with the term
VEHICLE, means:



         (a)   Any vehicle located on public premises which does
not have lawfully affixed thereto or displayed thereon a valid unexpired
license plate and inspection sticker permitting its operation upon the
highways of the state;



         (b)   Any vehicle which is left on public premises
continuously without being moved for a period of seven days;



         (c)   Any vehicle located on public premises illegally
or in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement
of pedestrian or other vehicle traffic on a public right-of-way, street or
highway;



         (d)   Any vehicle that has remained on private premises
without the consent of the owner or person in control of such premises, for
more than 48 hours;



         (e)   Any vehicle from which there has been removed the
engine or transmission or differential or which is otherwise partially
dismantled or inoperable and left on public premises; and



         (f)   Any vehicle which has been removed by a towing
service or a public agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or
ordinance other than this subchapter the violation of which may require the
removal and impoundment of said motor vehicle and which motor once impounded
within 30 days of its removal.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. passed 12-1-2004)



§ 91.02  DESIGNATION; REMOVAL.



   Whenever a police officer of the town finds a vehicle to be an
abandoned vehicle, he or she shall attach to it a notice to remove pursuant
to I.C. 9-22-1-11. The Police Department is authorized to order the removal
of any abandoned vehicle left at any place within the town which has not been
removed by the Police Department or by a commercial towing firm. The town may
enter into contracts with commercial towing firms or with garages for
necessary removal and storage services.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2)



§ 91.03  STORAGE.



   (A)   Any vehicle removed pursuant to this subchapter shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the
Indiana Code. The impounded vehicle shall be stored at a garage of the town,
or in a privately owned garage as designated by the town.



   (B)   Notice of the impoundment shall be given in accordance with
I.C. 9-22-1-19.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 3)



§ 91.04  TOWING AND STORAGE FEES.



   (A)   The owner or lienholder, or the authorized representative of
an owner or lienholder, of any abandoned vehicle which has been removed and
impounded pursuant to this subchapter may appear and claim said vehicle
within 15 days of the mailing of notice pursuant to I.C. 9-22-1-19. The
removal and storage fees for an impounded vehicle shall be in accordance with
schedule from time to time approved by the Town Council and filed in the
office of the Marshal.



   (B)   Upon payment of the above fees and proof of entitlement, the
vehicle shall be released to the claimant.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 4)



§ 91.05  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   The Town Council finds that abandoned vehicles are a public nuisance
and a safety, health and environmental hazard.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 5)



§ 91.06  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   I.C. 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32, as it presently exists and is
hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by reference, as if set forth in full
herein.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 6)



§ 91.07  ENFORCEMENT OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The Police Department is designated as the local agency given the
responsibility for removal, storage and disposal of abandoned vehicles to the
extent permitted under I.C. 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-16 as it presently exists
and is hereafter amended.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 7)




JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES




§ 91.20  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   Because of the danger to health from vermin and insects, the danger to
children attracted by them and the environmental pollution created by their
presence, junk motor vehicles are declared to be a nuisance, except in
lawfully operated salvage yards or yards lawfully operated for vehicles
awaiting permission for junking from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 1)



§ 91.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. A car which is partially dismantled or wrecked
and/or which cannot safely or legally be operated on a public way.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for
towing or transporting people or materials, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers, motorcycles,
tractors, dune buggies and other off the road vehicles.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 2)  (Ord. passed 12-1-2004)



§ 91.22  PROHIBITED STORAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any
junked motor vehicle to store or permit any such vehicle to remain on any
private property within the town for a period of more than ten days after the
receipt of notice requiring such removal and it shall be further unlawful for
any person owning any private property in the town to store or to permit any
such vehicle to remain on his or her property for more than ten days after
the receipt of notice requiring its removal.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.23  PERMITTED STORAGE.



   This subchapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle stored within an
enclosed building or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise where the vehicle is located. Examples of business enterprises
shall may include auto salvage yards, auto repair, auto body, auto service
stations and auto sales lots.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 4)  (Ord. passed 12-1-2004)



§ 91.24  REMOVAL; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any member of the Police Department may order a junk motor
vehicle removed within ten days.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 5)



   (B)   (1)   Notice of the order of removal shall be placed on the
junk motor vehicle and a coy of such notice shall be served on any adult
occupying the real estate on which the junk motor vehicle is located and on
the owner of the junk motor vehicle if known.



         (a)   If no occupant of the real estate or owner of the
junk motor vehicle can be found, a notice affixed to any building on the real
estate shall constitute notice to the owner and occupant of the real estate
and to the owner of the junk motor vehicle.



         (b)   If there is no building on the real estate, the
notice shall be affixed elsewhere on the real estate.



      (2)   If the junk motor vehicle is not removed within the time
fixed by the notice, the Police Department may cause the motor vehicle to be
removed at the expense of the owner of the real estate and/or at the expense
of the owner of the motor vehicle.



      (3)   After removal of the junk motor vehicle, the Police
Department may elect to proceed as follows.



         (a)   Within a reasonable time after removal of a junk
motor vehicle to a storage area, the Police Department shall prepare and
forward to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles a vehicle report containing a
description of the vehicle including the make, model, engine number, if any,
identification number and the number of the license plate and request that
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles advise the Police Department of the name and
most recent mailing address of the owner and any lienholder. If the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles provides a response to the inquiry made by the Police
Department, the Police Department shall mail a copy of the notice and a copy
of this section to each individual listed as an owner of the motor vehicle
and as a lienholder on the motor vehicle.



         (b)   If the junk motor vehicle remains unclaimed a
period of 30 days after being placed in storage, the town will sell the
vehicle to the highest bidder at a public sale conducted after notice under
I.C. 5-3-1 or the town may elect to sell the motor vehicle as unclaimed
property in accordance with I.C. 36-1-11 et seq.



         (c)   If the town elects to sell the motor vehicle the
purchaser shall be furnished a bill of sale for the motor vehicle.



         (d)   The proceeds of the sale of any motor vehicle
shall be applied towards the costs incident to the removal, storage and
disposal of the motor vehicle. Any excess funds shall be returned to the
owner, if known; and, if unknown, deposited with the Clerk-Treasurer of the
town.



         (e)   If the town has entered into an agreement with any
business for the purpose of towing, storing and disposing of junk motor
vehicles, then the business may be empowered to dispose of the junk motor
vehicle as allowed by state law.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 6)  (Ord. passed 9-4-1996)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   A person or persons who violate the provisions of §§ 91.01
through 91.07 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than the
actual costs incurred by the town in towing, storing and disposition of the
abandoned vehicle, plus a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 7)



   (C)   A person or persons who violate the provisions of §§ 91.20
through 91.24 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than the
actual costs incurred by the town in towing, storing and disposition of the
junk vehicle, plus a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 7)



(Ord. passed 12-1-2004)



CHAPTER 92:  ANIMALS



Section



   92.01   Registration and restrictions



§ 92.01  REGISTRATION AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or harboring any
dog, cat or livestock of any description to permit same to roam or run at
large unattended. Any such dog, cat or livestock shall be confined by the
owner or person harboring same to the premises on which the animal is kept
when not under the control of such owner or harborer.



   (B)   Any dog, cat or livestock found off the premises of the owner
or harborer may be caught and confined by the Town Marshal or by any other
person. Any cat so found and detained may be humanely destroyed. Any dog so
found and detained not having affixed thereto a current registration tag may
be humanely destroyed. Any livestock so found and detained may be sold by the
person in possession thereof. In the event livestock shall be sold under this
section, the person selling same shall retain the proceeds thereof until
proof is furnished of the ownership of same at which time the person who sold
such livestock shall be entitled to retain his or her reasonable cost and
expenses in connection with the detention and sale. Any balance shall be paid
to the owner. A person who has detained a dog bearing a registration tag
shall deliver custody of such dog to the Town Marshal who shall notify the
owner or person to whom the registration tag was issued that such dog may be
reclaimed upon payment of the reasonable cost of the apprehension and
detention of the dog. If a dog bearing a registration tag is not claimed by
the person who purchased the registration or by his or her representative,
within 36 hours after notice, the dog may be destroyed or disposed of in a
humane manner by the Town Marshal.



   (C)   Any person or persons owning or harboring a dog which is
disposed to be cross shall keep said dog chained or on a leash, whether at
said person’s premises or elsewhere and shall fasten said dog on said
premises where he or she will be in full view of persons approaching said
premises.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or harboring any
dog, cat or animal of any description to suffer or permit a dog, cat or other
animal to engage in conduct defined as a public nuisance under §§ 90.15
through 90.21 of this code of ordinances. Whenever the Town Marshal
determines that a dog, cat or other animal is a public nuisance, he or she
shall take immediate steps necessary to abate such nuisance.



   (E)   Animals shall not be permitted in the public areas of a
festival or event, held within the town limits, that are open to the general
public. This includes all animals. There shall be an exception for animals
that are part of the festival or event, however, upon completion of the
specific part of the festival or event including the animal(s), the animal(s)
shall be removed from the area of the festival or event immediately.
Violation of this section shall be a Class C infraction. Service animals are
exempt from this section according to state and federal statutes.



(Title III, Ch. VII, Art. I)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1992; Ord. 3, 2014, passed
7-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93:  TOWN BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES



Section




Conduct




   93.01   Prohibited activities



   93.02   Tobacco and controlled substances




Industrial Growth Policy




   93.15   Purpose



   93.16   Goals



   93.17   Objectives



   93.18   MEGA; administration



 



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Animal nuisances, see § 90.22



   Public nuisances, see §§ 90.15 through 90.21




CONDUCT




§ 93.01  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   The purposes of this section are to protect property, health
and peace of people within the town.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ALCOHOL. The compound C2H5OH, known as ethyl alcohol, hydrated
oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever
process produced.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. A liquid or solid which is, or contains,
alcohol and which is fit for human consumption and which is reasonable
likely, or intended, to be used as a beverage.



      LOITER. Has application only to toilet facilities located on
municipal premises and shall mean the presence of a person within a toilet on
municipal premises for longer than a reasonable period of time necessary to
perform bodily toilet functions or for a time exceeding 15 minutes in any
continuous period of two hours’ duration.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which a
person or property may be transported.



      MUNICIPAL PREMISES. All premises owned by and under the
possession and control of the town.



      PET. Cats, dogs and other animals subjected to possession or
ownership by any person.



      REFUSE. Refuse means and includes solid and semi-solid wastes,
dead animals and offal.



   (C)   The following conduct upon or within municipal premises is
prohibited and shall be subject to penalty by courts with requisite
jurisdiction:



      (1)   Possession of alcohol for consumption or the possession
of any alcoholic beverage, except as evidence held pending criminal
prosecution;



      (2)   Recklessly, knowingly or intentionally placing or
leaving refuse, except in a container provided for the deposit of refuse;



      (3)   Loitering in a toilet facility;



      (4)   Parking or operating a motor vehicle on municipal
premises, except where posted regulations permit operating or parking;



      (5)   Suffering or permitting a pet to run at large and to
suffer or permit the presence of a pet whose movement is not controlled by
leash;



      (6)   Presence on property under the control of the Park and
Recreation Board of the town between the hours of 11:00 p.m. (EST) and 5:00
a.m. (EST) except when accompanied by a uniformed Marshal or Deputy Marshal
of the town;



      (7)   Defacing, damaging or in any manner altering the
appearance of fixtures or structures; and



      (8)   Use of municipal toilet facilities by a person afflicted
with a communicable disease, as defined by the public health laws of the
state.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XI, Art. I)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  TOBACCO AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall possess or ingest any derivative product
substance, as defined by the laws of the state, or use smokeless tobacco,
inside a building, structure or vehicle owned by or under the control of the
town or any of its departments or boards.



   (B)   No person shall ingest any derivative product of ignited
tobacco, an ignited tobacco product or an ignited controlled substance, as
defined by the laws of the state, or use smokeless tobacco, in any public
place owned by or under the control of the town or any place owned by or
under the control of the town or any of its departments or boards where signs
are posted prohibiting the conduct.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XI, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. passed 12-3-1997) 
Penalty, see § 93.99




INDUSTRIAL GROWTH POLICY




§ 93.15  PURPOSE.



   Economic growth provides an essential element of a community’s
lifestyle. Quality jobs and stable employment are necessary for the growth
and enhancement of a community. The purpose of this enactment is to establish
goals by defining objectives and outlining standards for economic growth,
with controls on the impact of that development on the quality of life in the
town’s community.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 1)



§ 93.16  GOALS.



   The goals of the town’s Industrial Growth Policy are as follows:



   (A)   Encourage diversified industrial growth which contributes to
the quality of life of the community by enriching its physical, social and
economic environments;



   (B)   Provide an atmosphere in the community which will encourage
investment by enterprises which meet these criteria;



   (C)   Encourage the expansion of present enterprises within the
community, in recognition of the existing firms’ contributions to and
investment in the community;



   (D)   Encourage the development and expansion of agribusiness
industries, historically at the heart of economic development of the
community;



   (E)   Encourage the growth and development of new and innovative
industries. With longstanding community ties to higher education and
research, the town seeks new investment in technological, communications and
informational enterprises;



   (F)   Encourage expansion of service industries which respond
innovatively to the needs of older citizens, which needs are a traditional
concern of the community.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 2)



§ 93.17  OBJECTIVES.



   The town’s Industrial Growth Policy shall encourage investment by
enterprises which complement the town’s present accepted physical, social
and economic environments, and which meet the following criteria:



   (A)   Compare favorably in size of employment to existing
enterprises;



   (B)   Provide jobs for the higher skilled worker;



   (C)   Enhance the physical environment through their production
processes; and



   (D)   Commit to responsible citizenship in the community.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 3)



§ 93.18  MEGA; ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Commission, to be
known and designated as Manchester’s Economic Growth Advocacy (MEGA).



      (1)   Membership. The Commission shall consist of the
following members: two members nominated by the town’s Chamber of Commerce,
approved by the Town Council; two members from the town’s
community-at-large, one of whom may be a member of the Town Forum Steering
Committee, nominated by MEGA and approved by the Town Council; the Town
Manager; not more than two members of the Town Council, whose appointment by
its Presiding Officer shall be ratified by the Town Council; and the
Executive Officer of the town’s contracted marketing group. All members of
the Commission, except ex-officio members, shall be appointed and, where
ratification is required, ratified annually.



      (2)   Advisory members. MEGA is authorized to appoint advisory
members to the Commission at any meeting of the Commission at which a quorum
is present. Advisory members may serve for so long as the Commission shall
determine and shall not have the right to vote.



      (3)   Chair. The Chair of MEGA shall be elected at its first
meeting and annually thereafter at its meeting in the month of January, upon
nomination by a member of the Commission and election by a majority of the
Commission membership. The Chair shall preside at meetings and shall be the
executive officer of the Commission.



      (4)   Secretary. The Chair of the Commission shall appoint the
Secretary of the Commission, whose duty it shall be to deliver written
notices to members for special meetings of the Commission; keep and preserve
its minutes; transmit its reports and recommendations to the Town Council;
and to place all documents and official papers of the Commission for
safekeeping with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



      (5)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet during the month of
January and not less frequently than quarter annually at predetermined times
and places and shall convene in special meetings on the call of the Chair or
on call by a majority of its membership, upon 48 hours’ written notice.



      (6)   Quorum. Five members of the Commission shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of any business or the making of any
recommendation, and all actions of the Commission, except the election of a
Chair shall be deemed authorized if carried by a majority of a quorum. Voting
at Commission meetings shall not be permitted by proxy.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 4)



   (B)   The Commission shall bear primary responsibility for the
following activities and recommendations.



      (1)   The Commission shall maintain a database of jobs, pay
rates, skills and the like to be used in targeting specific enterprises for
solicitation and for measuring the long-term success of economic development
initiatives.



      (2)   The Commission shall use the database to encourage
growth conforming to standards which it perceives to be desirable to the
community increase, but not at a rate which suddenly and adversely diminishes
the existing job-wage base. The database should be designed to permit
measurement and documentation of expansion of existing enterprises.



      (3)   The Commission shall work with, and aggressively
supplement, the marketing efforts of the town’s contractual industrial
development agency. A Town Council designated contractual industrial
development agency shall serve as the official community contact for
industrial growth prospects.



      (4)   The Commission shall identify and recommend to the Town
Council such measures and actions including, but not limited to, zoning,
taxes, tax relief and benefits, regulatory relief, infrastructure
improvements, capital loans, and work training, by which the town can
encourage economic development within the stated objectives. The Commission
shall also recommend different mixes of the options available to the town as,
in its judgment, are designed to create incentive packages to meet specific
needs of individual enterprises, both existing and prospective.



(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 5)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violations of § 93.02 of this chapter shall be subject to
imposition of a civil penalty of not less than $10, nor more than the maximum
penalty authorized by § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XI, Art. II, § 2)  (Ord. passed 12-3-1997)



CHAPTER 94:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   94.01   Policy statement



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Unlawful practice



   94.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   94.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related
transactions



   94.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services



   94.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation



   94.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   94.09   Exemptions



   94.10   Administrative enforcement



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d et
seq., as amended, the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq., as amended, and Indiana Code 22-9.5-1 et.
seq.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 1)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AN AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)



   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to
I.C. 22-9-1-4, et seq.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)



   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint
under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
94.04, 94.05, 94.06, 94.07, or 94.08 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure
that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by
one or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a
building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)



   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age
of 18 years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal
custody of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other
person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the
process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the
age of 18 years.



   FAMILY. Includes a single individual, with the status of such family
being further defined in definition of familial status in this section, Also,
pursuant to 24 C.F.R. Part 5, the definition of FAMILY is revised to include
families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender
identity, or marital status of its members.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)



   HANDICAP.



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities.



         (b)   A record of having such an impairment; or



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;



         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101
et seq.



         (e)   Any other impairment defined under state law.



      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use
of or addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C.§ 802; nor
does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because that individual
is a transvestite.



   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code, receivers, and
fiduciaries.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)



   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant
for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 2)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)



§ 94.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this section, § 94.09 and
I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental
of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 94.04 shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) and I.C.
22-9.5-3.



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section,
nothing in § 94.04 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single family house
by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale
or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24 month period.
The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or
rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman,
or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any
employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 94.04(C) of this
chapter, but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as his residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B), a person shall be deemed to
be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of
any dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing
sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving
the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or



      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   (A)   As made applicable by § 94.03 and except as exempted by §§
94.03(B) and 94.09, it shall be unlawful:



      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona
fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision
of services of facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



      (3)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made,
printed, or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to
the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation,
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation or discrimination.



      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling
is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact
so available.



      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
perspective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.



      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
handicap of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That person;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (8)   For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of
a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13,1998, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in such a manner that:



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               a.   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling;



               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (9)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. and of the
American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people (commonly cited
as "ANSIA117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of division
(A)(8)(c)3.c.



   (B)   Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 4)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term residential real
estate-related transaction means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential
real property.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or
familial status.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 5)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation,
on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or
national origin.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 6)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
granted or protected by §§ 94.03, 94.04, 94.05 or 94.06 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 7)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.08  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:



   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or



   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A); or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate; or



   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined
according to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall
be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or
both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of
years or for life.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 8)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.09  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et. seq.
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) of this
section.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, HOUSING
FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:



      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the
Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the
State Civil Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal
program); or



      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of
age or older; or



      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 9)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)



§ 94.10  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set
forth in division (B) hereof shall be vested in the Chief Elected Official of
the town.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town,
because of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under the
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
sections of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights
Commission for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6
and the Chief Elected Official of the town, shall refer all said complaints
to the Commission as provided for under division (A) of this section to said
Commission for purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief
as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall
administer their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and
urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the Chief Elected Official and the
Commission to further such purposes.



   (D)   The Chief Elected Official of the town, or the Chief Elected
Official's designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 10)  (Ord. 2, 2013, passed
3-13-2013)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   If bodily injury results, as per § 94.08 of this chapter, a
person shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten
years, or both; and, if death results, a person shall be subject to
imprisonment for any term of years or for life.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 8)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      111.   CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS



      112.   ADVERTISING



      113.   TAXICABS



      114.   COMMUNICATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   License required



   110.03   Exemptions



   110.04   License application; investigation



   110.05   License issuance or denial; suspension or revocation



   110.06   Required disclosures



   110.07   False, deceptive or misleading statements



   110.08   Hours



   110.09   Obstruction of public places prohibited



   110.10   “No Peddling” signs



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER. Any person who on foot or by vehicle sells or offers for sale
any goods, wares, merchandise or services directly to a consumer for
immediate delivery or performance, either by going from house to house for
the purpose of selling such goods or services or by selling such goods and
services in any public place.



   SOLICITOR. Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to
house or upon the public street an order for goods, subscriptions,
merchandise or services to be delivered or performed at a future date.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm or corporation, both as principals
and agents, who engage in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business and
in the course of such business hires, leases or occupies any building or
structure whatsoever. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer or
trader, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part
of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer or trader shall not exempt
any person, firm or corporation from being considered a TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
This definition shall not be construed to include persons who conduct home
“garage sales”.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 1)



§ 110.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall be engaged as a peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant within the town limits without first obtaining a license pursuant to
this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Any armed forces veteran, as defined by I.C. 25-25-2-1, upon
proof of possessing the license described in I.C. 25-25-2-1, shall be
permitted to vend, hawk and peddle goods, wares, fruits and merchandise
within the town and is exempt from the requirement of any town license,
license fee or tax for doing so; provided, however, that, such armed forces
veteran shall be subject to all other regulatory provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants engaged in
interstate commerce shall be exempt from any license fee or tax in obtaining
a license. Any person claiming this exemption shall file a verified statement
disclosing: the interstate nature of the business; the name and location of
the company or firm for which orders are to be solicited or secured; the name
and address of the nearest local or state manager, if any; the kind of goods
or merchandise to be delivered; the place of shipment and method of delivery;
and any other facts necessary to establish the claim of exemption. A copy of
the order blank, contract or other papers used by the applicant in taking
orders for interstate goods shall be attached to the statement. If it appears
to the Clerk-Treasurer that the applicant is entitled to an exemption, the
requirement of a license fee shall be waived.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 3)



§ 110.04  LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Application for any license required by this chapter shall be
made in writing on forms furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. No person shall
make a known misrepresentation or false statement on any application. The
application shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer and shall include:



      (1)   The applicant’s full name and address, the address of
his or her local business establishment and the exact nature of his or her
business;



      (2)   The name or title of the proposed business, profession
or occupation;



      (3)   If the applicant is not the owner of the place in which
the business is to be conducted, the name and address of the owner;



      (4)   If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or other
association, the names and addresses of all partners or principal officers;



      (5)   If the applicant is acting as an agent or employee, the
name and address of the principal or employer; and



      (6)   The attachment of a receipt from the Clerk-Treasurer
showing the payment of the license fee.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 4)



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall forward it to the Town Marshal who shall conduct an
investigation concerning the truth of the facts stated in the application,
the character of the applicant and the condition of the premises upon which
the proposed licensed activity is to take place.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 5)



§ 110.05  LICENSE ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall approve the application for a
license unless he or she finds that:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime, if the
crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of
the business, profession or occupation for which the license is to be issued;



      (2)   The applicant has committed any act involving
dishonesty, fraud or deceit with intent to substantially benefit himself,
herself or another or substantially injure another;



      (3)   The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact
required to be revealed in the application for the license or in any
amendment or report to be made thereunder; or



      (4)   Issuance of the license would be inconsistent with
public health, safety or general welfare.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 6)



   (B)   A license issued under this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the President of the Town Council pursuant to the notice and
hearing procedure set forth in I.C. 36-4-5-5. A license shall be revoked or
suspended if there is a finding that the person complained of has:



      (1)   Willfully violated a term or condition of his or her
license;



      (2)   Willfully done or permitted to be done an act in
violation of a statute or town ordinance relating to the business, profession
or occupation licensed; or



      (3)   Conducted the licensed business, profession or
occupation in such a manner as to constitute a threat to the public health,
safety or general welfare.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 12)



§ 110.06  REQUIRED DISCLOSURES.



   (A)   Each person engaged in peddling or soliciting for the sale of
goods or services at the residence of a prospective buyer shall, at the
outset, disclose to the prospective buyer his or her name and the company or
product he or she represents and, if requested to do so, shall immediately
leave the premises.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to misrepresent
the purpose of his or her call or to use any plan, scheme or ruse which
misrepresents such purpose.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.07  FALSE, DECEPTIVE OR MISLEADING STATEMENTS.



   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to make
or cause to be made, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of selling or
procuring any order for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or
services, any assertion, representation or statement of fact which is untrue,
deceptive or misleading.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.08  HOURS.



   It is unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit before the hour of
9:00 a.m. of any day or after the hour of 8:00 p.m. of any day without the
specific prior consent of the prospective buyer.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.09  OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person, either selling, or offering for sale,
any article or service by peddling or soliciting in any place, to obstruct or
cause to be obstructed, the passage of any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or
any other public place, by causing people to congregate at or near the place
where any article or service is being sold or offered for sale.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.10  “NO PEDDLING” SIGNS.



   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to ring the bell or knock
on the door or otherwise attempt to gain admittance for the purpose of
peddling or soliciting at any residence, dwelling or apartment at which a
sign bearing the words “No Peddlers or Solicitors” or words of similar
import indicating that peddlers or solicitors are not wanted on the premises,
is painted, affixed or otherwise exposed to public view; provided that, this
section shall not apply to any peddler or solicitor who rings the bell,
knocks on the door or otherwise attempts to gain admittance to such
residence, dwelling or apartment at the invitation or with the consent of the
occupant thereof.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   License required



   111.03   Exemptions



   111.04   License application



   111.05   License issuance, denial; suspension or revocation; notice



   111.06   Identification card requirements



   111.07   License transfer prohibited



   111.08   Endorsement disclaimer



   111.09   Hours



   111.10   Prohibited solicitation methods



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE. Any activity or pursuit which has as its object, or which
purports to have as its object, a benevolent, educational, patriotic,
religious, philanthropic, civic, fraternal or social welfare purpose.



   CONTRIBUTION. Any donation of food, clothing, money, property,
subscription or pledge or any other thing of tangible value.



   PROFESSIONAL PROMOTER. A person who, for compensation, plans, promotes,
conducts, manages or carries on, or attempts to plan, promote, conduct,
manage or carry on any drive or campaign for the purpose of soliciting
contributions for or on behalf of any charitable purpose. A bond fide officer
or regular employee of a charitable organization shall not be deemed a
PROFESSIONAL PROMOTER by reason of his or her participation in charitable
solicitations made by or on behalf of his or her employer.



   PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR. Any person employed for compensation by any
person or charitable organization to make solicitations on behalf of any
charitable purpose. A bona fide officer or regular employee of a charitable
organization shall not be deemed a PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR by reason of his or
her participation in charitable solicitations made by or on behalf of his or
her employer.



   SOLICIT and SOLICITATION. The request, directly or indirectly, for
money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other things of value will be used for a charitable purpose. These words
shall also mean and include the following methods of securing such money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value:



      (1)   Any oral or written request;



      (2)   The making of any announcement to the local press, or on
the radio or television, or by telephone of telegraph concerning a local
appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution
for any charitable purpose connected therewith;



      (3)   The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of
any handbill, written advertisement or other local publication which directly
or by implication seeks to obtain public support; and



      (4)   The sale of, or offer or attempt to sell, any
advertisement, advertising space, book, card, tag, coupon, device, magazine,
membership, merchandise, subscription, flower, ticket, candy, cookies or
other tangible item in connection with which any appeal is made for
charitable purpose, or where the name of any charitable agency is used or
referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such
sale, or when or where, in connection with any such sale, any statement is
made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will be
donated to any charitable purpose.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 1)



§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall solicit contribution within the town for any charitable
purpose without having a charitable solicitation license issued in accordance
with this chapter; provided, however, that, when a license has been issued to
any applicant, the individual agents or solicitors for such licensee shall
not be required to obtain individual solicitation licenses; provided further
that, any application for a charitable solicitation license in accordance
with this chapter shall be exempt from payment of license fees.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Solicitations made upon premises owned or occupied by the
organization on whose behalf such solicitation is made;



   (B)   Any religious organization or corporation or association
soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members thereof at the
time of such solicitation;



   (C)   Solicitations by persons requesting any contribution for the
relief of named individuals other than the solicitor when all of the
contributions collected, except for the actual cost of a social gathering to
collect contributions, are delivered to the named beneficiaries; or



   (D)   Solicitations by radio stations, television stations or
newspapers.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 3)



§ 111.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person or organization desiring to obtain a license to
solicit contributions for a charitable purpose shall submit an application in
writing on forms furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. No person shall make a
known misrepresentation or false statement on the application.



   (B)   The application shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer and
shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name of the charitable organization or purpose under
which contributions are solicited;



      (2)   The names and addresses of applicant and, if
appropriate, the applicant’s principal officers;



      (3)   The names and addresses of all of the applicant’s
chapters, branches and affiliates within the town;



      (4)   The approximate amount of funds proposed to be raised
and the estimated cost of the solicitation, including the amount of wages,
fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be paid to any person other than
applicant’s regular employees, including the names and addresses of any
professional promoters or professional solicitors who shall act on behalf of
the applicant and the terms arranged for their compensation. If there is any
change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in
the application, the applicant shall notify the Clerk-Treasurer in writing
within 24 hours, exclusive of weekends and holidays;



      (5)   The purpose of the solicitation, with a specific
statement, supported by facts and figures, if any, showing the need for the
solicited funds and where and how the solicited funds will be spent;



      (6)   The method or methods to be used in conducting the
solicitation;



      (7)   The dates of the commencement and termination of the
solicitation period; and



      (8)   A financial statement of any funds collected for
charitable purposed by the applicant during its last charitable solicitation
period, stating the amount of contributions raised, the cost of distribution
and final distribution of the balance.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 4)



§ 111.05  LICENSE ISSUANCE, DENIAL; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; NOTICE.



   (A)   A charitable solicitation license shall be issued by the
Clerk-Treasurer only if he or she finds that the following facts exist:



      (1)   The application is complete, and that all of the
statements made in the application are true;



      (2)   The charitable organization is not connected in any way,
either directly or indirectly, with a professional promoter or a professional
solicitor who has within the past ten years:



         (a)   Been convicted of a crime involving solicitations
for or on behalf of any charitable organization or charitable purpose;



         (b)   Been convicted of any crime involving
misrepresentation, deceit or fraud; or



         (c)   Been found in any civil or administrative
proceedings to have committed any act of misrepresentation, deceit or fraud;



      (3)   Neither the charitable organization, nor any of its
officers, trustees, directors or principals, have within the past ten years:



         (a)   Been convicted of any crime involving
solicitations for or on behalf of a charitable organization of charitable
purpose;



         (b)   Been convicted of any crime involving
misrepresentation, deceit or fraud; or



         (c)   Been found in any civil or administrative
proceeding to have committed any act of misrepresentation, deceit or fraud.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 5)



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall either issue or deny the license
within 15 days of his or her receipt of the application for the license. If
the license is denied, written notice thereof shall be sent to the applicant
by certified mail, which applicant may, within ten days of the mailing of the
notice, request a hearing on the denial before the Town Council. The hearing
shall be held as soon as possible, but in no case later than 30 days after
the receipt of the request for hearing. If no request for hearing is made
within the ten-day period, the Clerk-Treasurer’s decision shall be final.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 6)



   (C)   Licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Clerk-Treasurer pursuant to the notice and hearing procedures set
forth in I.C. 36-4-5-5. A license shall be revoked or suspended if there is a
finding that the person complained of has:



      (1)   Willfully violated a term or condition of his or her
license;



      (2)   Willfully done or permitted to be done any act in
violation of a statute or town ordinance relating to charitable
solicitations; or



      (3)   Been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or
an intent to defraud.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 7)



§ 111.06  IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All charitable organizations to whom charitable solicitation
licenses have been issued shall furnish an identification card to each of
their agents and solicitors, which card is required to be in the possession
of the agents and solicitors when soliciting. Such identification cards shall
include the name of the charitable organization, its charitable solicitation
license number, date of expiration of the license, the name and signature of
the agent or solicitor and the signature of an appropriate official of the
organization.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person soliciting contributions for any
charitable purpose to fail to have in his or her possession the
identification card required in this section, or alternatively the license
issued under this chapter, or to refuse to display such card of license upon
the request of any town official or person solicited.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.07  LICENSE TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   No license identification card issued under this chapter shall be
transferable or assignable.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 9)



§ 111.08  ENDORSEMENT DISCLAIMER.



   Issuance of a charitable solicitation license does not constitute
endorsement or approval by the town of any charitable organization. It is
unlawful for any person or charitable organization to claim or imply,
directly or indirectly, any such endorsement or approval by reason of having
obtained a charitable solicitation license from the town.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.09  HOURS.



   No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose from
residences by phone or door to door between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.10  PROHIBITED SOLICITATION METHODS.



   (A)   No person soliciting contributions for any charitable purpose
shall use advertising that contains false, misleading or deceptive
statements; or make or perpetrate any other misstatement, misrepresentation,
deception or fraud in connection with such solicitation.



   (B)   No charitable organization or professional promoter,
soliciting contributions, shall use a name, symbol or statement so closely
related or similar to that used by another charitable organization or
governmental agency that its use would tend to confuse or mislead the public.



   (C)   No person shall solicit contributions by the use of statements
or materials that would indicate that such funds were being raised for an
organization, agency or person, in the absence of proper and valid
authorization from that organization, agency or person.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  ADVERTISING



Section



   112.01   Permit required



   112.02   Permit fee



   112.03   Exceptions



§ 112.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to display,
distribute, pass and/or place in vehicles on the streets and/or in or upon
any portion of any residence within the corporate limits of the town
handbills without having first obtained a permit from the Clerk-Treasurer of
said town to do so.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. III, § 1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.02  PERMIT FEE.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue such a permit to any person, firm or
corporation to so distribute advertising matter upon payment of the sum of
$10 for an annual license, which shall be issued for a calendar year and
shall expire at the end of the year without reference to the date on which
said license is issued.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. III, § 2)



§ 112.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the distribution of news in any sheet,
pamphlet or paper wherein the major portion of said sheet, pamphlet or paper
is devoted to the dissemination of news or information of a general nature,
such as meets the rules and regulations of the United States Postal
Department as to the distribution of newsprint under newsprint rates.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3)



CHAPTER 113:  TAXICABS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   License required



   113.03   License application; investigation



   113.04   Proof of financial responsibility



   113.05   License issuance or denial; suspension or revocation



   113.06   License contents; transfer prohibited



   113.07   Rates



   113.08   Display of license and rates



   113.09   Taximeter requirements



   113.10   Taxicab inspections



   113.11   Receipts



   113.12   Number of passengers; restriction



   113.13   Exclusive use by customer



   113.14   Duty to carry



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle designed and constructed to transport
passengers, no more than six in number, not including the driver, which is
used to transport passengers for pay, which is not operated over any definite
and designated route within the town limits, and the destination of which is
designated by the passenger at the time of transportation.



   TAXICAB BUSINESS. The owning or managing of taxicabs for financial
profit.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 1)



§ 113.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the operation of a taxicab business within
the town without first obtaining a master taxicab license certificate.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.03  LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Every person engaging in the operation of a taxicab business
shall apply for a master taxicab license certificate on a form provided by
the Clerk-Treasurer. In addition to any other information deemed necessary by
the Clerk-Treasurer, the application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The number of taxicabs for which the applicant seeks a
license;



      (2)   The make, model, serial number, motor number and state
license plate number of each taxicab;



      (3)   A description of the distinguishing color or
identification scheme of the taxicabs; and



      (4)   Proof of financial responsibility as required by §
113.04 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 3)



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall forward it to the Town Marshal who shall conduct an
investigation concerning the truth of the facts stated in the application,
the character of the applicant, the condition of the premises upon which the
proposed licensed activity is to take place and whether the taxicabs to be
licensed conform to applicable state and local vehicle requirements.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 5)



§ 113.04  PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   No taxicab license shall be issued unless the applicant files with the
Clerk-Treasurer written proof of his or her ability to respond in damages for
liability thereafter incurred, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or
use of each taxicab, in the amounts required by I.C. 9-25-5.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 4)



§ 113.05  LICENSE ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   In determining whether to grant or deny an application, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall consider: the public need for the service; the
financial responsibility of the applicant; the number, kind and type of
equipment; and the effect of the proposed service on the use of town streets
and alleys. The Clerk-Treasurer shall approve the license application unless
he or she finds that:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime, if the
crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of
the business, profession or occupation for which the license is to be issued;



      (2)   The applicant has committed any act involving
dishonesty, fraud or deceit with intent to substantially benefit himself,
herself or another, or substantially injure another;



      (3)   The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact
required to be revealed in the application for the license, or in any
amendment or report to be made thereunder; or



      (4)   Issuance of the license would be inconsistent with
public health, safety or general welfare.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 6)



   (B)   Licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the President of the Town Council pursuant to the notice and hearing
procedure set forth at I.C. 36-4-5-5. A license shall be revoked or suspended
if there is a finding that the person complained of has:



      (1)   Willfully violated a term or condition of his or her
license;



      (2)   Willfully done or permitted to be done an act in
violation of a statute or town ordinance relating to the business, profession
or occupation licensed; or



      (3)   Conducted the licensed business, profession or
occupation in such a manner as to constitute a threat to public health,
safety or general welfare.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 8)



§ 113.06  LICENSE CONTENTS; TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Upon approval of the application, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue to the applicant a master license certificate and individual taxicab
licenses for each taxicab to be licensed. The master taxicab license
certificate shall state the date of issuance, the term of the license and the
information stated in the application. The individual taxicab license shall
be identical to the master taxicab license certificate; except that, it shall
be of a size convenient for display in the taxicab and in addition shall
state the motor number, state license plate number and passenger seating
capacity of the taxicab for which it is issued.



   (B)   The master taxicab license certificate and the individual
taxicab licenses shall be non- transferable and non-assignable.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 7)



§ 113.07  RATES.



   The Town Council shall adopt, by resolution, a uniform rate schedule to
taxicab services. No person engaging in the operation of a taxicab business
or driving a taxicab within the town limits shall charge rates which differ
from the uniform rate schedule adopted by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.08  DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND RATES.



   Every taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter shall display, within
the taxicab in plain view of its passengers, the individual taxicab license
provided for in § 113.06 of this chapter and the uniform rate schedule
provided for in § 113.07 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.09  TAXIMETER REQUIREMENTS.



   Every taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be equipped with
a taximeter which shall be kept operating at all times within such standards
of accuracy as may be prescribed by the Town Marshal and which shall be
installed in such a manner as to permit the passenger to see the amount of
the fare as registered.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 11)



§ 113.10  TAXICAB INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Town Marshal shall inspect periodically each licensed
taxicab.



   (B)   The inspection shall include a check of the condition and
accuracy of the taximeter and timing devices in each taxicab.



   (C)   The Town Marshal shall also have the authority to perform spot
checks on all taxicabs at any reasonable time to determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 12)



§ 113.11  RECEIPTS.



   (A)   Each driver of a taxicab shall provide a passenger with a
receipt when requested.



   (B)   The receipt shall include complete and accurate information in
legible form as follows:



      (1)   The name and signature of the drive and the individual
taxicab license number;



      (2)   Date, time and place of trip origin and dismissal; and



      (3)   Itemized listing of charges and total fare paid or
charged.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 13)



§ 113.12  NUMBER OF PASSENGERS; RESTRICTION.



   No driver shall permit more passengers to be carried in a taxicab than
the rated seating capacity of each taxicab as fixed by the Clerk-Treasurer
and set out in the individual taxicab license.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.13  EXCLUSIVE USE BY CUSTOMER.



   When a taxicab is engaged by a customer, that customer shall have the
exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment from
the time of engaging such taxicab until said customer is delivered to the
designated destination, and no driver of said taxicab shall solicit or carry
additional customers therein without the expressed consent of the original
customer.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.14  DUTY TO CARRY.



   No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person
who agrees to pay the proper fare unless he or she is previously engaged with
an exclusive-ride customer.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 114:  COMMUNICATIONS



Section



   114.01   Impeding communication signals



§ 114.01  IMPEDING COMMUNICATION SIGNALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
operate any instrument or device or permit any wiring to be in such a
condition as to produce or emanate electrical impulses or waves so as to
cause impedance to radio and television signal reception.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. III, Art. I, § 1)



   (B)   In order to enforce the provisions of division (A) above, it
is further ordained that any person, firm or corporation shall, upon
reasonable proof being presented to the Town Marshal that said person, firm
or corporation is violating division (A) above and that upon written notice
by said Marshal to said person, firm or corporation, it shall be unlawful to
continue to operate said device or permit the continuance of the use of any
such wiring described in said notice without first installing or attaching
suitable apparatus or device which will trap or ground electrical impulses or
waves causing impedance and interference as herein described.



(Prior Code, Title IV, Ch. III, Art. I, § 2)



Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Discharging weapons and explosives



§ 130.01  DISCHARGING WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES.



   It shall be unlawful to shoot or discharge any gun, air rifle, sling
shot, bow and arrow or any explosive material within the corporate limits of
the town, except when necessary for the purpose of construction or repair
work.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. VIII, Art. I)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      151.   SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS



      152.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



      153.   FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT



      154.   STORM WATER



      155.   SUBDIVISIONS



      156.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   150.01   Annexations



§ 150.01  ANNEXATIONS.



   (A)   All ordinances heretofore adopted by the Town Council
effecting annexations of land to the incorporated area of the town are hereby
incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set forth verbatim in this
code. Two copies of each of said annexation ordinances are on file in the
office of the Clerk- Treasurer and are available for inspection by the
public. Ordinances subsequently enacted in accordance with law effecting
annexation of land to the incorporated boundaries of the town shall be deemed
incorporated herein by reference as the same are enacted and when two copies
of same are placed on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and made
available for public inspection.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall record in the office of the
county’s Recorder all ordinances enacted which effect an annexation of land
to the town.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. IV, Art. I)



CHAPTER 151:  SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS



Section



   151.01   Occupants and owners to clean



   151.02   Obstruction of public pedestrian ways



   151.03   Excavation permits and bonds



   151.04   Moving buildings upon or across public ways



   151.05   Sidewalks, curbs and tree lawns



   151.06   Trees



   151.07   Personal conduct upon, contiguous to public ways



   151.08   Street grades



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  OCCUPANTS AND OWNERS TO CLEAN.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner, if there be no
occupant, of each and every building within the town fronting or bordering
upon any sidewalk of brick, cement or stone to permit said sidewalk to become
covered with trash or debris or, when and if said sidewalk becomes covered
with snow, to permit said snow to remain on said sidewalk longer than is
reasonable, taking into consideration the physical condition of the owner or
occupant, his or her time of employment; provided further that, in any event
no snow shall be permitted to remain on said sidewalk after it has
accumulated and after 6:00 p.m. on any one day.



   (B)   The Town Marshal is hereby authorized to notify such occupant
or owner of such building or lot, failing to comply with the provisions of
this section and, if such owner or occupant shall fail or refuse to commence
the removal of said snow or debris within two hours after being so notified,
the Town Marshal shall forthwith employ some competent person to remove said
snow or debris and the cost thereof shall be taxed against the owner or
occupant as a part of the penalty provided herein.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. II, Art. I)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.02  OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PEDESTRIAN WAYS.



   (A)   No person shall obstruct any public sidewalk or other public
pedestrian passage way, or any part thereof, and no person shall interfere
with the unimpeded passage of pedestrians within a public pedestrian way by
placing or causing any object to be placed thereon except as specifically
authorized herein.



   (B)   On public pedestrian ways having a width exceeding six feet,
and located within areas zoned for business use under the town’s Zoning
Ordinance, the owner or other lawful occupant of the premises abutting the
public pedestrian way may use or permit the use of that portion of the public
pedestrian way in excess of the six feet abutting the roadway for the
display, preparation, sale and consumption of merchandise and consumables for
periods not exceeding 16 hours each day, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.



   (C)   This section does not authorize the use of tree lawns or the
display, sale or consumption of merchandise or consumables not otherwise
lawful under the laws of the state and does not regulate permanent signs or
parts of buildings, including canopies and awnings, lawfully protruding over
public pedestrian ways.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. II, Art. II)  (Ord. passed 12-3-1997)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



§ 151.03  EXCAVATION PERMITS AND BONDS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
excavate in any part of the street, alley or public way in the town without
first having completed and application and obtaining a permit from the
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   The application shall be signed by the owner of the lot or
part of lot on which such building is to be erected, from which lot said work
is to commence or said lot in connection with which said work is being done
and/or to be done, which application shall state the proposed location, and
state fully and minutely the kind of building to be erected or excavation to
be made, the principal materials to be used in the construction of said
building and the kind and size of tile and/or drainage material to be used
and when and where proposed to be connected, and said Town Council shall
thereupon order the Clerk-Treasurer to issue a permit to said applicant
allowing him or her to make such proposed improvements, excavations, changes,
structure, work, drain and/or sewer and designate what portion of the street,
alley or sidewalk may be cut, dug into, broken and/or excavated, and where
thereon building material may be placed; provided, the same does not violate
any sections of this section, any state law and/or does not interfere with
any public works being done by the town in pursuance of law and does not
interfere with the rights of other people, unduly obstruct traffic and/or is
not otherwise dangerous to the public. The Council shall not issue a permit
to any person to connect or tap into any sewer with a larger size drain
and/or sewer than is provided by the plans and specifications for said sewer,
in event said sewer is in process of construction and/or if the same would,
in the opinion of the Town Engineer, carry material injurious to the proper
use of said sewer for the purpose for which the same was built and/or
intended or for the purpose for which said sewer is being constructed;
provided further that, said applicant shall sign an agreement with sufficient
surety thereon, to the approval of the Council, guaranteeing that any
building, buildings, excavations, diggings, repairing, changes, sewer
connections, places where material is deposited and any injuries to public
property and/or land, streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewers and/or surfaces
thereof, so injured or damaged in connection with said work shall be put in
as good a condition as they were before said work was done and within 30 days
after the completion thereof and that all materials so deposited shall be
removed therefrom within 30 days after the completion of the work for which
said permit is granted. Said applicant and his or her surety shall not be
released from their bond unless and until the Street Commissioner and/or the
Engineer has accepted the condition of said property and/or abutting public
property, streets, alleys, sidewalks and surfaces thereof and/or sewers
connected with has been properly replaced and/or repaired where injury or
damage has been done and that this section has been fully complied with and
that no other ordinance and/or statute has been violated in connection with
said work. Said agreement and bond of the applicant shall further provide
that the property owner will properly safeguard all work done in connection
with said permit and that the town will be save harmless from all loss or
payment of damages or costs in defending any suits by reason of the negligent
acts and/or alleged negligent acts of said applicant or person or persons,
corporation, associations, firm, partnership or other entity or employer
contracted with in connection with the work provided for in said permit.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. II, Art. III)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.04  MOVING BUILDINGS UPON OR ACROSS PUBLIC WAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
move any building or buildings on, over and/or upon any street or alley
within the corporate limits of the town without meeting the requirements of
this section and obtaining a permit from the Town Council to move said
building or buildings.



   (B)   Before said permit shall be granted to any person, firm or
corporation, said applicant shall furnish a bond to the town with sufficient
surety to the approval of the Town Council thereof and agreeing therein to
save the town harmless from any and all damages that might accrue therein to
notify all companies having wires crossing any street or alley over which
said building or buildings are to be moved.



   (C)   The permit issued as herein provided shall describe the route
over which said building or buildings are to be moved and it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move said buildings or
buildings over any other street or alley within the corporate limits of said
town not set out in said permit.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. II, Art. IV)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.05  SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND TREE LAWNS.



   (A)   Streets, curbs, sidewalks and tree lawns are held for and
devoted to public use, subject to the recognition of the peculiar rights of
abutting property owners therein, and it is the purpose, spirit and language
of state law to enable a municipality to require improvements, to determine
the character of the improvements and to enforce the payment of benefits of
improvements against the owners of the properties abutting such improvements.



   (B)   Without relinquishing the power and authority of the
municipality to require general improvements to streets, curbs, tree lawns
and sidewalks now available under state law, it is necessary in the interests
of safety to establish standards for replacement, maintenance and repair of
curbs, tree lawns and sidewalks at specific properties in order to preserve
and protect the interest of the public generally and abutting property owners.



   (C)   The Street Commissioner shall establish, maintain on file in
his or her office and shall make available to owners of property in the town
specifications for the construction of curbs, sidewalks and maintenance of
tree lawns, including any requirements for the trimming of trees located
within tree lawns or overhanging any portion of the public streets, alleys
and ways in the town.



   (D)   Each owner of property abutting a public street, alley or way
in the town shall bear responsibility for proper and safe condition of
abutting curbs, tree lawns, trees and sidewalks and, shall, if requested in
writing in accordance with the terms of this section, replace, repair and
maintain curbs, tree lawns, sidewalks and trees overhanging any portion of
the public places of the town in compliance with the specifications described
in the preceding section, so as to afford users of the public streets, tree
lawns and sidewalks reasonable safety.



   (E)   If the Street Commissioner determines in writing that a curb,
tree lawn or sidewalk is defective and that the defective condition creates a
foreseeable risk of harm to persons using the street, curb, tree lawn of
sidewalk, then the Street Commissioner shall serve notice upon the owner of
the property which abuts upon such defective condition describing the defect
and the specific requirements for elimination of the defect. The Street
Commissioner shall also determine and advise the property owner of the time
within which the corrective measures shall be commenced and completed. The
notice shall include a copy of any specifications prescribed by the Street
Commissioner for the correction of the defect. If the property owner resides
within the town, the notice shall be served upon the property owner by the
Town Marshal. If the property owner is not a resident within the corporate
limits of the town, notice shall be served upon the property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If a property owner notified in
accordance with this section does not agree with any part of the
determination made by the Street Commission, the property owner shall have
the right to appeal the Street Commissioner’s determination to the Town
Manager; provided that, the property owner shall notify the Town Manager in
writing of the reason or reasons for the objection within 30 days after the
Street Commissioner’s notice is served upon the property owner. The Town
Manager shall fix a date, time and place to hear the objection of the
property owner and shall, within five days after the hearing, notify the
property owner of the decision, in writing, which determination shall be
served upon the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested.
All decisions of the Town Manager shall be forwarded by the Town Manager to
the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall place the matter on the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council; provided, however, if the
Town Manager’s decision on the appeal shall have been served on the
property owner within seven days of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Town Council, the matter shall be placed on the agenda of the immediately
succeeding regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council. If the property
owner objects to the decision of the Town Manager, then the property owner
shall have the right to appear before the Town Council when the matter is
scheduled on its agenda and to be heard. The decision of the Town Council in
the matter shall be final, subject to only any rights of the property owner
to enjoin the action of the town in a court of competent jurisdiction. When
the positions of Street Commissioner and Town Manager are occupied by the
same person, an appeal from a decision of the Street Commissioner shall be
directed to the Town Council, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall place the matter
on the Town Council’s agenda and give the notices required hereunder.



   (F)   In the event a property owner shall not comply with a final
order to repair a defective condition, and such failure shall have continued
for more than 120 days from the date of the order, the Street Commissioner,
with the approval of the Town manager, may contract for the repair, to be
paid from appropriated funds. The costs of such repair, plus 20% thereof for
the contracting and supervisory services along with interest at the statutory
rate, shall be a lien upon the property benefitted by the repair, under the
same requirements and procedures prescribed by I.C. 32-28-3 for mechanics’
liens, enforceable by the person performing the repair or the town. In
addition to the right of the town to contract for the complete repairs
ordered hereunder, the failure of a property owner to complete a repair
within 120 days of the final order therefore shall constitute a violation of
the Penal Code of the town.



   (G)   In the event the correction of a defective condition
necessitates the establishment of grades or elevations or requires the
services of a licensed engineer for the purpose of defining the scope of the
work, then the costs of the services described in this section shall be borne
by the town.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. II, Art. V)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.06  TREES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any tree on his
or her premises or on the tree lawn immediately abutting their premises to
become in such a state of growth that any limb is low enough to strike or
brush against any vehicle passing thereunder and/or to strike or brush
against any pedestrian walking thereunder.



   (B)   Except as required by division (A), it shall be unlawful for a
person to willfully damage a tree in the tree lawn by chemical or physical
means, including but not limited to girdling. It shall also be unlawful for a
person to prune, remove, cut above or below ground or otherwise disturb more
than 10% of any tree or to plant a tree, on a tree lawn, municipally owned
property or along any public way or to employ, encourage or direct any other
person to prune, remove, cut above or below ground, or otherwise disturb more
than 10% of any or to plant a tree, on a tree lawn, municipally owned
property or along any public way, without first filing an application and
procuring a permit from the Clerk- Treasurer. No fee shall be charged to
secure the permit. A permit shall not be issued to remove a tree unless the
tree is determined by an unauthorized representative of the North Manchester
Tree Advisory Commission, to be diseased, dead or dangerous to person or
property.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. X, Art. I)  (Ord. passed 8-1-2007; Ord. 10,
2013, passed 11-6-2013)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.07  PERSONAL CONDUCT UPON, CONTIGUOUS TO PUBLIC WAYS.



   (A)   Based on findings that the presence of persons in repose upon
or against, and the presence of persons within, the open recesses, entry ways
and covered walkways of, structures which are contiguous to public ways,
without the express permission of the structure occupant for access, during
hours when the structure is closed to entry by the occupant’s clientele for
the conduct of business, contributes to obstruction and littering of public
ways, contributes to violation of the tobacco derivatives use prohibition of
§ 93.02 of this chapter, contributes to violations of the prohibition
against obstruction of pedestrian public ways of § 151.02 of this chapter
causes persons to apprehend that the use of the affected public ways poses a
threat to their personal safety and property and contributes to a general
decline of the core business district of the town, with consequent greater
costs of providing public services and decline of tax revenues which fund
such services, the conduct described in this section is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance, subject to imposition of civil penalties and deserving of
priority enforcement by the public safety personnel of the town; provided,
however, no act, failure to act or conduct which is protected by the
Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state shall be
made a civil violation by the provisions of this section.



   (B)   No person shall repose in, upon or against the pediments,
walls, windows and other openings or projections of a structure, or under the
covered walkway of structures, which are contiguous to public ways, without
the express permission of the structure occupant, during hours when the
structure is closed to entry by the occupant’s clientele.



   (C)   Except for passage on or along a public way, no person shall
occupy the recesses, offset spaces, entry ways and covered walkways of
structures, which are contiguous to public ways.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. V)  (Ord. passed 7-12-2000) 
Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.08  STREET GRADES.



   (A)   The town’s Civil Engineer shall and he is hereby ordered to
select some suitable and permanent point upon the Town Hall in said town and
to calculate and ascertain the exact elevation and distance of said point
above the level of the sea and to permanently mark on said point by marks
which cannot be erased or destroyed, its distance and elevation above the
level of the sea and to record the location and description of said point and
its distance and elevation above the level of the sea and the markings
thereon in the proper records in his or her office, which point, when
calculated, ascertained and properly marked and recorded, shall hereafter be
taken as a benchmark for the grades of all the streets and alleys within the
corporate limits of said city.



   (B)   When the grade of any street or alley within the said town is
hereafter established by said Town Council, the said benchmark described in
division (A) above shall be the base from which said grade shall be
calculated and described.



   (C)   When the grade of any street within the said town shall be
established duly and legally by the Town Council, the grade thereof shall be
marked as follows: wherever said street intersects with any other street in
said city, two lines shall be drawn, one line being drawn parallel with and
eight feet south from the north line of said intersection, and one line being
drawn parallel with and eight feet east of the west line of said
intersection, at the point of the intersection of said two lines, a concrete,
stone or iron monument shall be placed and the top of said monument shall be
set at the true grade of the street at the intersection of the centerlines of
said intersecting streets.



   (D)   Benchmarks shall be established at convenient points and
wherever possible. The elevation of the tops of said benchmarks from said
monuments and the distance and location therefrom shall be ascertained and
said distances, elevations and locations shall be permanently marked on said
benchmarks by marks which cannot be erased or destroyed.



   (E)   An accurate description of the location of said monuments and
the marking thereon, if any, and an accurate description of said benchmarks
and their locations and their elevations from said monuments and the markings
thereon and the elevation of said benchmark provided for in division (A)
above, from said monuments, shall all be recorded in the proper records of
his or her office by the said Town Civil Engineer. A book of grades and
markings and profiles of the different streets shall also be properly kept by
the Town Engineer.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. V, Art. I)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violations of § 151.02 of this chapter shall be subject to
imposition of a civil penalty of not less than $10, nor more than the maximum
penalty authorized by this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. II, Art. II)



   (C)   A violation of § 151.06 of this chapter shall subject the
violator to a fine not less than $50, nor more than $2,500 per violation per
tree.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. X, Art. I)



   (D)   (1)   A person who violates the provisions of § 151.07 of
this chapter shall be issued a warning ticket for the first offense, and a
copy of § 151.07 of this chapter shall be served upon the violator by the
police officer issuing the warning.



      (2)   A person who violates the provisions of § 151.07 of
this chapter a second or subsequent time shall be issued a citation for a
civil violation and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $10, nor more than permitted by the general penalty provisions of this
code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. V)



(Ord. passed 12-3-1997; Ord. passed 7-12-2000; Ord. passed 8-1-2007)



CHAPTER 152:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section




General Provisions




   152.01   Demolition permits



   152.02   Fire limits; building restrictions




Building Code




   152.15   Title



   152.16   Purpose



   152.17   Authority



   152.18   Scope



   152.19   Adoption of rules by reference



   152.20   Permits; application



   152.21   Fees and required inspections



   152.22   Stop orders



   152.23   Certificate of occupancy



   152.24   Workmanship



   152.25   Violations



   152.26   Right of appeal



   152.27   Remedies




Unsafe Buildings




   152.40   Title



   152.41   Purpose and scope



   152.42   Alterations, additions and repairs



   152.43   Enforcement



   152.44   Hearing authority



   152.45   “Unsafe building” defined; other definitions



   152.46   Hearing; conduct



   152.47   State law adopted



   152.48   Intent



   152.49   Unsafe Building Fund



   152.50   Attorney fees



 



   152.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 152.01  DEMOLITION PERMITS.



   (A)   The owner of property to be demolished shall apply to the
town’s Building Inspector for a demolition permit before commencing the
demolition on site. A uniform application shall be designed and made
available to an applicant by the Building Inspector. The application shall be
accompanied by an acknowledgment from the entities which provide natural gas,
electricity, telephone, telecable, water and sanitary sewer services to the
site that arrangement for the termination of services to the site have been
completed. Prior to issuing a demolition permit the Building Inspector shall
certify that the structure to be demolished is free of toxic and/or hazardous
materials or, in the alternative, that the state’s Department of
Environmental Management has approved removal and disposal of toxic and/or
hazardous materials on the site.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term DEMOLITION means and
includes the razing and removal from site of a structure or a designated
portion of a structure. DEMOLITION does not include incidental removal of
building or construction materials from a site for which a valid building
permit is issued unless the demolition phase is a pre-requisite to the
construction for which the building permit was issued, in which case a
separate demolition permit is required.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall impose and collect fees for
demolition permits as follows:



      (1)   Complete or partial demolition of a structure
appurtenant to a residential use: $25;



      (2)   Partial demolition of a residence structure: $50;



      (3)   Demolition of a residence structure: $100;



      (4)   Demolition of all or part of a commercial structure:
$200; and



      (5)   Demolition of multiple commercial or industrial
structures on the same site: $125 per structure.



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall familiarize himself or herself
with the demolition site prior to issuing a demolition permit. In the course
of the demolition, the Building Inspector shall make two inspections of the
demolition site, the first within 72 hours of receiving notification from the
owner or contractor that demolition has progressed to the point of
sub-surface removal, and a final inspection when the owner or contractor
provides notification that the demolition is complete. The owner or applicant
for permit shall be present for the final inspection when the Building
Inspector makes a determination that the final condition of the site does or
does not satisfy the provisions of this section. If the final inspection does
not show full compliance with the provisions of this section, the Building
Inspector shall give written instructions specifying the additional work
necessary to complete the demolition and assure compliance with this section,
to be followed by another final inspection. The notice required by this
section may be by telephone, cut shall be documented by a memo showing the
time of contact and identity of person contacted.



   (E)   The following specifications for demolition shall be observed.



      (1)   Permitted demolition shall be completed within 180 days
from the issuance of the permit unless, for good cause shown, the owner shall
request a longer time and the Plan Commission shall have reviewed and
approved the request.



      (2)   The owner or entity contracted with by the owner for
demolition shall eliminate hazards of bodily injury and property damage to
abutting owners and occupants of property, pedestrians and operators of
vehicles on and around the site, on the public ways of the town and agree to
indemnify and hold the town harmless from all claims of and for bodily injury
and property damage occasioned by the demolition. At the time of application,
the owner or other entity contracted by the owner to complete the demolition
shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing current commercial insurance
coverage for bodily injury and property damage liability.



      (3)   Basement walls, concrete slabs, footing, chimneys,
steps, sidewalks and underground structures shall be removed to a depth of
three feet below finish grade. Concrete slab(s) below three-foot depth shall
be broken to allow the penetration of water.



      (4)   Backfill materials shall consist of non-organic granular
materials only.



      (5)   Utility service lines shall be cut and plugged under the
supervision of the service provider to whom notice of severance shall be
given. Water and sewer lines shall be cut and plugged at or near the main
under the supervision of the Department of Public Works.



      (6)   Plant life on the tree lawn of the site shall be
protected against damage and preserved unless prior authorization is given
for its removal or destruction by the Tree Advisory Commission of the town.



      (7)   No fire will be ignited on a permitted demolition site,
except in accordance with a duly issued and valid burn permit under
applicable law.



      (8)   When demolition is complete the top four inches of the
site shall be backfilled with soil suitable to support vegetation and the
site shall be seeded or sodded within 30 days or, if not within the growing
season, within such time as the Building Inspector shall specify in the
demolition permit. The site shall be re-seeded or re-sodded as often as may
be necessary to produce a covering of growing and thriving grass. The
requirements of this division (E)(8) shall not apply to that portion of a
demolition site, and necessary access thereto, upon which a valid building
permit has been issued for construction of surface improvements under the
town’s Zoning Ordinance.



      (9)   Demolition work shall comply with all requirements of
the Uniform Building Code in force and effect in the state.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. III, Art. I)  (Ord. passed 6-6-2002)  Penalty,
see § 152.99



§ 152.02  FIRE LIMITS; BUILDING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   All that part of the town embraced within the following
described boundaries, shall be known as the fire limits of said town, to sit:
beginning at the northwest corner of Lot Number 17 O.P.; thence south on the
west line thereof to Eel River; thence along Eel River to the southwest
corner Lot Number 150 O.P.; thence east to Mill Street; thence north to Main
Street; thence east to a point opposite east line of Lot Number 138 O.P.;
thence north to Second Street; thence west to a point opposite the east line
of Lot Number 118 O.P.; thence north to the northeast corner of said lot;
thence west to the northwest corner of Lot Number 47; thence south to Second
Street; thence west to Market Street; thence south to a point opposite south
line of Lot Number 29 O.P.; thence west to place of beginning.



   (B)   No person shall erect or cause to be erected on any lot or
part of lot in said town lying within the fire limits as described in
division (A) above any building or addition to any building heretofore
erected, unless the outer wall thereof be composed of brick or stone, laid up
with mortar or composed of other fire-proof material, not less than nine
inches in thickness, unless the roofs thereof be covered with slate, tin,
iron or other fire-proof materials.



   (C)   Whenever any frame or wooden buildings heretofore erected
within the fire limits, defined in division (A) above, shall be removed from
its foundation and location, the same shall not be relocated within the said
fire limits, but shall not be removed without the same.



   (D)   No frame or wooden building, whether partially or fully
completed, shall be located and moved within the fire limits described in
division (A) above.



   (E)   No wooden building within said fire limits which may hereafter
be damaged to the extent of 50% of the value thereof shall be repaired or
rebuilt.



   (F)   (1)   The amount or extent of damage that may be done to
any building shall be determined by three disinterested persons, residents of
the town, one of whom shall be selected by the owner of the building, the
second by the Town Council and the two so chosen shall select the third, and
the decision of the persons so appointed shall be final and conclusive.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the building,
before said reference, to deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer the sum of $5,
which shall be applied to the payment of the reference expenses, and the
remainder, if any, shall be returned to such owner.



   (G)   No building lying within said fire limits shall be reroofed
unless the same is done with slate, tin, iron or other fire-proof materials.



   (H)   It shall be the duty of the Marshal, whenever any wooden
building is erected or commenced to be erected in said fire limits, contrary
to the provisions of divisions (B) or (D) above or any wooden building is
commenced to be repaired contrary to the provisions of division (C) above, to
report the same immediately to the Town Council showing the location and
description of such building, and the Town Council shall thereupon issue
their warrant to the said Marshal to take down or remove such building beyond
the fire limits, defined in division (A) above, and the cost thereof shall be
collected from such offender.



   (I)   Before any person or persons, corporation or association shall
commence to erect, alter or repair any house, structure or other building,
lying within the corporate limits of the town, or shall commence to make an
excavation in any sidewalk or street or part of the same, or place any
building material in any street within said corporate limits, such person or
persons, or if a corporation, its proper officers, shall make application in
writing to the Town Council, signed by the owner of the lot or part of lot on
which such building is to be erected, which application shall state the
proposed location, and state fully and minutely the kind of building to be
erected or excavations to be made, and principal materials to be used in the
construction of said building, and said Town Council shall thereupon order
the Clerk-Treasurer to issue a permit to said applicant allowing him or her
to make such proposed improvements and certain defined part of the street to
place building material upon; provided, the same does not violate any of the
sections of this section; and, provided, said applicant shall sign an
agreement that, when the building or buildings are completed, he or she will
remove all rubbish and restore the street and sidewalk in as good condition
as they were before said building was placed thereon, and failing to do so,
that he or she will pay for the removal and restoration of the street,
together with $5 for the services of the officer in doing the same, and also
that he or she will, during the progress of said work, properly protect the
same by putting up safeguards along the excavation, and by hanging out red
lights at night; and, further that, he or she will protect and hold the town
harmless from all loss or payment of damages by reason of negligent acts of
said applicant or the person or persons employed to make such improvements.



   (J)   In no case shall any permit granted under division (I) above
grant any right whatever to use in such case more than one-half of the
street, measuring from the longitudinal center thereof to the immediate outer
edge of the sidewalk fronting such proposed building or excavation, and no
permit shall grant any right to place any material whatever in any alley, nor
keep the sidewalk in front of such building or buildings obstructed so as to
prevent free travel thereon.



   (K)   It shall be unlawful to erect, construct or repair any kind or
type of building within the corporate limits unless aid construction complies
with the regulations for safe construction as set forth in the National Fire
Underwriters Code of Construction.



   (L)   All damages recoverable from property owners by provisions of
this section may be enforced by a suit against said owner in the name of the
Town Council members of the town filed in a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. I)  Penalty, see § 152.99




BUILDING CODE




§ 152.15  TITLE.



   This subchapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Building Code of the Town of North Manchester,
Indiana”, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this
code” or “this subchapter”, incorporated herein.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 1)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.16  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare,
and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of
buildings and structures.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 2)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.17  AUTHORITY.



   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of this subchapter. Whenever, in
this subchapter, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of
or subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner of the town, this
shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining
whether this subchapter has been complied with; and no such provision shall
be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what this
subchapter shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
ordinances or to enforce this subchapter in an arbitrary or discriminatory
manner. Any variance from adopted building rules are subject to approval
under I.C. 22-13-2-7(b).



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 3)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.18  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter apply to the construction,
alteration, repair, use, occupancy and addition to all buildings and
structures, other than industrialized building systems or mobile structures
certified under I.C. 22-15-4, in the town.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 4)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.19  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in the following articles of I.A.C. Title 675
are hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall include later
amendments to those articles as the same are published in the Indiana
Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed
therein:



      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes:



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards;



         (b)   Indiana Building Codes; and



         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards.



      (2)   Article 14 - One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code; Indiana
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code;



      (3)   Article 16 - Plumbing Code Indiana Plumbing Code;



      (4)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code; and



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.



      (5)   Article 18 - Mechanical Code Indiana Mechanical Code;



      (6)   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code; and



         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code.



      (7)   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Code Indiana Swimming Pool
Code.



   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on
file in the office of the Building Commissioner and Department of Public
Safety.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 5)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.20  PERMITS; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes,
unless the application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the
proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications
showing the work to be done.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 6)



   (B)   A permit shall be obtained before beginning new construction,
alteration or repair of any building or structure adding additional square
footage, changing a load bearing wall or any roofing or recovering of any
existing roof, and for any building project exceeding $1,500 in cost,
excluding costs of interior finishes, trim or cabinetry and exterior cosmetic
finishes, using forms furnished by the Building Commissioner. All fees
required by this subchapter shall be paid to the town.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 7)



   (C)   All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance
with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for
permits, there shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances. Unless
the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning works and phrases used in
this subchapter are to be defined by reference to the town’s Zoning
Ordinance as now or hereafter amended.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 8)



   (D)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building
Commissioner shall:



      (1)   Review all building permit applications to determine
full compliance with the provisions of this subchapter;



      (2)   Review all building permit applications for new
construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding;



      (3)   Review building permit applications for major repairs
within the floodplain area having special flood hazards to determine that the
proposed repair:



         (a)   Uses construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage; and



         (b)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



      (4)   Review building permit applications for new construction
or substantial improvements within the floodplain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and
mobile homes):



         (a)   Is protected against flood damage;



         (b)   Is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, flood damage; and



         (c)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 10)



(Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.21  FEES AND REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   Permits required by § 152.20(B) of this
chapter shall be issued upon prior payment of inspection fees according to
the following schedule:



 

Type of Construction
 

Required Inspection

 

Single

 

Total




Inspection Fee

 

Inspection Fees



1- or 2-family dwelling, detached
 

4

 

$30

 

$120



Accessory buildings (residential use)
 


 

$30

 

$30



Additions/alterations (all occupancies)
 

2

 

$30

 

$60



Mobile homes, temporary structures
 

1

 

$30

 

$30




 



         (b)   The minimum permit fee for any permit shall be
$30. For unusually large or complex buildings or structures, the Building
Commissioner shall have the power to increase the number of required
inspections by 50%. The Building Commissioner shall in all cases designate
the stage of construction when each required inspection must be requested by
the permit holder. No concrete shall be placed for foundations without prior
inspection. No electrical, mechanical, plumbing or thermal insulation work
shall be covered without prior inspection. Where additional inspections are
required due to failure of permit holder to have work ready for inspection at
a designated stage of construction, the Building Commissioner shall have the
power to assess a reinspection fee of $30 for each such additional
inspection. Reinspection fees shall be paid to the town prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy. The Building Commissioner shall submit an
annual report to the Town Manager or permit fees collected, cost of
inspection operations and recommendations for adjustment of required
inspections and single inspection fees as necessary.



      (2)   (a)   All other construction, alteration, repair, use
or occupancy and additions to all buildings and structures, including
multiple-family housing, shall be subject to the following inspection fees,
applied to the project. A fee of $0.04 per square foot or area will be
assessed one each project. On buildings with multiple levels, including
basements, the sum of all levels will be used to calculate the total square
footage of the project.



         (b)   The minimum inspection fee will be $100 and the
maximum fee will be $600 per building. For unusually large or complex
buildings or structures, the Building Commissioner shall have the power to
increase the inspection fee by 50%. The Building Commissioner shall in all
cases designate the stage of construction when each required inspection must
be requested by the permit holder. No concrete shall be placed for
foundations without prior inspection. Where additional inspections are
required due to failure of permit holder to have work ready for inspection at
a designated state of construction, the Building Commissioner shall have the
power to assess a reinspection fee of $100 for each additional inspection.
Reinspection fees shall be paid to the town prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. The Building Commissioner shall submit an annual
report to the Town Manager of permit fees collected, cost of inspections
operations and recommendations for adjustment of required inspections and
single inspection fees as necessary.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 9)



   (B)   (1)   After the issuance of any building permit, the
Building Commissioner shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of
the work being done as are necessary to ensure full compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter and the terms of the permit.



      (2)   Reinspections of work found to be incomplete or not
ready for inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as
prescribed in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 11)



   (C)   The Director of Public Safety Services, or his or her
designated representative, shall assist the Building Commissioner in the
inspection of fire suppression, detection and alarm systems and shall provide
reports of such inspection to the Building Commissioner.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 12)



   (D)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building
Commissioner or his or her duly authorized representative may enter at
reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the zoning
jurisdiction of the town to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 13)



(Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.22  STOP ORDERS.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter, the Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be
done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by
the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 14)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999) 
Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.23  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure
constructed after the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued unless such
building or structure was constructed in compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or structure
unless a full, partial or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the Building Commissioner.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 15)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999) 
Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.24  WORKMANSHIP.



   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 16)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999) 
Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.25  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as
owner, lessee, sub-lessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure, other than fences, in the zoning jurisdiction of
the town or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 17)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999) 
Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.26  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   All persons shall have the right to appeal any order of the Building
Commissioner first through the town’s Plan Commission and then to the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission of the state in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 22-13-2-7 and I.C. 4-21.5-3-7.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 18)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999)



§ 152.27  REMEDIES.



   The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the town bring actions
in the Circuit or Superior Courts of the county for mandatory and injunctive
relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or
orders made by the Building Commissioner, and any such action for mandatory
or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties
provided for in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 19)  (Ord. passed 6-2-1999)




UNSAFE BUILDINGS




§ 152.40  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the “Town of North Manchester
Unsafe Building Code” and hereby adopts by reference I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq.
in its entirety as part of the town’s Unsafe Building Law in conjunction
with this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 1)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.41  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose and scope of these provisions are as follows.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide a just,
equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to
any other remedy provided by the town’s Building Code, Housing Code, or
otherwise available by any other state or local law, whereby buildings or
structures which from any cause may endanger the life, limb, health, morals,
property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be
required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. The purpose of this
subchapter is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any
particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially
protected or benefitted by the terms of this subchapter.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all dangerous
or unsafe buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which
may hereafter become dangerous or unsafe in this jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 2)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.42  ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS.



   All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be repaired according to the requirements
of the building codes adopted by the town and all other applicable building
codes, state, local or otherwise.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 3)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.43  ENFORCEMENT.



   The following general provisions shall apply.



   (A)   Enforcement authority. The Building Commissioner of the town
or his or her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provision of this
subchapter as the enforcement authority. The enforcement authority may issues
orders requiring action relative to any unsafe building or unsafe premises as
outlined in I.C. 36-7-9-5. Said person shall have the power to render
interpretations of this subchapter and all adopted codes and to adopt and
enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the
application of its provision.



   (B)   Inspections. The local or state fire marshal, local fire chief
or the enforcement authority or his or her designee is hereby authorized to
make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the
provision of this subchapter.



   (C)   Right of entry. Whenever the enforcement authority determines
it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter or to determine if applicable codes are being followed or if a
building is an unsafe building, the enforcement authority or his or her
designee may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or
perform the duties imposed by this subchapter, provided that if such building
or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and
entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the enforcement
authority or his or her designee shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the enforcement authority or
his or her designee shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to
secure entry.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 4)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.44  HEARING AUTHORITY.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall act as the Unsafe Building
Hearing Authority. All decisions and findings shall be rendered in writing to
the property owner, with a copy to the enforcement authority or authority’s
designee. Appeals to the Hearing Authority or hearings held by the same shall
be processed in accordance with the provision contained in I.C. 36-7-9-1 et
seq. and this subchapter. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the
Hearing Authority shall be delivered to the Unsafe Building Enforcement
Authority, which shall make them freely accessible to the public. The Hearing
Authority shall have no discretion relative to interpretation of the
administrative provisions of this code, nor shall the hearing authority be
empowered to waive requirements of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 5)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.45  “UNSAFE BUILDING” DEFINED; OTHER DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   UNSAFE BUILDING.



      (1)   A building or structure, or any part of a building or
structure, that is:



         (a)   In an impaired structural condition that makes it
unsafe to a person or property;



         (b)   A fire hazard;



         (c)   A hazard to the public health;



         (d)   A public nuisance;



         (e)   Dangerous to a person or property because of a
violation of a statute or ordinance concerning building condition or
maintenance; or



         (f)   Vacant and not maintained in a manner that would
allow human habitation, occupancy or use under the requirements of a statute
or an ordinance.



      (2)   For the purpose of this code, any building or structure
which has any or all the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be
deemed to be an UNSAFE BUILDING; provided that, such condition or defects
exist to the extent that the life, health property or safety of the public or
its occupants or potential occupants are endanger or where such conditions
constitute a nuisance which may endanger life, limb, health, morals,
property, safety or welfare of the general public:



         (a)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is not sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as
to provide safe adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;



         (b)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or
size or is not so arranged as to provide safe adequate means of exit in case
of fire or panic;



         (c)   Whenever any portions thereof has been damaged by
fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that
the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before such catastrophe and is less the minimum requirements of the Building
Code for new buildings;



         (d)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance
thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse
and thereby injure persons or damage property;



         (e)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the, exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place
so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that
specified in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the
Building code for such buildings;



         (f)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of:



            1.   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;



            2.   Faulty construction;



            3.   The removal, movement or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;



            4.   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or



            5.   Any other cause, is likely to partially or
completely collapse.



         (g)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or
structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used;



         (h)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line
passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one
third of the base;



         (i)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of
the foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings;



         (j)   Whenever any building or structure has been
damaged by fire and more than six months goes by from the date of the fire
and the building has not been repaired;



         (k)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined by the Health
Officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition
that is likely to cause sickness or disease;



         (l)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure
remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or
structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in
excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public;



         (m)   Inadequate or insufficient bath, toilet or kitchen
facilities;



         (n)   Inadequate or insufficient water supply or water
supply systems;



         (o)   Inadequate or insufficient or other deficient air
cooling, air heating or water heating equipment; and



         (p)   Any condition or conditions in violation of other
applicable ordinances of the town and/or the building standards or codes of
the county or the state.



   UNSAFE PREMISES.



      (1)   An unsafe building;



      (2)   The tract of real property on which the unsafe building
is located; and



      (3)   For purposes of this chapter, a tract of real property
that does not contain a building or structure, not including land used for
production agriculture, is considered an unsafe premise if the tract of real
property is:



         (a)   A fire hazard;



         (b)   A hazard to public health;



         (c)   A public nuisance; or



         (d)   Dangerous to a person or property because of a
violation of a statute or an ordinance.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 6)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.46  HEARING; CONDUCT.



   (A)   Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the
technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.



   (B)   Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken.



   (C)   Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose
of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence.



   (D)   Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be
admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are
accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the
existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the
admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in court of
competent jurisdiction in the state.



   (E)   Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded.



   (F)   Rights of parties. Each party shall have these rights, among
others:



      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to
the issue of the hearing;



      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;



      (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



      (4)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party first
called the witness to testify;



      (5)   To rebut the evidence; and



      (6)   To be represented by an attorney admitted to practice
law in the state.



   (G)   Official notice of documents and things.



      (1)   What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official
notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for
decision, of any fact or of official records of the hearing authority and
ordinances of the town or rules and regulations of the Hearing Authority and
of any notices or inspections of the town. These include all notices issued
by the enforcement authority, including the inspection report and photographs.



      (2)   Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing
shall be informed of the matters to be noticed, and these matters shall be
noted in the record, referred to therein, or appended thereto.



      (3)   Opportunities to refute noticed matters. Parties present
at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute
the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation
of authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the Hearing
Authority.



      (4)   Inspection of the premises.



         (a)   The Hearing Authority may inspect any building or
premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing; provided
that:



            1.   Notice of such inspection shall be given to
the parties before the inspection is made;



            2.   The parties are given opportunity to be
present during the inspection; and



            3.   The Hearing Authority shall state for the
record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and
the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut
or explain the matters so stated by the Hearing Authority.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 7)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.47  STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   The town specifically acknowledges and adopts and incorporates by
references all policies, procedures and definitions as spelled out in I.C.
36-7-9-1 et seq., as the policies, procedures and definitions, and more
specifically adopts the definition of “known or recorded substantial
property interest” in I.C. 36-7-9-2.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 8)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.48  INTENT.



   (A)   It is the specific intent of this subchapter to incorporate
all future amendments or changes to the Unsafe Building Law, I.C. 36-7-9-1 et
seq., as amendments to the town’s Unsafe Building Law as they are enacted
as defined in said statute.



   (B)   If any provision of this subchapter conflicts with any
provision of I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq., as amended from time to time, the
provisions of the state statutes shall control.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 9)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.49  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   There is hereby created an “Unsafe Building Fund” for the deposit
of any funds collected under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 10)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.50  ATTORNEY FEES.



   In the event the town is required to bring any action in a court of law
to enforce any order of the enforcement authority or any violation of the
Unsafe Building Code, the town shall be entitled to recover costs, attorney
fees and expenses from the property owner.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 11)  (Ord. passed 12-3-2008)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be a violation of § 152.01 of this chapter
to commence demolition without a demolition permit or to fail to observe the
requirements of § 152.01 of this chapter in connection with the execution of
a permitted demolition, for which a civil penalty shall be imposed in an
amount not exceeding the maximum amount permitted by this code of ordinances.



      (2)   Each day a violation continues may be considered a
separate violation.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. III, Art. I)



   (C)   (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
152.02(B) of this chapter shall, upon conviction before any court of
competent jurisdiction, be fined in any sum not less than $10, nor more than
$25, and each day’s continuance of such violation shall be deemed a
separate offense.



      (2)   Any person convicted before any court of competent
jurisdiction of having relocated such building within the said fire limits,
per § 152.02(C) of this chapter, shall be fined for the use of said town not
less than $10, nor more than $25, and every day’s continuance of such
building on such relocation shall be deemed to be a separate offense.



      (3)   Any person convicted before any court of competent
jurisdiction of having moved and located any such building within the fire
limits aforesaid, as per § 152.02(D) of this chapter, shall be fined not
less than $10, nor more than $25.



      (4)   Whenever any wooden building within said fire limits is
damaged thereafter the extent of such damage shall be ascertained in the
manner provided by § 152.02(F) of this chapter before it is repaired or
commenced to repair any wooden building situated within said fire limits,
which has been damaged, before the extent of the damages have been
ascertained, as provided in § 152.02(F) of this chapter, as per § 152.02(E)
of this chapter, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $25.



      (5)   Any person violation the provisions of § 152.02(G) of
this chapter shall, upon conviction before any court of competent
jurisdiction, be fined in any sum not exceeding $25, and each day’s
continuance of the same shall constitute a separate offense.



      (6)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §
152.02(I) of this chapter shall be fined in any sum not less than $10, nor
more than $25, and for each day’s continuance not more than $10.



(Prior Code, Title III, Ch. IV, Art. I)



   (D)   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the
provisions of §§ 152.15 through 152.27 of this chapter, or shall do any act
prohibited herein, or shall fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined,
within the time prescribed by the Building Commissioner, or shall fail,
neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Building Commissioner
in connection with the provisions of §§ 152.15 through 152.27 of this
chapter for each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or
corporation shall be fined in any sum not less than $10, nor more than $300.
Each day of such unlawful activity as is prohibited hereby shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 20)



(Ord. passed 6-2-1999; Ord. passed 6-6-2002)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT



Section



   153.01   Statement of purpose



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   Administrator duties



   153.04   Regulatory flood elevation and floodway limits



   153.05   Improvement location permit



   153.06   Preventing increased damages



   153.07   Protecting buildings



   153.08   Other development requirements



   153.09   Variances



   153.10   Disclaimer of liability



   153.11   Violations



   153.12   Abrogation and greater restrictions



§ 153.01  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate development in flood hazard
areas in order to reduce the potential for loss of life and property, reduce
the potential for extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief:



   (A)   By means of preventing development which materially increases
flood hazards to persons or property;



   (B)   To protect buildings and other improvements on land from flood
damage;



   (C)   To protect human life and health from hazards of flooding;



   (D)   To lessen the burden on taxpayers for costs of flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood
rescue and relief operations;



   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by
minimizing the potential for creating flood blighted areas; and



   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
property in the town and adjacent areas under its planning and zoning
jurisdiction by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
building or any addition to a building;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a
site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of roads or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, channel improvements and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials; or



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, heights or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation or the
construction of permanent buildings.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FHBM. Flood Hazard Boundary Map.



   FIRM. Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the floodway
fringe districts.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE or the FPG. The elevation of the regulatory
flood plus two feet at any given location in the special flood hazard area or
the “SFHA”.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the flood hazard areas lying outside
the floodway.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The basement floor;



      (2)   The garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the building;



      (3)   The first floor of buildings elevated on pilings or
constructed on a crawl space with permanent openings; or



      (4)   The floor level of any enclosure below an elevated
building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow
of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters, through providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) having a total area of one square foot for every two
square feet of enclosed floor area subject to flooding. The bottom of all
such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the enclosed area’s
floor; or



         (b)   Such enclosed space shall be usable for
non-residential purposes and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.



   RECREATION VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal
use.



   REGULATORY FLOOD.



      (1)   A flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure which is
acceptable to and approved by the state’s Natural Resources Commission. The
regulatory flood elevation at any location is as defined in § 153.04 of this
chapter.



      (2)   The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the term BASE
FLOOD.



   SFHA or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the town that are subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs
of the town are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
of the county and the incorporated areas prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated 11-19-1997. The SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the town or that may be annexed into the town are generally identified as
such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for the county by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated 11-19-1997.



   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 40%
of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
“substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements or
any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the alteration
will not preclude the continued designation of the structure as a “historic
structure”.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.03  ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES.



   The Building Inspector for the town is appointed Administrator to
review all development and subdivision proposals to ensure compliance with
this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following duties:



   (A)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the town meet the requirements of this chapter;



   (B)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request
about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;



   (C)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
state’s Natural Resources Commission for all development projects subject
to § 153.06 of this chapter, and maintain a record of such authorization
(either copy of actual permit or letter of recommendation);



   (D)   Maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new and/or substantially improved
buildings constructed in the SFHA;



   (E)   Maintain a record of the engineer’s certificate and the
“as-built” flood-proofed elevation of all buildings subject to § 153.07
of this chapter;



   (F)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to improve base flood and floodway date and to improve the
administration of this chapter. Submit reports as required for the National
Flood Insurance Program; and



   (G)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, copies of DNR permits and letters of
recommendation, federal permit documents and “as built” elevation and
flood-proofing data for all building constructed subject to this chapter.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 3)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.04  REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION AND FLOODWAY LIMITS.



   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood and
floodway limits. The best available regulatory flood data is listed below.
Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party submitting
the detailed engineering study shall have a duty to replace existing data
with correct data and submit it to the Department of Natural Resources for
review and approval.



   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation and the floodway limits of the
town shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of the county and incorporated areas dated 11-19-1997 and the
corresponding FIRM maps dated 11-19-1997 prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an
“AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the county and incorporated areas dated
11-19-1997.



   (C)   The regulatory flood elevation and the floodway limits for
each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an “A Zone” on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map for the county and incorporated areas shall be according
to the best available data as provided by the Department of Natural Resources.



   (D)   The regulatory flood elevation and floodway limits for the
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated county that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town or that may be annexed into the
town shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of the county and incorporated areas dated 11-19-1997 and the
corresponding FIRM prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. If
the SFHA is delineated as “AH Zone” or “AO Zone”, the elevation (or
depth) will be delineated on the FIRM for the county and incorporated areas
dated 11-19-1997. If the SFHA is delineated as “Zone A” on the County
Flood Insurance Rate Map FIRM for the county and incorporated areas, the
regulatory flood elevation and floodway limits shall be according to the
correct data available as provided by the Department of Natural Resources.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 4)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.05  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining an
improvement location permit from the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector shall not issue an improvement location permit if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



   (A)   The application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A description of the proposed development;



      (2)   Location of the proposed development, sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



      (3)   A legal description of the property site;



      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
structure locations and existing and proposed land grades; and



      (5)   Elevation of lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed structures. Elevation should be in National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 (NGVD).



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for an improvement permit, the
Building Inspector shall determine if the site is located within an
identified floodway or within the location floodplain where:



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodway, the Building
Inspector shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with
all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Department of Natural
Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway. Under the
provisions of I.C. 14-28-1, a permit from the Natural Resources Commission is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and
paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of construction of the
building. No action shall be taken by the Building Official until a permit
has been issued by the Natural Resources Commission granting approval for
construction in the floodway. Once a permit has been issued by the Natural
Resources Commission, the Building Official may issue the local improvement
location permit, provided the provisions contained in §§ 153.07 and 153.08
of this chapter have been met. The improvement location permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit issued by the Natural Resources Commission;



      (2)   If the site is located in an identified floodway fringe,
then the Building Inspector may issue the local improvement location permit;
provided, the provisions contained in §§ 153.06 and 153.07 of this chapter
have been met. The key provision is that the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be at or above the flood protection
grade; and



      (3)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and floodway fringe have not yet been determined
(shown as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map), and the drainage area
upstream of the site is grater than one square mile, the Building Inspector
shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all
pertinent plans and specifications, to the Department of Natural Resources
for review and comment. No action shall be taken by the Building Inspector
until either a permit for construction in the floodway or a letter of
recommendation citing the 100-year flood elevation and the recommended flood
protection grade has been received from the Department of Natural Resources.
Once the Building Inspector has received the proper permit or letter of
recommendation approving the proposed development, an improvement location
permit may be issued provided the conditions of the ILP are not less
restrictive than the conditions received from Natural Resources and the
provisions contained in §§ 153.06 and 153.07 of this chapter have been met.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 5)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.06  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health and
safety.



   (A)   Within the floodway identified on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the following standards shall
apply.



      (1)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future similar works, will cause any increase in
the elevation of the regulatory flood.



      (2)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees), the town shall submit a request to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency to revise the regulatory flood data.



   (B)   Within all SFHAs identified as A Zones (no 100 year flood
elevation and/or floodway/floodway fringe delineation has been provided), the
following standard shall apply: the total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the regulatory flood elevation more than
one-tenth of one foot and will not increase flood damages or potential flood
damages.



   (C)   (1)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or
storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection
grade, unless such materials are stored in a storage tank or flood-proofed
building constructed according to the requirements of §§ 153.07 and 153.08
of this chapter.



      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on-site
waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above
ground openings located below the FPG are water-tight.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 6)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.07  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of § 153.06 of this
chapter, all buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from
flood damage below the FPG.



   (A)   The building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of any new building valued at
more than $1,000;



      (2)   Structural alterations made to:



         (a)   An existing building (previously unaltered)
building, the cost of which equals or exceeds 40% of the value of the
pre-altered building (excluding the value of the land); and



         (b)   Any previously altered building.



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building
that are valued at or more than 40% of the market value of the building
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred;



      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (5)   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days.



   (B)   This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
following methods. The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of
compliance with these building protection standards as required in § 153.03
of this chapter.



      (1)   A residential or non-residential building may be
constructed on a permanent landfill in accordance with the following.



         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
one foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
the Standard Protector Test method.



         (b)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond
the foundation of the building before sloping below the FPG.



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical (3:1).



         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



         (e)   The lowest floor (see definition of “lowest
floor” in § 153.02 of this chapter) shall be at or above the FPG.



      (2)   A residential or non-residential building may be
elevated in accordance with the following.



         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on
posts, piers, columns, extended walls or other types of similar foundation;
provided:



            1.   Walls of any enclosure below the elevated
floor shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters, through
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows)
having a total area of one square foot for every two square feet of enclosed
floor area subject to flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall be no
higher than one foot above the enclosed area’s floor; and



            2.   Any enclosure below the elevated floor is
used for non-residential purposes and building access.



         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so
as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as buoyancy,
current, waves, ice and floating debris.



         (c)   All areas below the FPG shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the FPG. Water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pipes, electrical
and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other water-proofed service
facilities may be located below the FPG.



      (3)   Manufactured homes and travel trailers (also called
recreational vehicles) to be installed or substantially improved on a site
for more than 180 days must meet one of the following anchoring requirements.



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



            1.   Outside a manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            2.   In a new manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision; or



            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as a result of a flood;



         (b)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements that are no less than 36 inches in height
above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. This requirement
applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged
by a flood.



      (4)   Recreation vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on the site for less than 180 consecutive days;



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         (c)   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes”
herein.



      (5)   A non-residential building may be flood-proofed to the
FPG (in lieu of elevating) if done in accordance with the following.



         (a)   A registered professional engineer shall certify
that the building has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The building design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures and impacts
from debris or ice.



         (b)   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 7)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.08  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Plan Commission shall review all proposed subdivisions to
determine whether the subdivision lies in a flood hazard area as defined
elsewhere by ordinance. If the Plan Commission finds the subdivision to be so
located, the Plan Commission shall forward plans and materials to the
state’s Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. The Plan
Commission shall require appropriate changes and modifications in order to
assure that:



      (1)   It is consistent with the need to minimize flood damages;



      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;



      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards; and



      (4)   Onsite waste disposal systems, if provided, will be so
located and designed to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them
during the occurrence of the regulatory flood.



   (B)   Developers shall record the 100-year flood elevation on all
subdivision plats containing lands identified elsewhere by ordinance as
within a flood hazard area prior to submitting the plats for approval by the
Plan Commission.



   (C)   All owners of manufactured home parks or subdivisions located
within the SFHA identified as Zone A on the county’s FHBM or FIRM develop
an evacuation plan for those lots located in Zone A and file it with the
local Plan Commission and have it filed and approved by the appropriate
community emergency management authorities.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 8)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.09  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may consider issuing a variance to
the terms and provisions of this chapter; provided, the applicant
demonstrates that:



      (1)   There exists a good and sufficient cause for the
requested variance;



      (2)   The strict application of the terms of this chapter will
constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



      (3)   The granting of the requested variance will not increase
flood heights, create additional threats to public safety, cause additional
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may issue a variance to the terms
and provisions of this chapter subject to the following standards and
conditions.



      (1)   No variance or exception for a residential use within a
floodway subject to § 153.07(A) or (B) of this chapter may be granted.



      (2)   Any variance or exception granted in a floodway subject
to § 153.07(A) or (B) of this chapter will require a permit from Natural
Resources.



      (3)   Variances or exceptions to the building protection
standards of § 153.08 of this chapter may be granted only when a new
structure is to be located on a lot of one-half acre or less in size,
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the flood protection grade.



      (4)   Variance or exception may be granted for the
reconstruction or restoration of any structure individually listed on the
Register of Historic Places or the State Survey of Historic Architectural,
Archaeological and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts and Objects.



      (5)   All variances shall give the minimum relief necessary
and be such that the maximum practical flood protection will be given to the
proposed construction.



      (6)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue a written notice
to the recipient of a variance or exception that the proposed construction
will be subject to increased risks to life and property and could require
payment of excessive flood insurance premiums.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 9)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.10  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the town, Department of Natural Resources or the
state for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully hereunder.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 10)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.11  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Failure to obtain an improvement location permit in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All violations
shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance
with the provisions of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance for the town.



   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   (C)   The town’s Plan Commission shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



   (D)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town, the county or the state
from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All
costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 11)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



§ 153.12  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter repeals and supersedes all provisions contained
in this code of ordinances regulating development in or upon or use of land
in flood hazard areas.



   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall take precedence.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 12)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1997)



CHAPTER 154:  STORM WATER



Section



   154.01   Tap permits and fees



§ 154.01  TAP PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   No person shall tap into a closed drain or direct water to any
open drain under the jurisdiction of the Department of Storm Water Management
without first having obtained a permit from the Superintendent authorizing
the action.



   (B)   The minimum fee for connection to the storm water system shall
be $300 and the maximum fee shall be the minimum fee or documented cost to
the town, whichever is greater payable to the utility.



   (C)   Each connection to the storm water system shall be inspected
by the Superintendent for which a fee of $25 shall be paid to the utility.



(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. VI, Art. I)  (Ord. passed 4-1-1989)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 155:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   155.01   Regulations adopted by reference



§ 155.01  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The town’s subdivision regulations, and any and all amendments, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full
herein.



(Prior Code, Title II, Ch. III, Art. I)



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   156.001   Short title



   156.002   Authority



   156.003   Purpose



   156.004   Interpretation



   156.005   Non-interference with greater restrictions otherwise
imposed



   156.006   Separability



   156.007   Applicability



   156.008   Determination and interpretation of district boundaries



   156.009   Procedure relating to vacated and annexed areas



   156.010   Use



   156.011   Height



   156.012   Yard, lot area and size of building



   156.013   Lots



   156.014   Map and text amendments



   156.015   Certiorari procedure



   156.016   Application and notice requirements



   156.017   Definitions



   156.018   Fees; schedule




Zone District and Maps




   156.030   Establishment of districts



   156.031   Official zone map



   156.032   Identification of the official zoning map



   156.033   Maintenance of the official zoning map



   156.034   Location of official zoning map



   156.035   Replacement of the official zoning map



   156.036   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries



   156.037   Annexed land




“A” Agricultural District




   156.050   Purpose



   156.051   Principal permitted uses



   156.052   Accessory permitted uses



   156.053   Special exception uses



   156.054   Lot development standards



   156.055   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.056   Signage requirements



   156.057   Landscape and buffer requirements




“RE” Residence Estate District




   156.070   Purpose



   156.071   Principal permitted uses



   156.072   Accessory permitted uses



   156.073   Special exception uses



   156.074   Lot development standards



   156.075   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.076   Signage requirements



   156.077   Landscape and buffer requirements




“RSF” Residence Single-Family District




   156.090   Purpose



   156.091   Principal permitted uses



   156.092   Accessory permitted uses



   156.093   Special exception uses



   156.094   Lot development standards



   156.095   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.096   Signage requirements



   156.097   Landscape and buffer requirements




“RTF” Residence Two-Family District




   156.110   Purpose



   156.111   Principal permitted uses



   156.112   Accessory permitted uses



   156.113   Special exception uses



   156.114   Lot development standards



   156.115   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.116   Signage requirements



   156.117   Landscape and buffer requirements




“RMF-L” Residence Multi-Family Low Density District




   156.130   Purpose



   156.131   Principal permitted uses



   156.132   Accessory permitted uses



   156.133   Special exception uses



   156.134   Lot development standards



   156.135   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.136   Signage requirements



   156.137   Landscape and buffer requirements




“RMF-H” Residence Multi Family High Density District




   156.150   Purpose



   156.151   Principal permitted uses



   156.152   Accessory permitted uses



   156.153   Special exception uses



   156.154   Lot development standards



   156.155   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.156   Signage requirements



   156.157   Landscape and buffer requirements




“RU” Residence Urban District




   156.170   Purpose



   156.171   Principal permitted uses



   156.172   Accessory permitted uses



   156.173   Special exception uses



   156.174   Lot development standards



   156.175   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.176   Signage requirements



   156.177   Landscape and buffer requirements




“PO” Professional Office District




   156.190   Purpose



   156.191   Principal permitted uses



   156.192   Accessory permitted uses



   156.193   Special exception uses



   156.194   Lot development standards



   156.195   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.196   Signage requirements



   156.197   Landscape and buffer requirements




“B-L” Business Local District




   156.210   Purpose



   156.211   Principal permitted uses



   156.212   Accessory permitted uses



   156.213   Special exception uses



   156.214   Lot development standards



   156.215   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.216   Signage requirements



   156.217   Landscape and buffer requirements




“B-G” Business General District




   156.230   Purpose



   156.231   Principal permitted uses



   156.232   Accessory permitted uses



   156.233   Special exception uses



   156.234   Lot development standards



   156.235   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.236   Signage requirements



   156.237   Landscape and buffer requirements




“CBD” Central Business District




   156.250   Purpose



   156.251   Principal permitted uses



   156.252   Accessory permitted uses



   156.253   Special exception uses



   156.254   Lot development standards



   156.255   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.256   Signage requirements



   156.257   Landscape and buffer requirements




“L-I” Limited Industrial District




   156.270   Purpose



   156.271   Principal permitted uses



   156.272   Accessory permitted uses



   156.273   Special exception uses



   156.274   Lot development standards



   156.275   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.276   Signage requirements



   156.277   Landscape and buffer requirements




“I” Industrial District




   156.290   Purpose



   156.291   Principal permitted uses



   156.292   Accessory permitted uses



   156.293   Special exception uses



   156.294   Lot development standards



   156.295   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.296   Signage requirements



   156.297   Landscape and buffer requirements




“FP” Floodplain District




   156.310   Purpose



   156.311   Principal permitted uses



   156.312   Accessory permitted uses



   156.313   Special exception uses



   156.314   Lot development standards



   156.315   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   156.316   Signage requirements



   156.317   Landscape and buffer requirements




Planned Unit Development




   156.330   Purpose



   156.331   General requirements



   156.332   Open space requirements



   156.333   Procedure



   156.334   Designation binding successors in interest



   156.335   Modifications to approved plan




Supplemental Regulations




   156.350   Vision clearance



   156.351   Trees



   156.352   Lot of record



   156.353   Partial use of alley for yard



   156.354   Accessory buildings and uses



   156.355   Building lines



   156.356   Tapered yard formula



   156.357   Side yards



   156.358   Mobile home dwelling



   156.359   Single-family conversions



   156.360   Modification of structure height



   156.361   Waste materials



   156.362   Home occupations



   156.363   Fences and walls



   156.364   Satellite dishes



   156.365   Beds and breakfast establishments



   156.366   Drive through facilities



   156.367   Portable storage units in residential districts



   156.368   Security and wall-mounted lighting



   156.369   Performance standards



   156.370   Downtown facade improvement program




Off-Street Parking and Loading




   156.380   Purpose



   156.381   General requirements



   156.382   Design standards



   156.383   Units of measure



   156.384   Table of parking requirements



   156.385   Loading requirements




Signs




   156.400   Purpose



   156.401   Definitions



   156.402   Exempt signs



   156.403   On-premises signs; general provisions



   156.404   Residential district signs



   156.405   Business and industrial district signs



   156.406   Agricultural district signs



   156.407   Signs permitted in any district



   156.408   Outdoor advertising signs



   156.409   Permit required



   156.410   Non-conforming signs



   156.411   Abandonment of signs




Non-Conformities




   156.425   Intent



   156.426   Incompatibility of non-conforming uses



   156.427   Single non-conforming lots of record



   156.428   Non-conforming lots of record in combination



   156.429   Non-conforming uses of land



   156.430   Non-conforming structures



   156.431   Non-conforming uses of structures or of structures and
land in combination



   156.432   Repairs and maintenance




Special Exception Uses




   156.445   Procedure and requirements for approval of special
exception uses



   156.446   Authority



   156.447   Parties entitled to seek special exception uses



   156.448   Procedure for review and decision



   156.449   General standards for special exception uses



   156.450   Factors to be considered



   156.451   Specific standards for special exception uses



   156.452   Supplemental conditions and safeguards



   156.453   No presumption of approval



   156.454   Expiration of special exception use permit




Landscape Regulations




   156.465   Purpose



   156.466   Applicability



   156.467   Submission and approval



   156.468   Buffer area materials and standards



   156.469   Conflicts in requirements



   156.470   Easements and setbacks



   156.471   Greenbelt areas



   156.472   Screening and interior landscaping of off-street parking
and off-street loading areas



   156.473   Screening of service structures



   156.474   Buffer area requirements



   156.475   Modifications



   156.476   Appeals




Administration and Enforcement




   156.490   Building Commissioner; duties



   156.491   Plan Commission



   156.492   Board of Zoning Appeals



   156.493   Improvement location permit



   156.494   Certificates of occupancy



   156.495   Temporary certificate of occupancy




Board of Zoning Appeals




   156.510   Establishment



   156.511   Organization



   156.512   Rules of procedure



   156.513   Meetings and records



   156.514   Appeal



   156.515   Powers and duties of the Board



   156.516   Variances



   156.517   Notice of public hearing in newspaper and to interested
parties



   156.518   Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals



   156.519   Special exception uses



 



   156.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 156.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter and ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto shall be
known and may be cited hereafter as the “Zoning Ordinance of North
Manchester, Indiana, 1995,” or simply the “Zoning Ordinance”.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.002  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.



   (B)   Whenever any provision of this chapter refers to or cites a
section of the Indiana Code and that section is later amended or superseded,
this chapter shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the
section that most closely corresponds to the superseded section.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.003  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Encourage the most appropriate uses of land;



   (B)   To provide for the general availability of light and air to
buildings;



   (C)   To avoid the overcrowding of land and the over concentration
of population;



   (D)   To ensure economical extensions to sewers, water supply, waste
disposal and other public utilities, as well as development of recreation,
schools and other public facilities; and



   (E)   To promote the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare to the citizens of the town by regulating the
locations and the bulk of buildings and other structures, and by regulating
the uses of land and buildings in accordance with the laws of the state as
recorded in I.C. Title 36.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.004  INTERPRETATION.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall
be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare. The town’s Plan
Commission has given consideration to the existing and future probable use of
land in the territory affected by this chapter, and has prepared a
Comprehensive Land Use Plan showing the future development of this area,
which has served as a guide in the preparation of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.005  NON-INTERFERENCE WITH GREATER RESTRICTIONS OTHERWISE IMPOSED.



   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; nor any
ordinances, rules regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, or
which shall be adopted or issued and which are not in conflict with any of
the provisions of this chapter; except where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of
buildings, or requires larger open spaces or greater lot area per family than
are required or imposed by such easements, covenants or agreements between
parties, or by such ordinance, rules, regulations or permits, the provisions
of this chapter shall control.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.006  SEPARABILITY.



   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.007  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land, land
development, uses of land and uses of all structures within the
jurisdictional boundary of the town and within the one-mile boundary of
extraterritorial jurisdiction exercised by the town.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.008  DETERMINATION AND INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   In determining the boundaries of districts, and establishing
the provisions applicable to each district, due and careful consideration has
been given to existing conditions, the character of buildings erected in each
district, the most desirable use for which the land in each district may be
adapted and the conservation of property values throughout the territory
within the jurisdiction of the Commission.



   (B)   District boundary lines generally follow lot lines or the
centerlines of streets or alleys or the centerline of railroads or streams as
they existed at the time of adoption of this chapter. Where uncertainty
exists as to the exact boundaries of any district as shown on the zone map,
the following rules shall apply:



      (1)   In unsubdivided areas, or where a district boundary
subdivides a lot, the exact location of the boundary shall be determined by
use of the scale of the zone map.



      (2)   In the case of further uncertainty, the Board of Appeals
shall interpret the intent of the zone map as to the location of the boundary
in question.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.009  PROCEDURE RELATING TO VACATED AND ANNEXED AREAS.



   (A)   Whenever any street, place, alley, public way, railroad
right-of-way, waterway or other similar area is vacated by proper authority,
the districts adjoining each side of such street, place, alley, public way,
railroad right-of-way, waterway or similar area shall be extended
automatically to the center of such vacation and all area included in the
vacation shall then and thenceforth be subject to all appropriate provisions
of the extended districts. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining
district or district nearest the portion vacated shall be extended
automatically to include all of the vacated area.



   (B)   Territory which may hereafter be annexed to the town shall be
as zoned at the time of annexation. A proposed zoning map for the annexed
territory shall be made public prior to the annexation proceedings.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.010  USE.



   No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected,
reconstructed or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and
specified in a district in which such building or land is located or unless
same is a legal non-conforming use as is otherwise set forth herein.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.011  HEIGHT.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed, in height, the limits established and specified for the use and the
district in which such building is located unless a variance is specifically
granted by the Board of Appeals.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.012  YARD, LOT AREA AND SIZE OF BUILDING.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered in
any manner which will encroach upon, or reduce in any manner, the yards, lot
area per family, ground floor area of dwellings, or lot coverage provisions
established and specified for the use and district in which such building is
located unless a variance is specifically granted by the Board of Appeals.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.013  LOTS.



   Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot which fronts
on a street. In no case shall there be more than one single-family building
used for residential purposes and its accessory buildings located on one lot.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.014  MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS.



   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good
zoning practices require, the Town Council may, by ordinance, after receipt
of recommendation from the Plan Commission, and subject to the procedures
provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations,
restrictions and boundaries or classification of property.



   (A)   All amendments to this chapter shall be in conformance with
the then current provisions of state law.



   (B)   Amendments to this chapter’s text or map may be proposed by:



      (1)   Town Council or any member of the Town Council;



      (2)   Plan Commission; and



      (3)   By the owner or owners of 50% or more of the area
involved in the petition.



   (C)   A petition to amend this chapter shall be filed, on the form
provided by the Plan Commission, along with the information requested
thereon, with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town or as is otherwise determined
appropriate by the Building Commissioner.



   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the petition to the Plan
Commission for public hearing and recommendation.



   (E)   Following public notice and hearing in accordance with the
provisions of state law, the Plan Commission shall take one of the following
actions, relative to the petition:



      (1)   Recommend approval;



      (2)   Recommend approval subject to modification; provided
that, such modifications must be accepted by the petitioner prior to
forwarding the Plan Commission’s recommendation to the Town Council;



      (3)   Recommend disapproval; or



      (4)   Table and continue the petition in accordance with the
rules and procedures of the Plan Commission.



   (F)   Upon receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the
Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the petition, at which time the
Town Council shall take one of the following actions:



      (1)   Approve the petition; provided, however, that, petitions
with an unfavorable recommendation from the Plan Commission shall not be
passed, except by an affirmative vote of at least 75% of the members of the
Town Council;



      (2)   Disapprove the petition; or



      (3)   Table and continue the petition in accordance with the
rules and procedures of the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.015  CERTIORARI PROCEDURE.



   In any decision by the town’s Board of Zoning Appeals under this
chapter, any person aggrieved may petition the Circuit Court of the county by
writ of certiorari as provided by law.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.016  APPLICATION AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All requests for a zone change, variance or special exception
shall be directed to the Building Commissioner through the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer. After preliminary examination and approval to ensure that
all minimum requirements have been met, said petition or application shall be
referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals, Plan Commission or Town Council, as
is appropriate.



   (B)   In the event that a public hearing is required by this
chapter, or by state law, or is deemed appropriate by the Building
Commissioner, the Board of Zoning Appeals, Plan Commission or Town Council,
the petitioner shall be required to provide notice as follows.



      (1)   A legal notice shall be published in the News-Journal or
other paper specified by the Building Commissioner, identifying the
petitioner, the action sought, a general description of the property and the
date, time and place of the meeting.



      (2)   Said notice shall be published at least once, no more
than 30 and no less than ten days prior to the meeting date.



      (3)   No less than 15 days prior to the meeting date the
petitioner shall mail a copy of said notice by certified United States mail
to all property owners directly adjacent to the property upon which the
change is sought, including property that would be adjacent if the lot lines
were extended at right angles across any adjacent street or other
right-of-way.



      (4)   Within the time requirements of division (B)(3) above in
lieu of certified mail, the Building Commissioner may authorize the
petitioner to provide personal notice to said adjacent property owners, or
provide notice by first class mail with the submission of an affidavit of a
postal employee certifying the date, names and addresses to which said
notices were mailed.



      (5)   The petitioner shall bear the expense of providing
notice as required herein and shall file with the Building Commissioner
proofs of compliance at or prior to the hearing.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.017  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa;
words in the singular number include the plural number and vice-versa; the
word “building” includes the word “structure” and vice-versa; the
word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ABANDONMENT. The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the
use of the property by the owner with the intention of transferring rights
neither to the property to another owner, nor of resuming the use of the
property.



      ABUT. To physically touch or border upon; to share a common
property line.



      ADULT BUSINESS. The viewing, sale or rental in exchange for money
or other valuable consideration:



         (a)   Of pornographic film, pornographic printed
material, pornographic photographs or other pornographic images;



         (b)   Of sexual toys or sexual paraphernalia, as those
terms are defined by the manufacturers, producers or distributors thereof,
excepting condoms and intrauterine devices used for the prevention of disease
or pregnancy;



         (c)   Of display of the nude human body; and



         (d)   Dancing or dancing exhibitions which display the
nude human body without an opaque covering of the genitalia.



      AGRI-BUSINESS. Establishments primarily engaged in supplying
goods and services to the agricultural and farming community such as the sale
of chemical pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers, farm machinery, livestock
products and feed, seeds or other equipment, grain elevators, greenhouses and
products normally used in connection with farming and livestock operations.



      AGRICULTURE. The production of crops and livestock useful to man
and the harvesting, storage and primary processing of agricultural products
produced on the premises. Agricultural crops include: living plants used for
human food, fiber, animal feed and forage; tree and vine crops; and other
field crops. Also included are extensive horticultural enterprises where a
product is raised for sale. Agricultural livestock production includes the
raising, breeding and maintaining of apiaries and food animals such as
horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, fowl, fish and fur-bearing animals
raised for their pelts.



      ALLEY. A public or private service way providing a secondary
means of access to abutting lands.



      ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARY CLINIC. A place used for the care,
grooming, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals
and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention and may include
overnight accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation and
recuperation.



      APARTMENT BUILDING. A building or structure arranged, intended or
designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of
each other with each including its own separate bath and kitchen facilities.



      APPLICANT. The owner of land, or his or her agent or legal
representative, submitting an application under the provisions of this
chapter.



      ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY/RETIREMENT HOME. A multiple-family
structure, controlled either by a public body, institutional body or
non-profit corporation, a majority of whose occupants shall be 65 years of
age or over, or a multiple family structure where each unit is occupied by at
least one person who is 55 years of age or over and is retired, and where the
rental arrangement includes primarily non-medical services dealing with the
activities and instrumental activities of daily living.



      AUDITORIUM. A building or structure designed or intended to be
used for entertainment events, expositions, presentations or other public
gatherings.



      AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING AND IMPOUND YARD. A parcel of land or
building that is used for the temporary storage of wrecked or seized motor
vehicles usually awaiting to be claimed by titleholders or their agents,
insurance adjustment or transport to a repair shop.



      AUTOMOBILE, MOTORCYCLE, RV, FARM EQUIPMENT AND TRUCK SALES. An
establishment for the sale or leasing of new and used motor vehicles,
motorcycles, recreational vehicles, farm implements or trucks, which are
temporarily displayed and sold on the premises.



      AUTOMOBILE WRECKING/SALVAGE YARD. Any place where two or more
motor vehicles, not in running condition, are stored in the open and are not
being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for
wrecking, salvage or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and
including any used farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and
not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial
salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.



      BAR or TAVERN. A use, licensed by the state, to sell retail
alcoholic beverages to be consumed on or off premises and which may provide
dancing, entertainment and food. The term BAR shall include TAVERN, PUB,
NIGHTCLUB and COCKTAIL LOUNGE.



      BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. An owner occupied dwelling, or
portion of a dwelling, where short-term lodging rooms and morning meals are
provided for compensation.



      BEDROOM or SLEEPING ROOM. A private room planned and intended for
sleeping, separated from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom
without crossing another bedroom.



      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, railroad right-of-way,
waterways or other barriers.



      BOARD. The North Manchester Board of Zoning Appeals.



      BUFFERYARD. Land area used to visibly separate one use from
another or to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances.



      BUILDING. A structure having a roof intended for the shelter,
support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property.



      BUILDING CODE. A town ordinance or group of ordinances
establishing and controlling the standards for constructing buildings,
utilities, mechanical equipment and all forms of structures and permanent
installations and related matters, within the town.



      BUILDING MATERIALS WHOLESALE. See WHOLESALER.



      BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the dominant use of the principal building or land.



      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard
roofs, and the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.



      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. Where a part of
an accessory building is attached to the PRINCIPAL BUILDING in a substantial
manner, as by a roof, such accessory building shall be considered a part of
the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.



      BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of the
principal building and accessory building(s) excluding open steps or
terraces, unenclosed porches or architectural appurtenances projecting not
more than two feet beyond a wall of the building(s).



      BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The Building Commissioner of the Town of
North Manchester, Indiana.



      BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no structural connection
with another building.



      BUILDING PERMIT. A certificate issued by the town permitting a
person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure within
its jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done.



      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum horizontal
distance between the right-of-way of any street, or the property line of the
side and rear yards, and a part of any structure regardless of whether it is
the front, side or rear of the building.



      CAR WASH. A building or part of a building containing facilities
for washing more than two automobiles, or using production-line methods with
a chain conveyor, blower, steam-cleaning device or other mechanical device
and which may include on the same site the fueling of automobiles when such
fueling is ancillary and preliminary to the principal function of washing
vehicles.



      CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including columbariums, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such CEMETERY.



      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate signed by the Building
Commissioner stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or
structure referred to therein comply with the provisions of this chapter.



      CLUB. A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying regular dues and are who are organized for some common
purpose. CLUBS shall exclude religious places of worship or groups organized
solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a
commercial enterprise.



      COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR. A facility for any
profit-making activity which is generally related to the entertainment or
recreation field that is open to the general public, such as: motion picture
theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, video game rooms and similar
entertainment activities.



      COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR. Any profit-making activity
entertainment or recreation services offered outside of an enclosed building
that is open to the general public. Examples include golf courses, driving
ranges, miniature golf courses, go-kart tracks, sand volleyball courts, water
parks, batting cages and amusement parks.



      COMMISSION. The North Manchester Town Plan Commission.



      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Includes physical, social and/or economic
plans and policies in graphic and verbal statement forms for the development
of the town and surrounding area within the town’s planning jurisdiction,
prepared and adopted by the Town Council, pursuant to the state acts, and
including any part of such plan and/or policies separately adopted and any
amendment to such plan and/or policies, or parts thereof.



      CONCRETE OR ASPHALT MIXING PLANT. An outdoor or indoor facility
used for the production and temporary storage of concrete, portland cement
and asphalt products.



      CONDOMINIUM. The division of building(s) and the related land
into horizontal property interests meeting the requirements of and controlled
by state statutes for condominiums as prescribed by the I.C. 32-25-1 through
32-25-9.



      CONFINED FEEDING. The raising of animals for food, fur or
recreation in lots, pens, ponds, sheds or buildings, where they are confined,
fed and maintained for at least 45 days during any year, and where there is
no ground cover or vegetation present over at least half of the animals’
confinement area. Livestock markets and sale barns are generally excluded.
CONFINED FEEDING OPERATIONS are further defined in I.C. 13-11-2-39.



      CONFINED FEEDING OPERATION. Any livestock operation engaged in
the confined feeding of at least 300 cattle, or 600 swine or sheep, or 30,000
fowl, such as chickens, ducks and other poultry and as may further be defined
or regulated in I.C. 13-18-10.



      CONTRACTOR’S OFFICE AND YARD. A facility used for office space
and storage for conducting the business affairs of persons engaged in the
building trades industry. Such use may include unenclosed areas used for the
storage and maintenance of construction equipment and other materials
customarily used in the trade carried on by the contractor.



      DAY CARE CENTER. Any licensed institution operated for the
purpose of providing care and maintenance to children separated from their
parent, guardian or custodian during a part of the day for two or more
consecutive weeks, except a school or other bona fide educational institution
and as further regulated in 470 I.A.C. 3-4.1-2.



      DENSITY. A unit of measurement that indicates the number of units
per acre of land.



      DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or
er representative or agent. Consent for making applications for development
approval shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.



      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to, buildings and other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.



      DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A drawing to scale, including a legal or site
description of the real estate involved which shows the location and size of
all existing and proposed buildings, structures and yards; location and
dimension of buildings lines and easements; widths and lengths of all
entrances and exits to and from the real estate; location of all adjacent or
adjoining streets; surface water drainage plan; the purpose of which is to
present a unified or organized arrangement of buildings, service facilities
and other improvements including, but not limited to, planting areas, public
parking areas and surface water detention and retention structures.



      DISTRICT. A section of the territory within the jurisdiction of
the North Manchester Town Plan Commission for which uniform regulations
governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of use of the buildings
and land, and open spaces about buildings are herein established.



      DOUBLE-WIDE MOBILE HOME. See DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.



      DRIVE THROUGH FACILITY. Any portion of a building or structure
from which business is transacted or is capable of being transacted, directly
with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transaction.
This definition shall also include DRIVE IN FACILITIES.



      DRIVEWAY. A private roadway providing access from a dwelling or
off-street parking lot to a street or other thoroughfare.



      DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, used primarily as a
place of residence, containing living, sleeping and sanitary facilities, for
one or more human beings, but not including hotels or motels.



      DWELLING, DUPLEX. See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.



      DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. A detached dwelling unit designed to be
repeatedly transported on highways, and when arriving at the site for
placement involving only minor and incidental unpacking, assembling and
connection operations, but which involves no substantial reconstruction which
would render the unit unfit as a conveyance on the highway. A transportable
structure that is wholly, or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation on a building site and designed for long-term residential use
and built prior to, or not conforming to, enactment of the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq.), effective on the 6-15-1976, and usually built to the
voluntary industry standard of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) - A119.1, Standards for Mobile Homes. The term MOBILE HOME does not
include commercial trailers, job site trailers or temporary classroom
trailers or structures.



      DWELLING, MODULAR HOME (FACTORY BUILT). A structural assemblage
of materials having been constructed by an approved method of construction,
comprising all or part of a total structure which, when constructed, is
self-sufficient, and when installed constitutes a dwelling unit, except for
necessary preparation for its placement. The prototype model of which has a
serial number designating it as a modular structure approved by the state’s
Department of Fire and Building Services.



      DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building designed for occupancy by more
than two families.



      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for occupancy by no
more than one family and as further described and defined by the most recent
Uniform Building Code. (Modified by Steering Committee on 8-27-2003.)



      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling in which living quarters are
arranged side-by-side, or one over the other and having either separate or
one common entrance for two families.



      DWELLING UNIT. One room or rooms containing independent cooking,
sanitation and sleeping facilities and constituting an independent
housekeeping establishment, physically separated from other dwelling units in
the same structure. The term DWELLING UNIT does not include recreational
vehicles.



      EASEMENT. A portion or strip of land which is part of a lot or
parcel, but which has been reserved for a specific use for access by persons,
or for utilities and/or services.



      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Public, private, secular or non-secular,
pre-primary, primary, grade, junior high, high, preparatory school or
academy; junior college; college or university, if public or founded or
conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or charitable
organization. For the purposes of this chapter, home schooling shall not be
considered an EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.



      ENLARGEMENT. An increase in size of an existing structure or use.



      ESSENTIAL SERVICE. Overhead or underground electrical, gas, steam
or water transmission or distribution systems, and collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems and structures used by public utilities or
governmental departments or commissions or systems as are required for the
protection of public health, safety or general welfare, including: utility
substations, towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables and similar improvements.



      FACTORY-BUILT HOME. See “DWELLING, MODULAR HOME.



      FAMILY. One or more persons, not necessarily related by blood,
marriage, adoption or guardianship, living as a single housekeeping unit with
not more than two persons regularly sleeping in each bedroom or sleeping room.



      FENCE. Any artificially constructed barrier of any material, or
combination of materials, erected to enclose or screen areas of land.



      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any building, property or activity of
which the principal use or purpose of which is the provision of financial
services including, but not limited to, banks, facilities for automatic
teller machines (ATMs), credit unions, savings and loan institutions and
mortgage companies.



      FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Those floodplains which have not been
adequately protected from flooding by the regulatory flood by means of dikes,
levees or reservoirs, and are shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of
the Federal Insurance Administration or maps provided to the Commission from
the state’s Resources Commission.



      FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been
or may hereafter be covered by flood water from the regulatory flood.



      FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest point around
the perimeter of a building at which flood waters may enter the interior of
the building.



      FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any
river or stream shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration.



      FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the flood hazard areas lying
outside the floodway, shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration.



      FLOOR AREA, GROUND. The square foot area of a building within its
largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the ground floor
level exclusive of open porches, breeze ways, terraces, garages and exterior
stairways.



      FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The total area, computed on a horizontal
plane, within the outside dimensions of a building.



      FLOOR AREA, NET. The total area, computed on a horizontal plane,
used for a particular business category; exclusive of entrances, hallways,
stairs and other accessory areas used for ingress or egress.



      FOUNDATION. The supporting member of a wall or structure.



      FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE. A building containing sleeping
rooms, bathrooms, common rooms and a central kitchen and dining room
maintained exclusively for fraternity or sorority members and their guests or
visitors and affiliated with an institution of higher learning.



      FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting on a street or way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. Lots shall not be considered to
front on stub ends of streets and, in the case of corner lots, will be
considered to front on both intersecting streets.



      GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure or land used
for supplying and selling motor fuel, lubricants, travel aides, minor
automobile accessories or oil direct to motor vehicles. Convenience goods for
sale to the public may also be available. This definition shall also apply to
GAS STATIONS and SERVICE STATIONS.



      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building generally and primarily
used for the storage of motor vehicles owned by the owner of said vehicle.



      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building, except those defined herein as a
private garage, used for the storage, or care of motor vehicles, or where
such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration,
hire or sale.



      GREENHOUSE. A building or structure constructed mostly of glass,
glasslike or translucent material, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the
protection or cultivation of flowers or other plants.



      GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL. A greenhouse used for the growing of
flowers or plants, all or part of which are sold at wholesale.



      GROUP HOME. A residential care facility licensed by the state
which provides room and board, and personal care and supervision for more
than eight, but not more than 16, aged, mentally retarded or developmentally
disabled persons who are able to be integrated into a family-type setting.



      GROUP HOME, STUDENT. A home or housing unit occupied by more than
three persons unrelated by blood or marriage, and functioning as a single
housekeeping unit. The term STUDENT GROUP HOME includes a club, nurses home,
boarding or lodging house, fraternity, sorority and student cooperative, as
well as other residential and housekeeping uses fitting within the foregoing
definition but does not include a hotel, motel, nursing home, nursing home
conversion or bed and breakfast establishment.



      HEAVY MANUFACTURING. A use engaged in the processing or
assembling, altering, converting, fabricating, finishing, processing or
treatment of a product utilizing a process which may include or generate
objectionable or hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor, vibration,
water pollution or dust and which may be operating outside of a completely
enclosed structure.



      HELIPORT. An area, either at ground level or elevated on a
structure, licensed by the federal government or appropriate state agency and
approved for the loading, unloading, landing and takeoff of helicopters that
may include auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and
maintenance equipment.



      HOME OCCUPATION. The production of goods and/or services within a
residence by a member(s) of the family residing in the residence, provided
that the use is limited in extent and incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling unit for residential purposes and which does not change the
residential character of the neighborhood. (See § 156.362 of this chapter.)



      HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services, primarily for
in-patient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an
integral part of the facility; provided, such institution is operated by, or
treatment is given under direct supervision of a licensed physician. Types of
HOSPITALS include general, mental, chronic disease and allied special
hospitals such as cardiac, contagious disease, maternity, orthopedic, cancer
and the like.



      HOTEL/MOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging
accommodations, on a daily rate, to the general public and potentially
providing additional accessory services such as restaurants, meeting rooms
and recreational facilities.



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard surfaced, man-made area that does
not readily absorb or retain water, including, but not limited to, building
roofs, paved parking and driveway areas, sidewalks and paved recreation areas.



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO. The measure of intensity of land use,
determined by dividing the total of all impervious surfaces on a site by the
gross area of the site.



      IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A permit signed by the Building
Commissioner stating that a proposed improvement complies with the provisions
of this chapter and such other ordinances as may be applicable.



      INDUSTRIAL PARK. A single structure or group of structures or
lots intended for industrial purposes or operations forming a comprehensive
arrangement of buildings, grounds and access ways planned in accordance with
harmonious principles of architectural and landscape architectural design and
industrial management.



      INFILL DEVELOPMENT. The development of new principally permitted
buildings on scattered development sites in a developed or built-up area.



      JUNK YARD. Any place at which personal property is or may be
possessed, salvaged, collected, dismantled or sorted for reuse, resale or
reduction, including, but not limited to, used or salvaged base metal or
metals, their compounds or combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper,
rags, glass rubber, lumber, millwork, brick and similar property except
animal matter; and used motor vehicles, machinery or equipment which is used,
owned or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts there from.



      JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION. The Town of North Manchester,
Indiana, and the contiguous unincorporated territory lying within one mile of
the corporate limits of the town or the legal description as assigned by the
County Commissioners.



      KENNEL. An establishment licensed by the state to operate a
facility housing domestic animals such as dogs or cats, and where grooming,
breeding, boarding, training or selling of animals is conducted as a business.



      LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS. The off-street area required for
the receipt of distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise.



      LIGHT MANUFACTURING. A use engaged in the processing or
assembling, altering, converting, fabricating, finishing, processing or
treatment of a product utilizing a relatively clean and quiet process which
does not include or generate objectionable or hazardous elements such as
smoke, noise, odor, vibration, water pollution or dust and which is operating
in a completely enclosed structure.



      LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth used for the loading
or unloading of cargo, products or materials from vehicles.



      LOT. A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of
land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or of building development.



      LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and having frontage on two
or more intersecting streets.



      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. See LOT, THROUGH.



      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.



      LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the front
line and the rear line of the lot, measured in the general direction of the
side lot lines.



      LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.



      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot area covered by the
building area.



      LOT GROUND LEVEL.



         (a)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street
only, the elevation of the sidewalk or the established grade of the street at
the front lot line at the center of the wall adjoining the street; for
buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the
elevation of the sidewalk or the said established grade at the center of all
walls adjoining the streets; and for buildings having one wall adjoining the
street, the average level of the ground adjacent to the building.



         (b)   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more
than five feet from a street is to be considered as adjoining the street.



      LOT LINE. The property line between two established parcels of
land or one parcel and a public right-of-way.



      LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, a line
separating the lot from the street or place; and, in the case of a corner
lot, a line separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street,
except in cases where deed restrictions in effect specify another street
right-of-way line as the front lot line.



      LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped
lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.



      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.



      LOT LINE, ZERO. The location of a building on a lot in such a
manner that one or more of the building’s sides rests directly on a lot
line.



      LOT, NON-CONFORMING. A lot, the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter
but which fails by reason of the adoption, revision or amendment to conform
to the present requirements of the zoning district.



      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the county’s Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes
and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.



      LOT WIDTH. The dimension of a lot, measured between side lot
lines on the building line.



      MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. See HEAVY MANUFACTURING.



      MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. See LIGHT MANUFACTURING.



      MASTER PLAN. See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



      MOBILE HOME. See DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.



      MODULAR HOME (FACTORY BUILT). See DWELLING, MODULAR HOME.



      MOBILE HOME COURT OR PARK. A mobile home development, designed
with a variety of facilities for common use, and in which mobile home spaces
are rented.



      MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A mobile home development designed and
intended to provide individual, subdivided lots for sale for the placement of
mobile homes for residential purposes.



      MULTI-TENANT BUILDING, NON-RESIDENTIAL. Any non-residential
building or structure that is occupied by two or more owners, renters or land
uses, which is managed as a single property.



      NON-CONFORMING LOT. See LOT, NON-CONFORMING.



      NON-CONFORMING USE. The use of a building, structure or parcel of
land lawfully existing prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter, but which fails by reason of the adoption, revision or amendment to
conform to the present requirement of this chapter.



      NURSING HOME.



         (a)   A facility licensed by the state, which:



            1.   Provides nursing services on a continuing
basis;



            2.   Admits the majority of the occupants upon the
advice of physicians as ill or infirm person requiring nursing services;



            3.   Provides for licensed physicians services or
supervision; and



            4.   Maintains medical records.



         (b)   Such facilities may also provide other and similar
medical or health services; provided that, no occupant requires physical
restraint within the facility. Examples of NURSING HOME FACILITIES that
provide health services may include, if they comply with all the above
criteria, nursing homes, convalescent homes, maternity homes, rest homes,
homes for the aged and the like.



      OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the
property to be subdivided or developed, whether or not in the same ownership
of the applicant for subdivision approval.



      OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. A use in a building, or portion of a
building, wherein services are performed involving predominately
administrative, professional or clerical operations.



      OPEN SPACE. A natural or manmade landscaped area not occupied by
any structures, buildings or impervious surfaces.



      OUTDOOR DISPLAY. An area of designated size, outside of an
enclosed building, used for the display of merchandise, goods, wares or
tangible property normally sold, rented or leased within the business on the
property where the merchandise is sold, rented or leased.



      OUTDOOR STORAGE. A use involving the keeping outside of an
enclosed building of personal or business property, goods, wares, or
merchandise that are not located in that specific area for customer viewing
or immediate sale, in the same place, for a period of more than 72 hours.



      OUTDOOR THEATER. An open lot devoted primarily to the showing of
motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical or other live performances.



      OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation
or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or
sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided or
developed under these regulations.



      PARK and PLAYGROUND. The use of any land or open space for
passive or active non-commercial recreation purposes.



      PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An area paved with a hard surface
(including gravel) in accordance with town specifications, other than a
street or an alley, designed or used for the temporary parking of motor
vehicles for clients, customers or employees.



      PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An area, paved with a hard surface
(including gravel) in accordance with town specifications, other than a
street or alley, designed or used for the temporary parking of more than four
motor vehicles when available for public use, whether free or for
compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.



      PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An off-street parking space is a
temporary storage area for a motor vehicle, including a driveway for a
residential use, with room to open doors on both sides, that is directly
accessible to an access aisle and which is not located on a dedicated street
right-of-way.



      PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person
or persons.



      PERSONAL SERVICES. Any use which caters to customers needs, and
which may include the incidental sale of products. PERSONAL SERVICES may
include barber shops, beauty shops, dry cleaners, health clubs and tanning
spas. PERSONAL SERVICES shall not include adult business or sexually-oriented
businesses.



      PLACE. An open, unoccupied, officially designated space other
than a street or alley permanently reserved for use as the principal means of
access to abutting property.



      PLAN COMMISSION. The town’s area plan body as established in
accordance with state law, often referred to herein simply as the Commission.



      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A parcel of land or contiguous
parcels of land controlled by a single landowner or by a group of landowners
in common agreement as to control, to be developed as a single entity, the
environment of which is compatible with adjacent parcels and the intent of
the zoning district or districts in which it is located.



      PLANT NURSERY. Any land, building, structure or any combination
thereof used for the storage, cultivation, transplanting or live trees,
shrubs or offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for
gardening or landscaping.



      PLAT. A map or chart indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision
of land either filed or intended to be filed for record.



      PRIVATE SEWER. A sewage disposal system which is not constructed,
installed, maintained, operated and owned by a municipality, taxing district
established for that purpose, or a utility under the jurisdiction of the
Public Service Commission of the state. Any such private system shall be in
conformance with all local and state codes, ordinances and regulations.



      PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. See OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL.



      PROFESSIONAL SERVICE. The use of office and other related spaces
for such services as are provided by medical practitioners not intended for
overnight care, dentists, attorneys, architects, real estate agents,
engineers, funeral homes and other similar professions.



      PUBLIC BUILDING AND SERVICES. A building, facility or land owned,
controlled and/or operated by the town, county, state or federal government
including fire stations, libraries, post offices, police stations and the
Town Hall.



      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewage disposal system which is constructed,
installed, maintained, operated and owned by a municipality, taxing district
established for that purpose, or a utility under the jurisdiction of the
Public Service Commission of the state, but shall not include a sewer
installed for the purpose of subsoil drainage.



      PUBLIC WATER. A water supply which is constructed, installed,
maintained, operated and owned by a municipality, taxing district established
for that purpose or a utility under the jurisdiction of the Public Service
Commission of the state.



      RECREATIONAL FACILITY; OUTDOOR. Any land or facility, operated by
a non-profit organization that is open to the public or members of the
non-profit organization that may include, but is not limited to, athletic
fields, picnic areas, playgrounds and bike/hike trails.



      RECYCLING CENTER. A center whose primary purpose is to gather and
separate such products as glass, paper, metal plastics and similar materials.
Such uses shall be distinguished from junk yards and salvage yards and shall
be primarily involved with domestic uses.



      REGULATORY FLOOD. That flood having a peak discharge which can be
equaled or exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as
calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by
the state’s Natural Resources Commission; this flood is equivalent to a
flood having the probability of occurrence of 1% in any given year.



      RELIGIOUS PLACE OF WORSHIP. A use involving a building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for
religious worship or services and which building, together with its accessory
buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain public worship.



      RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT LABORATORY. A use in which scientific
research, investigation, testing or experimentation is conducted, but not
including the manufacturing or sale of products, except as incidental and
accessory to the main purpose of the facility.



      RESTAURANT. A use involving a business establishment, with or
without table service, within which food is prepared and offered for sale and
consumption on or off the premises, to the customer, in a ready to consume
state in individual serving or in non-disposable containers.



      RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. A use involving a business establishment
whose principal business is the sale of previously prepared food, in
disposable containers, directly to the consumer in a ready to consume state
for consumption either within the restaurant or off-premises.



      RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Limitations of various kinds on the usage
of lots or parcels of land within a subdivision which are proposed by the
subdivider and, in the case of public health, safety and welfare by the
Commission, that are recorded with the plat and run with the land.



      RETAIL BUSINESS. A use that provides goods, wares and
merchandise, directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for
immediate purchase.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, pedestrian-way, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, special
landscaping or for another special use.



      ROADSIDE BUSINESS. A temporary use for the sale of seasonal
products and/or produce.



      SANITARY LANDFILL. A solid waste disposal facility at which solid
waste, trash, refuse, junk or unwanted materials is deposited on or beneath
the surface of the ground as an intended place of final location as regulated
by I.C. 13-19.



      SCREENING. A fence, wall or an area of land used as a planting
strip on which evergreen, hedge, shrubbery or other planting materials are
placed for the purpose of limiting visibility.



      SETBACK. The minimum required horizontal distance between the
property line or the right-of-way and the building line. The SETBACK LINE
shall be parallel to the front lot line and no portion of the building shall
be closer to the front lot line than the required minimum SETBACK.



      SIGN. Any advertising device, billboard or board, or structure,
or part thereof, or device attached thereto or painted or represented
thereon, for advertising display or publicity purposes. SIGNS placed or
erected by governmental agencies for the purpose of showing street names or
traffic directions or regulations for other governmental purposes shall not
be included herein.



      SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A construction sign is a temporary sign
identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor and/or material supplier
participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located.



      SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A directional sign is any on-premise sign
giving directions, instructions or facility information but shall not contain
the name or logo of an establishment, nor any advertising copy.



      SIGN, FREESTANDING. A freestanding sign is any permanent sign not
attached to a building. This shall include signs attached to poles and signs
attached directly to the ground.



      SIGN, NON-CONFORMING. A non-conforming sign is a sign which was
erected legally, but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign
restrictions and regulations.



      SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. A sign that directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.



      SIGN, POLITICAL. A political sign is a temporary sign which
announces the candidacy of a person or slate or persons running for elective
office or a political party or issue.



      SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A portable sandwich board is a sign with
two display surfaces that is not permanently anchored to the ground or a
structure and has a hinged, or A-frame construction that allows the sign to
be displayed indoors or outdoors.



      SIGN, PORTABLE. A portable sign is a sign which is movable and
which is not permanently attached to the ground, a structure or other signs,
and is designed or constructed in such a manner that it can be moved or
relocated without involving any structural or support changes.



      SIGN, PROJECTING. A projecting sign is a sign supported by a
building wall or column and extending a distance exceeding 12 inches from the
wall.



      SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A real estate sign is a temporary sign
advertising the property or land upon which the sign is located as being for
rent, lease or sale.



      SIGN, SUBDIVISION. A subdivision sign is any ground-mounted or
wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium complex or
residential development.



      SIGN, TEMPORARY. A temporary sign is any sign not constructed or
intended for long-term use and is not permanently mounted.



      SIGN, WALL. A wall sign is any sign which is located on or formed
by the surface of the wall of a building. A mansard roof facade on a building
shall be considered part of the wall.



      SIGN, WINDOW. A window sign is a sign installed inside a window
and intended to be viewed from the outside.



      STORAGE, COMMERCIAL. A building used primarily for the storage of
goods and materials by the owner of goods and materials or operated for a
specific commercial establishment or group of establishments in a particular
industrial or economic field.



      STORAGE, PERSONAL. The use of a building containing individual,
compartmentalized and controlled access stalls, rooms or lockers that are
leased, rented or owned by different individuals for the storage of
individual possessions or personal property.



      STREET. A right-of-way or thoroughfare, other than an alley, or
place dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use, usually
affording the principal means of access to abutting property.



      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the
ground except utilities poles and towers.



      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof.



      SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more
lots, parcels, sites, units, plats or interests for the purpose of offer,
sale, lease or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and
all other plans, terms, and conditions, including re-subdivision. SUBDIVISION
includes the division of development of land zones for residential and
non-residential uses, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise,
intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument.



      TOWN. The Town of North Manchester, Indiana.



      TRUCK AND FREIGHT TERMINAL. An area and building where trucks
load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be
divided or aggregated into smaller or larger loads to transfer to other
vehicles or modes of transportation.



      USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building
thereon is designated, arranged or intended, for which it is occupied,
utilized or maintained.



      USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to and serving the principal
use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.



      USE, PRINCIPALLY PERMITTED. The primary or predominant use of any
lot.



      USE, SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of the
use as specified in this chapter and authorized by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



      VARIANCE. A modification of the strict terms of the relevant
district regulations where the modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and
not a result of action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the
regulations would result in a practical difficulty or an unnecessary hardship.



      VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS. A triangular space at the street
corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision.



      WAREHOUSE. A use primarily involved in the indoor storage of
goods and materials.



      WHOLESALER. A use which maintains a stock of goods, other than
samples on premises, and is engaged in the resale of commodities in quantity,
to businesses, industries and institutions.



      YARD. A space on the same lot with a building, which is open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot or
in the case of a corner lot extending also along the length of the lot
abutting the side street, unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces,
driveways, lamp posts, and similar appurtenances, the depth of which is the
least distance between the lot line and the building line. The FRONT YARD of
a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street upon which the lot has
its least frontage.



      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line.



      YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and side lot line,
extending from the front yard or from the front lot line where no front yard
is required, to the rear yard.



      YARD SALE. A sale offering primarily domestic and household items
belonging to the primary occupant of the premises and/or said persons,
friends, relatives and neighbors.



      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Building Commissioner of the Town of
North Manchester.



      ZONING AMENDMENT. A change of the zoning map or zoning text
authorized by the town, either in the allowable use within a district, in the
boundaries of a district or in a change to the ordinance text.



      ZONE MAP. A map entitled “Zone Map, North Manchester,
Indiana”, dated 5-5-1982, and any subsequent amendments thereto.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.018  FEES; SCHEDULE.



   (A)   (1)   The fees for all applicant costs incurred in this
chapter shall be established by the Town Council as identified in division
(B) below.



      (2)   Furthermore, no plan shall be accepted for filing and
processing, as provided in this chapter, unless and until a filing fee is
paid to the town and the application is deemed complete by the Building
Commissioner.



      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for unforeseen
expenses incurred by the town in reviewing plans or any modifications to such
plans. Such expenses may include items such as the cost of professional
consulting services including expenses and legal fees in connection with
reviewing the plan, prepared reports, inspections, the publication and
mailing of public notice in connection therewith and any other reasonable
expenses directly attributable thereon.



      (4)   Failure to pay costs within 30 days of invoice shall
stop all processing and review of the plans or shall cause suspension of all
development activities on the site.



      (5)   Applications and petitions filed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be accompanied by filing fees for the
following:



         (a)   Applications for an improvement location permit
including:



            1.   New structures; and



            2.   Any structural alteration, which results in
an increase in size to the building area of the original structure.



         (b)   For an appeal from the decision of the Building
Commissioner to the Board of Appeals;



         (c)   For an application for a special exception or
variance;



         (d)   For each application for the approval of a
shopping center; and



         (e)   For a petition for an amendment to this chapter.



      (6)   No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this division
(A) shall be returnable to the applicant or petitioner.



   (B)   (1)   The Town Council shall, by ordinance, establish a
schedule of fees for improvement location permits, amendments, appeals,
variances, special exception use permits, plan approvals and other matters
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this chapter requiring
investigations, inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses.
Such expenses may include items such as the cost of using professional
services to review plans or applications.



      (2)   The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of
the town’s Building Department and may be altered or amended only by the
Town Council.



      (3)   Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application or appeal. Upon the finding of a
zoning ordinance violation by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Court
may award the town a reasonable attorney fee for the prosecution of said
action.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




ZONE DISTRICT AND MAPS




§ 156.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of specified
uses, and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings for those
uses, the town is hereby divided into the following districts.



 


District Designation

 
Type of District





A

 
Agricultural



B-G (B-2)

 
Business General



B-L (B-1)

 
Business Local



CBD

 
Central Business District



FP

 
Floodplain



I (I-2)

 
Industrial



L-I

 
Limited Industrial



RE (S-1)

 
Residence Estate



RMF-H (R-4)

 
Residence Multi-Family High Density



RMF-L (R-3)

 
Residence Multi-Family Low Density



RSF (R-1)

 
Residence Single-Family



RTF (R-2)

 
Residence Two-Family



RU

 
Residence Urban




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.031  OFFICIAL ZONE MAP.



   The official zone map, which accompanies and is hereby declared to be a
part of this chapter, shows the boundaries of the area covered by the
districts established in § 156.030 of this chapter, which may be amended
from time to time. Notations, references, indications and other matters shown
on the zone map are as much a part of this chapter as if they were fully
described herein.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.032  IDENTIFICATION OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The official zoning map shall be identified by certification
by and bearing the seal of the Town under the following words: “This is to
certify that this is the official zoning map of the Town of North Manchester,
State of Indiana”, together with the date of adoption of this chapter.



   (B)   Certification shall be by the signature of the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.033  MAINTENANCE OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and I.C.
36-7-4-600, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed
on the official zoning map, these changes shall be entered on the official
zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Town Council
with an entry on the official zoning map as follows:



 



On (Date) by official action of the Town Council, the following changes were
made on the official zoning map:

 


      (Description of changes in district boundaries)     


 



 



   (B)   Such entry shall be signed by the President of the Plan
Commission and attested by the Plan Commission Secretary. No changes of any
nature shall be made on the official zoning map or shown except in conformity
with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of any
kind by a person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter
and punishable as provided under § 156.999 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.034  LOCATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   Regardless of the existence of copies of the official zoning map which,
from time to time may be published, the official zoning map shall be located
in the office of the Building Department.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.035  REPLACEMENT OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the Town Council may, by ordinance, adopt a new
official zoning map which shall superseded the prior official zoning map.



   (B)   The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other
errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no correction shall
have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any
subsequent amendment.



   (C)   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature
of the President of the Plan Commission, attested by the Secretary of the
Plan Commission and bearing the seal of the town under the following words:



 






This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the
official zoning map adopted,                                
                        , as part of Ordinance Number        
          of the Town of North Manchester, Indiana. Unless the prior
official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior
map or any significant parts which remain, shall be preserved, together with
all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.


 



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.036  RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of
districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall
apply.



      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of thoroughfares or highways, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines.



      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed as following the lot line.



      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following town
limits shall be construed as following the town limits.



      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall
be construed to be midway between the main tracks.



      (5)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall
be construed to follow the centerlines.



      (6)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following
floodplain lines shall be construed to follow the floodplain lines.



      (7)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of
features indicated in the subsections above shall be so controlled. Distances
not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by
the scale of the map by the Building Commissioner.



   (B)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown as the official zoning map, or in other
circumstances not covered by divisions (A) through (G) above, the Building
Commissioner shall interpret the boundaries. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hear appeals to the decision of the Building Commissioner’s decision.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.037  ANNEXED LAND.



   (A)   Where land is to be annexed into the town, the Town Council
may direct the Plan Commission to make a recommendation on the appropriate
zoning district classification for the property that the Board is considering
for annexation. In such circumstances, the Plan Commission shall follow the
process for amendments to the zoning map set forth in § 156.014 of this
chapter. Town Council action on the Plan Commission’s recommendation shall
be scheduled in conjunction with the Town Council’s adoption of the
annexation ordinance.



   (B)   (1)   Should the Town Council annex land without adopting
an amendment to the zoning map establishing the appropriate zoning district
classification for the property, the property shall retain the zoning
classification prior to annexation.



      (2)   If this chapter does not have the same zoning
classification as the county from which the land was annexed, the property
shall have the zoning district classification of this chapter that is the
closest to the classification assigned to it by the county.



      (3)   The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for
identifying the zoning district classification for property annexed under
this division (B).



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“A” AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT




§ 156.050  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this district is to provide for a full range of
land use activities related to the agricultural industry. Such uses include
crop production and livestock operations, orchards, vineyards, pastures,
nurseries, farm residences, barns, sheds, grain bins and all other
agriculturally related uses and structures.



   (B)   The district is not intended for businesses engaged primarily
in the sale of agricultural products not produced on said property and\or by
the owners or occupants of said property. This district is not intended for
agri-business uses, except by special exception.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.051  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “A”
Agricultural District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Single-family dwelling; detached, when associated with an agricultural use
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• Agriculture


 
 
 
 
• Confined feeding operation


 
 
 
 
• Plant nursery


 
 
 
 
• Roadside business



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.052  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “A”
Agricultural District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.053  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“A” Agricultural District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Cemetery
 
• Agri-business



 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Animal hospital or veterinary clinic



 
• Essential services
 
• Commercial entertainment; outdoor



 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Greenhouse, commercial



 

 
• Heliport



 

 
• Private or public parking area



 

 
• Recreational facility, outdoor




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.054  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “A” Agricultural District:



 



Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use; excluding agricultural buildings and structures


35 feet accessory use


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
20%


Minimum front yard setback
 
60 feet


Minimum lot area
 
5 acres


Minimum lot width at building line
 
100 feet


Minimum rear yard setback
 
50 feet


14 feet accessory use


Minimum side yard setback
 
20 feet


50 feet when located next to a non-agricultural district




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.055  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.056  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.057  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“RE” RESIDENCE ESTATE DISTRICT




§ 156.070  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this district is to provide for large lot
single-family residential development in limited areas of the town. Net
densities are at one dwelling unit per acre.



   (B)   Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to,
single-family residential dwellings, institutional, public and recreational
uses that serve the needs of residents living in the area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.071  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “RE” Residence
Estate District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Single-family dwelling; detached
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• Plant nursery


 
 
 
 
• Roadside business



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.072  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “RE”
Residence Estate District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.073  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“RE” Residence Estate District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Assisted living facility or retirement home
 
• Cemetery
 
• Commercial entertainment; outdoor


• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Day care center


• Mobile home park
 
• Essential services
 
• Heliport


• Nursing home
 
• Park and playground
 
• Hospital



 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Recreation facility; outdoor



 
• Religious place of worship
 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.074  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “RE” Residence Estate District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
1 acre


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
35%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
100 feet


Minimum front yard setback
 
60 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
20 feet principal use


5 feet accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
50 feet


14 feet accessory use


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.075  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.076  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.077  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“RSF” RESIDENCE SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT




§ 156.090  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to provide for low to medium density
single-family residential development. Net densities are at four dwelling
units per acre. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to,
single-family residential dwellings, institutional, public and recreational
uses that serve the needs of residents living in the area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.091  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “RSF” Residence
Single-family District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Single-family dwelling; detached
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• None



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.092  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “RSF”
Residence Single-Family District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.093  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“RSF” Residence Single-Family District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Cemetery
 
• Day care center



 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Recreation facility; outdoor



 
• Essential services
 




 
• Park and playground
 




 
• Public buildings and services
 




 
• Religious place of worship
 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.094  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “RSF” Residence Single- Family District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
10,000 square feet single-family dwellings


1 acres all other uses


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
40%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
80 feet single-family dwelling


100 feet all other uses


Minimum front yard setback
 
30 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
8 feet principal use


5 feet accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
25 feet


7 feet accessory use


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.095  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.096  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.097  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“RTF” RESIDENCE TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT




§ 156.110  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this district is to provide for medium to low
density residential areas representing a compatible mix of single-family and
two-family dwellings which may, in certain circumstances serve as a
transition between R-1 Districts and other less restrictive zones and uses.
Net densities are at five to eight dwelling units per acre.



   (B)   Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to,
single and two-family residential dwellings, institutional, public and
recreational uses that serve the needs of residents living in the area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.111  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “RTF” Residence
Two-Family District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Single-family dwelling; detached
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• None


• Two-family dwelling
 

 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.112  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “”RTF”
Residence Two-family District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.113  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“RTF” Residence Two-Family District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Cemetery
 
• Day care center



 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Recreation facility; outdoor



 
• Essential services
 




 
• Park and playground
 




 
• Public buildings and services
 




 
• Religious place of worship
 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.114  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “RTF” Residence Two- Family District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
7,500 square feet single-family dwelling


10,000 square feet two-family dwelling


1 acres all other uses


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
50%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
70 feet single-family dwelling


80 feet two-family dwelling


100 feet all other uses


Minimum front yard setback
 
30 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
7 feet principal use


5 feet accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
25 feet


7 feet accessory use


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.115  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.116  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.117  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“RMF-L” RESIDENCE MULTI-FAMILY LOW DENSITY DISTRICT




§ 156.130  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to provide for medium to high density
residential areas representing a compatible mix of single, two and
multi-family dwellings. Net densities are at five to 12 dwelling units per
acre. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, single-, two-
and multi-family residential dwellings, institutional, public and
recreational uses that serve the needs of residents living in the area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.131  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “RMF-L”
Residence Multi-Family Low Density District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Multi-family dwelling
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• None


• Single-family dwelling; detached
 
 
 
 


• Two-family dwelling
 
 
 
 



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.132  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “RMF-L”
Residence Multi-Family Low Density District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.133  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“RMF-L” Residence Multi-Family Low Density District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Cemetery
 
• Day care center


• Group home
 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Recreation facility; outdoor


• Nursing home
 
• Essential services
 




 
• Park and playground
 




 
• Public buildings and services
 




 
• Religious place of worship
 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.134  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “RMF-L” Residence Multi-Family Low Density District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
7,500 square feet single-family dwelling


8,400 square feet two-family dwelling


3,500 square feet per unit multi-family dwelling


1 acres all other uses


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
55%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
70 feet single-family dwelling


80 feet two-family dwelling


100 feet all other uses


Minimum front yard setback
 
30 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
7 feet principal use


5 feet accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
25 feet


7 feet accessory use


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


40 feet multi-family use


15 feet accessory use


Minimum distance between multi-family buildings
 
20 feet




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.135  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.136  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.137  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“RMF-H” RESIDENCE MULTI-FAMILY HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT




§ 156.150  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this district is to provide for the highest
density residential areas representing a mix of single-family, two-family and
multi-family dwellings. Net densities are at five to 14 dwelling units per
acre.



   (B)   Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to,
single-, two- and multi-family residential dwellings, institutional, public
and recreational uses that serve the needs of residents living in the area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.151  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “RMF-H”
Residence Multi-Family High Density District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Multi-family dwelling
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• None


• Single-family dwelling; detached
 

 



• Two-family dwelling
 

 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.152  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “RMF-H”
Residence Multi-Family High Density District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.153  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“RMF-H” Residence Multi-Family High Density District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Assisted living facility or retirement home
 
• Cemetery
 
• Club or lodge


• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Day care center


• Group home
 
• Essential services
 
• Recreation facility; outdoor


• Mobile home park
 
• Park and playground
 



• Nursing home
 
• Public buildings and services
 




 
• Religious place of worship
 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.154  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “RMF-H” Residence Multi-Family High Density District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
7,500 square feet single-family dwelling


7,000 square feet two-family dwelling


3,000 square feet per unit multi-family dwelling


1 acres all other uses


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
65%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
70 feet single-family dwelling


70 feet two-family dwelling


100 feet all other uses


Minimum front yard setback
 
30 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
7 feet principal use


5 feet accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
25 feet


7 feet accessory use


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


40 feet multi-family use


15 feet accessory use


Minimum distance between multi-family buildings
 
20 feet




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.155  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.156  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.157  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“RU” RESIDENCE URBAN DISTRICT




§ 156.170  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to provide for the conservation and
revitalization of residential areas located in the oldest parts of the town
characterized predominately by single-family, detached dwellings on small
sized lots of record while protecting residential neighborhoods from the
intrusion of incompatible non-residential uses.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.171  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “RU” Residence
Urban District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Single-family dwelling; detached
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• None



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.172  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “RU”
Residence Urban District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.173  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“RU” Residence Urban District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Cemetery
 
• Day care center



 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Recreational facility, outdoor



 
• Essential services
 




 
• Park and playground
 




 
• Public buildings and services
 




 
• Religious place of worship
 




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.174  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “RU” Residence Urban District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
6,600 square feet single-family dwelling


20,000 square feet all other uses


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
75%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
60 feet single-family dwelling


100 feet all other uses


Minimum front yard setback
 
15 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
5 feet principal use


3 feet accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
25 feet


7 feet accessory use


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.175  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.176  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.177  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“PO” PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT




§ 156.190  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to provide appropriate areas for
professional, administrative and business offices while providing open
spaces, where necessary, to protect adjacent residential communities.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.191  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “PO”
Professional Office District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• None
 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Auditoriums



 
• Religious place of worship
 
• Non-profit organization



 
• Park or playground
 
• Office, professional



 

 
• Office, medical or dental



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.192  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “PO”
Professional Office District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use; and



   (B)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.193  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“PO” Professional Office District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• None
 
• Educational institution; elementary, middle and high school
 
• None


 
 
• Educational institution; technical or vocational school
 
 


 
 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
 


 
 
• Essential services
 
 



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.194  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “PO” Professional Office District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
None


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
70%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
None


Minimum front yard setback
 
None


Minimum side yard setback
 
20 feet when not abutting a residential district


20 feet, plus 1 foot for every 1 foot the principal structure exceeds 35 feet
in height where the side yard abuts a residential district


Minimum rear yard setback
 
20 feet when not abutting a residential district


20 feet, plus 1 foot for every 1 foot the principal structure exceeds 35 feet
in height where the rear yard abuts a residential district


Maximum building height
 
45 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.195  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.196  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.197  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“B-L” BUSINESS LOCAL DISTRICT




§ 156.210  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this district is to provide appropriate areas
for the local retail commercial uses serving the community and the general
market area of the town.



   (B)   A combination of retail, service, commercial, office,
professional, financial and governmental uses are encouraged.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.211  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “B-L” Business
Local District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Educational institution; technical or vocational school
 
• Auditoriums


 
 
 
 
• Club or lodge school



 



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses





 

 
• Hotel/motel



 

 
• Mortuary and funeral home



 

 
• Office, professional



 

 
• Office, medical or dental



 

 
• Personal service



 

 
• Professional service



 

 
• Recreational facility; indoor



 

 
• Restaurant; excluding drive-through



 

 
• Retail sales; not exceeding 5,000 square feet in floor area




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.212  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “B-L”
Business Local District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.213  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“B-L” Business Local District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• Assisted living facility or retirement home
 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Car wash


• Group home
 
• Essential services
 
• Commercial entertainment; excluding sexually-oriented businesses


• Mobile home subdivision
 
• Fraternity, sorority or student cooperative
 



• Multi-family dwelling
 
• Park or playground
 
• Commercial entertainment; outdoor


• Nursing home
 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Day care center


• Recreational vehicle park
 
• Religious place of worship
 
• Drive through facility


• Single-family detached dwelling
 

 
• Hospital


• Two-family dwelling
 

 
• Multi-tenant building



 

 
• Private or public parking area



 

 
• Recreational facility; outdoor



 

 
• Shopping center



 

 
• Storage; indoor commercial




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.214  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “B-L” Business Local District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
None


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
90%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
None


Minimum front yard setback
 
None


Minimum side yard setback
 
5 feet principal and accessory use


10 feet principal and accessory use when abutting a residential district


Minimum rear yard setback
 
15 feet


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.215  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.216  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.217  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“B-G” BUSINESS GENERAL DISTRICT




§ 156.230  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to provide areas for a wide range of
retailing uses and certain service uses that typically generate high volumes
of traffic and serve a large market area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.231  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “B-G” Business
General District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• Bed and breakfast establishment
 
• Educational institution; technical and vocational
 
• Agri-business



 

 
• Auditorium



 

 
• Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck sales



 

 
• Club or lodge



 

 
• Commercial entertainment; excluding sexually oriented business



 

 
• Contractors offices and yards



 

 
• Financial institution



 

 
• Hotel/motel



 

 
• Mortuary and funeral home



 

 
• Office, professional



 

 
• Office, medical or dental



 

 
• Personal service



 

 
• Professional service



 

 
• Recreational facility, indoor



 

 
• Restaurant; excluding drive through



 

 
• Restaurant with drive through



 

 
• Restaurant; fast food



 

 
• Retail sales




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.232  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “B-G”
Business General District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Car wash; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.233  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“B-G” Business General District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• Assisted living facility or retirement home
 
• Educational institution; college or university
 
• Animal hospital and veterinary clinic


• Group home
 
• Essential services
 
• Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck repair service


• Nursing home
 
• Park or playground
 
• Bar or tavern


• Recreational vehicle park
 
• Public buildings and service
 
• Building materials wholesale



 
• Religious place of worship
 
• Car wash



 

 
• Commercial entertainment; outdoor



 

 
• Day care center



 

 
• Drive through facility



 

 
• Gasoline service station



 

 
• Greenhouse, commercial



 

 
• Hospital



 

 
• Kennel



 

 
• Mobile home dealer



 

 
• Multi-tenant building



 

 
• Planned unit development



 

 
• Private or public parking area



 

 
• Recreational facility; outdoor



 

 
• Recycling center



 

 
• Shopping center



 

 
• Storage; indoor commercial



 

 
• Storage; outdoor commercial



 

 
• Storage; personal




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.234  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “B-G” Business General District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
None


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
70%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
None


Minimum front yard setback
 
None


Minimum side yard setback
 
5 feet principal and accessory use


10 feet principal and accessory use when abutting a residential district


Minimum rear yard setback
 
15 feet principal and accessory use


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.235  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.236  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.237  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“CBD” CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT




§ 156.250  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to provide a centrally located and
readily accessible high density area which offers a wide variety of retail,
service, financial, entertainment, residential and governmental uses. A broad
range of uses is permitted to reflect downtown’s role as a commercial,
cultural and government center. Development is intended to be intense with
maximum lot coverage, increased building scale and height density, and
buildings placed close together. Development is intended to be pedestrian
oriented with a strong emphasis on a safe and attractive streetscape.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.251  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “CBD” Central
Business District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• Residential dwellings when located on the second or higher floors of a
building
 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Bar or tavern



 

 
• Commercial entertainment; excluding sexually oriented businesses



 

 
• Financial institution



 

 
• Office, professional



 

 
• Office, medical or dental



 

 
• Personal service



 

 
• Professional service



 

 
• Restaurant; excluding drive through



 

 
• Retail sales




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.252  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “CBD”
Central Business District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



   (B)   Home occupations, pursuant to § 156.362 of this chapter; and



   (C)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.253  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“CBD” Central Business District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• Bed and breakfast
 
• Essential services
 
• Auditorium


• Multi-family dwelling
 

 
• Club or lodge



 

 
• Hotel/motel



 

 
• Multi-tenant building



 

 
• Private or public parking area



 

 
• Restaurant; fast food



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.254  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “CBD” Central Business District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
None


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
100%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
None


Minimum front yard setback
 
None, however in no case shall the building be setback greater than 15 feet
from the right-of-way


Minimum side yard setback
 
None


10 feet principal and accessory use when abutting a residential district


Minimum rear yard setback
 
None for principal and accessory uses


25 feet principal and accessory use when abutting a residential district


Maximum building height
 
40 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.255  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.256  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.257  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“L-I” LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT




§ 156.270  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this district is to provide lands for the
development of industrial uses that have high standards of performance and
that can locate in relatively close proximity to residential and business
uses.



   (B)   The district regulations are designed to permit the operation
of most manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing activities with adequate
protection for adjacent uses and sufficient control of external effects to
protect one industry from another. Some retail uses that service the
industrial uses within the industrial area may be permitted. Industrial
operations must be in an enclosed building.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.271  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “L-I” Limited
Industrial District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• None
 
• None
 
• Agri-business



 

 
• Building materials; wholesale



 

 
• Contractors offices and yards



 

 
• Greenhouse, commercial



 

 
• Recycling center



 

 
• Research and development laboratory



 

 
• Storage, personal



 

 
• Warehousing



 

 
• Wholesalers




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.272  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the
“L-I” Limited Industrial District:



      (1)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



      (2)   Personal service, limited to 25% of the structure;



      (3)   Professional service, limited to 25% of the structure;



      (4)   Retail sales, limited to 25% of the structure; and



      (5)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



   (B)   The total occupation of the principal structure by an
accessory use shall be no greater than 25% of the gross floor area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.273  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“L-I” Limited Industrial District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Use
 
Non-Residential Uses




• None
 
• Essential services
 
• Animal hospital and veterinarian clinic



 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck repair sales



 

 
• Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck repair service



 

 
• Club or lodge



 

 
• Commercial entertainment; outdoor



 

 
• Day care center



 

 
• Gasoline service station



 

 
• Junk yard



 

 
• Kennel



 

 
• Manufacturing, light



 

 
• Multi tenant building; non-commercial



 

 
• Private or public parking area



 

 
• Storage, indoor; commercial



 

 
• Storage, outdoor; commercial



 

 
• Truck freight terminal




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.274  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “L-I” Limited Industrial District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
None


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
70%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
None


Minimum front yard setback
 
25 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
25 feet principal and accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
20 feet principal and accessory use


40 feet principal and accessory use if abutting a residential district


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


35 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.275  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.276  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.277  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“I” INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT




§ 156.290  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to provide lands for development by most
general types of industrial firms. The regulations are designed to permit
operations in a clear and quiet manner and to protect adjacent district uses
and industries within the district. Residential and commercial uses are
prohibited in this district to conserve and protect the supply of prime
industrial land for industrial use and to assist in preventing conflicts with
respect to industrial uses and uses of a less restrictive district.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.291  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “I” Industrial
District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• None
 
• None
 
• Adult business



 

 
• Agri-business



 

 
• Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck repair service



 

 
• Contractors offices and yards



 

 
• Educational institution; technical and vocational



 

 
• Greenhouse, commercial



 

 
• Manufacturing, heavy



 

 
• Manufacturing, light



 

 
• Outdoor theater



 

 
• Recycling center



 

 
• Research and development laboratory



 

 
• Warehousing




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.292  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the
“I” Industrial District:



      (1)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use;



      (2)   Personal service, limited to 25% of the structure;



      (3)   Professional service, limited to 25% of the structure;



      (4)   Retail sales, limited to 25% of the structure; and



      (5)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



   (B)   The total occupation of the principal structure by an
accessory use shall be no greater than 25% of the gross floor area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.293  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“I” Industrial District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses




• None
 
• Essential services
 
• Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck repair sales



 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Automobile dismantling and impound yard



 

 
• Commercial entertainment; outdoor



 

 
• Concrete, asphalt mixing plants and foundry



 

 
• Day care center



 

 
• Multi-tenant building; non-commercial



 

 
• Private or public parking area



 

 
• Sanitary landfill



 

 
• Storage, indoor; commercial



 

 
• Storage, outdoor; commercial



 

 
• Truck freight terminal



 

 
• Wholesaler




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.294  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “I” Industrial District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
None


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
70%


Minimum lot width at building line
 
None


Minimum front yard setback
 
25 feet


Minimum side yard setback
 
25 feet principal and accessory use


Minimum rear yard setback
 
20 feet principal and accessory use


40 feet principal and accessory use if abutting a residential district


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


35 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.295  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.296  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.297  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




“FP” FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT




§ 156.310  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this district is to control the development of the
floodplain areas of the town that could result in, or contribute to, the
potential loss of life and/or property, create health and safety hazards and
lead to extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief if
left unregulated.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.311  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “FP” Floodplain
District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• None
 
• None
 
• Agriculture



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.312  ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “FP”
Floodplain District:



   (A)   Buildings or structures incidental to a permitted use; and



   (B)   Signs, pursuant to §§ 156.400 through 156.411 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.313  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception uses in the
“FP” Floodplain District:



 

Residential Uses
 
Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Non-Residential Uses


• None
 
• Essential services
 
• Commercial entertainment; outdoor



 
• Parks or playgrounds
 
• Private or public parking area



 
• Public buildings and services
 
• Recreational facility; outdoor



 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.314  LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within
the “FP” Floodplain District:



 



Minimum lot area
 
None


Maximum impervious surface coverage
 
As required by the Department of Natural Resources


Minimum lot width at building line
 
None


Minimum front yard setback
 
None


Minimum side yard setback
 
None


Minimum rear yard setback
 
None


Maximum building height
 
35 feet principal use


15 feet accessory use




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.315  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.380
through 156.385 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.316  SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.317  LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in §§ 156.465
through 156.476 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT




§ 156.330  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to permit more flexibility
in a development through land use controls that:



      (1)   Foster good environment design without violating the
constitutional requirements of uniform classification and adequate standards
that permit planned residential developments in accordance with the
comprehensive development plan of the town;



      (2)   Permit a variety of housing types including
single-family detached, two-family, condominiums and multi-family dwellings,
and other integrated land uses in imaginative physical and aesthetic
relationship to one another;



      (3)   Permits the grouping and preservation of open space,
school sites, recreation areas and lands for other public, semi-public (i.e.,
churches) and private purposes;



      (4)   Permit the development of an area rather than individual
lot development; and



      (5)   Serves as an incentive for the development of passive
energy designs for conservation purposes.



   (B)   No particular development shall necessarily include all the
requirements set forth above.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.331  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The general requirements for planned unit developments are as follows.



   (A)   The tract proposed shall consist of one or more contiguous
parcels of land comprising an area of four acres or more in size, unless the
tract is bounded on all sides by public right-of-way, public lands,
watercourses or less restrictive use districts or is adjacent to another
planned unit development, in which case it may be smaller than four acres if
approved by the Plan Commission.



   (B)   The primary use of the tract shall be residential, and may
include single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings and the usual
accessory uses such as garages, storage space and community activities.



   (C)   The tract may contain commercial and professional and personal
service uses as an integral part of a residential development; but such uses
shall be planned and gauged primarily for the service and convenience of
residents of the planned development, and shall be authorized only to the
extent that such uses are not available to the residents within a reasonable
proximity.



   (D)   Planned unit developments shall be designed to create
environments of stable and desirable character; they must provide provisions
for recreation space adequate to meet the needs of the anticipated population
or as designated in the comprehensive development plan.



   (E)   The tract must be served directly by streets of appropriate
size, function and capacity. Internal street systems shall meet the minimum
standards of the town.



   (F)   Street right-of-way and pavement widths, if approved by the
Plan Commission, may be reduced; however, every dwelling unit and all other
uses shall have access to a community street, court, walkway or other area
dedicated to common use.



   (G)   Minimum lot sizes, minimum setbacks, maximum lot coverage and
minimum lot widths shall be negotiated with and approved by the Plan
Commission.



   (H)   No principal building height shall exceed 35 feet. No
accessory building shall exceed 15 feet.



   (I)   All buildings shall be served by an adequate public sewer
system, water supply and other utilities. Where practical, all utilities
shall be located underground.



   (J)   All parking lots, open spaces and other areas in common
ownership shall be maintained properly by the developer, management or
homeowners association.



   (K)   Provisions for open space, compensating for the reduced lots
sizes, setbacks and the like shall be made by the developer as required below.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.332  OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Designation of open space. No less than 20% of the land
developed in any planned unit development shall be reserved as common open
space for the residents or users of the area being developed. The open space
shall be located as required in division (C) below. All required open space
shall be readily accessible and usable by residents living within the
approved development.



   (B)   Types of permitted open space.



      (1)   Common open space may either passive or active in nature
and shall fully complement the proposed development. Such space shall take
the form of parks, playgrounds, landscaped green space, nature walks or
natural areas.



      (2)   Land donated for any public purpose, which is accepted
by the town, may be credited towards the open space requirement at the
discretion of the Plan Commission.



      (3)   Where a planned unit development is to be developed in
phases, a portion of the required open space shall be provided in each phase.
Maintenance of the open space shall be provided for in the planned unit
development’s restrictive covenants recorded as part of the project.



      (4)   Common open space shall be either adjacent to, or
accessible by, all properties within the planned unit development.
Furthermore, open space shall be situated in such a way that it may be linked
up with other open spaces adjacent to the proposed planned unit development.



      (5)   Private required yards on individual lots shall not
count towards the open space requirements of this section.



   (C)   Disposition of common open space. The required amount of
common open space land reserved in a planned unit development shall be held
in corporate ownership by homeowners or the homeowners association of the
project area for the use of each owner who buys property within the
development or under exceptional circumstances be dedicated to the town,
following consent and approval by the Plan Commission, and retained as common
open space for public parks, recreation and related public uses. All land
dedicated to the town must meet the Plan Commission’s requirements as to
type, size, shape and location. Public utility and similar easements and
rights-of-way are not acceptable for common open space dedication to the
town, unless such land or right-of-way is usable as a trail or other for
other similar purposes and approved by the Plan Commission. A homeowners
association (HOA) shall be established and in place prior to the development
of any land within a planned unit development with the open space(s) under
their control being denoted on the record plat and identified as
“non-buildable open space” other than for HOA approved uses.



   (D)   Maintenance of open space.



      (1)   Homeowners or a homeowners association shall be
responsible for maintenance of open space and other required amenities within
the proposed PUD unless it is dedicated to and accepted by the town. A
homeowner’s association shall be established and the bylaws and articles of
incorporation shall be recorded at the time of approval of the final plat,
prior to issuance of a zoning certificate or approval of a final plat.



      (2)   The Plan Commission may require a maintenance bond be
provided or an escrow account established by the developer for maintenance
and upkeep of all common areas until such time as 75% of the lots in the
planned unit development have been sold.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.333  PROCEDURE.



   The developer shall comply with the following procedure for the
submission and approval of a planned unit development.



   (A)   Proposed development plan.



      (1)   Submission of proposed development plan.



         (a)   For the purposes of accomplishing the objectives
of this subchapter, the owner or owners of any tract of land shall submit a
proposed development plan for the use and development of the land to the Plan
Commission for review and public hearing.



         (b)   The applicant shall submit six copies of the
proposed development plan. As a minimum, the proposed development plan shall
contain the following information:



            1.   Access from public streets and internal site
circulation;



            2.   General locations of proposed land uses and
open spaces;



            3.   Existing site topography;



            4.   Typical building elevation(s) depicting the
size and general character of proposed buildings;



            5.   Other project amenities;



            6.   A submittal letter describing the proposed
project including:



               a.   Existing site land use and zoning;



               b.   Proposed land use and requested zone
changes; and



               c.   Overall density of the project in terms
of dwelling units per acre and/or gross floor area of non-residential
buildings.



            7.   Other descriptive data to further explain the
project.



      (2)   Hearing.



         (a)   Within a reasonable time after submission of the
proposed development plan, the Plan Commission shall set a date for a public
hearing and give 15 days’ notice.



            1.   If the Plan Commission approves, or approves
with modifications, the development plan after public hearing, the Plan
Commission shall affix its seal on the plans and provide the owner with a
copy.



            2.   If the Plan Commission disapproves the
proposed development plan after public hearing, the reasons for such
disapproval shall be recorded in the minutes and the owner provided with a
copy.



         (b)   Approval of the proposed development plan for a
planned unit development shall not constitute town approval of the future
preliminary plat or final plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of
approval of the concepts and details of the proposed development plan as
stated in the application for approval of the planned unit development, and
as a specific guide to the preparation of the preliminary and final plats
which are required as part of the application for approval of the planned
unit development plan. Further, it indicates approval of the details in the
application and a commitment by the applicant to such details.



      (3)   Effective time of approval. Approval of the proposed
development plan by the Plan Commission shall be effective for a period of 12
months. Within this period of time, the owner shall file for preliminary plat
approval or the development plan shall become null and void.



   (B)   Preliminary plat. The owner or applicant shall submit a
preliminary plat to the Plan Commission in conformance with the procedures
set forth in the subdivision regulations and below.



      (1)   Submission of preliminary plat.



         (a)   The preliminary plat shall conform to the
previously approved development plan.



         (b)   The applicant shall submit six copies of the
preliminary plat and complete application.



         (c)   All regulations for preliminary plat submissions
as identified below shall be adhered to, except those regulations concerning
lot size, setbacks, lot coverage, lot widths, building heights, street widths
and rights-of-way which may be modified by the Plan Commission.



            1.   The preliminary plat shall provide following
information:



               a.   Location map (which may be prepared by
indicating the data by notations on available maps) showing:



                  i.   Project name and location;



                  ii.   Any thoroughfares related to the
planned development;



                  iii.   Existing elementary and high
schools, parks and playgrounds, available for serving the planned development
and other community facilities; and



                  iv.   Title, scale, north point and
date.



               b.   A preliminary plat showing:



                  i.   Proposed name of the subdivision
or development;



                  ii.   Names and addresses of the
owner, subdivider, land planning consultant, engineer or surveyor, who
prepared the plan;



                  iii.   Adjacent property owners,
existing land uses and existing zoning within 200 feet of the subject
property;



                  iv.   Streets and rights-of-way, on
and adjoining the site of the proposed subdivision or development, showing
the names (which shall not duplicate other names of streets in the community,
unless extensions of such streets) and including roadway widths, approximate
gradients, types and widths of pavement, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks and
other pertinent data;



                  v.   Easements including locations,
widths and purposes;



                  vi.   Statement concerning the
location and approximate size or capacity of utilities to be installed;



                  vii.   Layout of lots showing
dimensions and numbered consecutively throughout the entire development;



                  viii.   Parcels of land and square
footage of areas proposed to be declared or reserved for schools, parks,
common open spaces, playgrounds or other public, semi-public or community
purposes;



                  ix.   The areas of the subdivision or
development to be used for each type of land use including residential
(number of units, size and density), commercial, office, industrial or other
activities indicating the total square footage of each use;



                  x.   Contours at vertical intervals of
two feet if the general slope of the site is less than 10% and at vertical
intervals of five feet if the general slop is greater than 10%;



                  xi.   Tract boundary lines showing
dimensions, bearings, angles and references to section, township and range
lines or corners;



                  xii.   Building setback lines and
building orientation;



                  xiii.   A signage plan identifying the
sizes and locations of all signage;



                  xiv.   Landscaping and existing
vegetation, including planned buffer areas between use groups;



                  xv.   A traffic impact study, if
determined necessary by the town;



                  xvi.   A document describing the
proposed phasing program for the project for all dwelling units, commercial
or office structures, industrial, recreational and other common facilities,
landscaping and other open space improvements;



                  xvii.   Legend and notes;



                  xviii.   Other features or conditions
which would affect the subdivision or development either favorably or
adversely; and



                  xix.   Scale, north point and date.



               c.   A description of the protective
covenants, homeowners association or private restrictions to be incorporated
in the plat of the subdivision or development, or become covenants in the
deeds for lots; and



               d.   The preliminary plat of the subdivision
or development shall be drawn to a scale of 50 feet to one inch, or 100 feet
to one inch; provided, however, that, if the resulting drawing would be over
36 inches in shortest dimension, a scale as recommended by the Commission may
be used.



            2.   The review process may require the
dissemination of the necessary drawings and information to the appropriate
town departments for their review and comments.



      (2)   Hearing.



         (a)   Within a reasonable time after submission of the
preliminary plat, the Plan Commission shall set a date for a public hearing
and give 15 days’ notice according to the requirements of I.C. 5-3.



            1.   If the Plan Commission approves, or approves
with modifications, the development plan after public hearing, the Plan
Commission shall affix its seal on the plans and forward the recommendation
to the Town Council for consideration.



            2.   If the Plan Commission disapproves the
proposed development plan after public hearing, the reasons for such
disapproval shall be recorded in the minutes and the owner provided with a
copy.



         (b)   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Plan
Commission and Town Council shall be effective for a period of 12 months.
Within this period of time, the owner shall file for final plat approval or
the preliminary plat shall become null and void.



   (C)   Final plat. The submission of a final plat for all or any
portion of the preliminary plat shall be in accordance with the procedures as
set forth for a final plat in the subdivision regulations and with the
requirements below.



      (1)   Submission of final plat. The applicant shall submit six
copies of the final plat and complete application.



         (a)   The final plat shall contain the following
information:



            1.   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and
angles, which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not
more than one foot in 20,000 feet;



            2.   Accurate distances and directions to the
nearest established street corners or official monuments. Reference corners
shall be accurately described on the plan;



            3.   Accurate locations of all existing and
recorded streets intersecting the boundaries of the tract;



            4.   Accurate metes and bounds description of the
boundary;



            5.   Source of title to the land to be subdivided
as shown by the books of the county’s Recorder;



            6.   Adjacent property owners, existing land uses
and existing zoning within 200 feet of the subject property;



            7.   Street names;



            8.   Complete curve notes for all curves included
in the plan;



            9.   Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet
and hundredths of feet, with angles to street, alley and lot lines;



            10.   Lot numbers and dimensions;



            11.   Accurate locations of easements for
utilities and any limitations on such easements;



            12.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be
dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or community use;



            13.   The areas of the subdivision or development
to be used for each type of land use including residential (number of units,
size and density), commercial, office, industrial or other activities
indicating the total square footage of each use;



            14.   Building setback lines, building orientation
and dimensions;



            15.   Site plans, floor plans, elevations and
cross-sections for representative buildings. Additional exterior detail
drawings, materials specifications and paint colors shall be required if
deemed essential to the further understanding of the intent or scope of the
final plat;



            16.   A signage plan identifying the sizes and
locations of all signage;



            17.   A detailed landscaping plan for all areas,
indicating all existing and proposed vegetation by species, size and caliper;
dimensions and materials, irrigation and special lighting fixtures;



            18.   Location, type, material and size of all
monuments and lot markers;



            19.   Plans and specifications for the
improvements required in this chapter;



            20.   Restrictions of all types which will run
with the land and become covenants in the deeds for lots;



            21.   Name of the subdivision or development;



            22.   A document describing the proposed phasing
program for the project for all dwelling units, commercial or office
structures, industrial, recreational and other common facilities, landscaping
and other open space improvements;



            23.   Name and address and owner and the
subdivider;



            24.   North point, scale and date;



            25.   Certification by a registered land surveyor;



            26.   Certification of dedication of streets and
other public property;



            27.   Certificate for approval by the Plan
Commission; and



            28.   Certificate for approval by the Board of
County Commissioners if the development lies wholly, or partly, beyond the
town limits.



         (b)   The original drawing of the final plat of the
subdivision shall be drawn to a scale of 50 feet to one inch; provided that,
if the resulting drawing would be over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a
scale of 100 feet to one inch may be used.



   (D)   Planned unit development standards for review. Using the
information submitted by the owner or applicant, the Plan Commission shall
review the application as to whether the petition meets the following
standards.



      (1)   The proposed development shall conform to the adopted
comprehensive plan, or represent a land use policy, which, in the Plan
Commissions’ opinion, is a logical and acceptable change in the adopted
comprehensive plan.



      (2)   The proposed development shall conform to the intent and
all regulations, requirements and standards of a planned unit development.



      (3)   The proposed development shall be adequately served by
public facilities and services such as, but not limited to, streets, police
and fire protection, school capacity, drainage course, water and sanitary
facilities, refuse disposal, and sidewalks; or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the proposed development shall be able to properly provide
such facilities and services.



      (4)   Common open space, other common properties and
facilities, individual properties and all other elements of a planned unit
development are so planned that they will achieve a unified open space and
recreation area system with open space and all other elements in appropriate
locations, suitably related to each other, the site and surrounding lands.



      (5)   The petitioner shall have made provision to assure that
public and common areas will be or have been irrevocably committed for that
purpose with notations of such commitment being denoted on the final plat.
Provisions shall be made for financing of improvements shown on the plan for
open space and other common areas, and that proper maintenance of such
improvements is assured.



      (6)   Traffic to, from and within the site will not be
hazardous or inconvenient to the project or to the surrounding neighborhood.
In applying this standard the Plan Commission shall consider, among other
things: convenient routes for pedestrian traffic; relationship of the
proposed project to main thoroughfares and street intersections; the
construction of any roadway improvements necessary to mitigate the impact of
the development; and the general character and intensity of the existing and
potential development of the neighborhood.



      (7)   The mix of housing unit types and densities, shall be
acceptable in terms of compatibility, issues of privacy and similar measures.



      (8)   Where applicable, the convenience type retail or
non-residential development within the project shall be appropriately located
within the planned unit development such that the vehicular traffic generated
by those uses does not affect the residential portions of the development.



      (9)   The Plan Commission shall determine, where applicable,
that noise, odor, light or other external effects which are connected with
the proposed uses, will not adversely affect adjacent and neighboring lands
and uses outside of the planned unit development.



      (10)   The proposed development shall create a minimum
disturbance to natural features and land forms.



      (11)   The property shall have adequate access to public
streets. The plan shall provide for logical extensions of public streets and
shall provide suitable street connections to adjacent parcels, where
applicable.



      (12)   Pedestrian circulation shall be provided within the
site, and shall interconnect all use areas, where applicable. The pedestrian
system shall provide for a logical extension of pedestrian ways outside the
site and to the edges of the site, where applicable.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.334  DESIGNATION BINDING SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST.



   Construction must commence in accordance with the approved final
development plan within 12 months from approval of the final plat. If
construction has not begun within the 12-month period, the PUD is voided and
the zoning reverts back to the previous zoning classification unless good
cause can be shown by the applicant and an extension of not more than 12
months is granted by the Plan Commission. If the project is not completed
within the time frame specified in the application, the applicant shall come
before the Board to identify the reasons for the delay(s).



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.335  MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED PLAN.



   (A)   Minor changes to an approved final plat may be approved by the
Building Commissioner if such changes are consistent with the purpose and
general character of the proposed development plan and do not change the
overall concept or intent of the development. The Building Commissioner shall
determine whether or not the minor changes fall within his or her
responsibility to approve the changes.



   (B)   The following modifications shall be considered a major
modification of the final plat and shall only be approved by the Plan
Commission:



      (1)   The extension or revision of the staged development
schedule;



      (2)   Increases in density of more than 10%;



      (3)   Reduction of common open space of more than 10%;



      (4)   An increase of more than 10% in the proportion of
housing types; or



      (5)   Major changes in infrastructure location including the
alignment of major streets.



   (C)   Major changes may be approved only by submission of a new
preliminary plat and supporting data, and following the preliminary plat
approval steps, holding of a new public hearing and subsequent amendment of
the final plat.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS




§ 156.350  VISION CLEARANCE.



   In order to provide clear unobstructed vision along public
right-of-way, the following requirements shall apply.



   (A)   Interior lots. No fence shall hereafter be erected within ten
feet of the front property line and/or the street right-of-way and no natural
plant material fences or hedges, exceeding 36 inches in height, shall be
permitted within this same area.



   (B)   Corner lots. No fence shall hereafter be erected within ten
feet of the intersection of the street right-of-way lines and no natural
plant material fence or other plantings exceeding 24 inches in height, shall
be permitted within this same area. These requirements shall not apply to
trees whose limbs have a minimum clearance of ten feet above the ground.







 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.351  TREES.



   It is the purpose of this section, to be referred to as the “North
Manchester Tree Ordinance”, to promote and protect the public health,
safety, aesthetics and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the
planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within
those portions of the town, commonly known as tree lawns, as well as street,
alley or other public rights-of-way. It is the intent of this chapter to
promote and encourage the planting, proper maintenance, restoration and
protection of desirable trees, shrubs and other plants on town property, tree
lawns and rights-of-way.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Building
Commissioner or such other individual or individuals appointed by the Plan
Commission to enforce the provisions of this section as is set forth in the
Tree Plan and Guidelines Manual developed for the town by the Tree Advisory
Commission. Permits shall be obtained from the Building Commissioner or as is
otherwise directed by the Plan Commission before trees, shrubs or other
plants located on tree lawns, streets, alleys or rights-of-way, are planted,
sprayed, treated, pruned, removed or otherwise disturbed. This limitation
shall not apply to any emergencies resulting from damaged trees or shrubs
when removal is necessary for the purpose of protecting the public health and
safety, nor shall it prohibit watering or similar basic care for said trees
or shrubs.



      (2)   The permits referred to above shall be considered
promptly upon proper application made to the Building Commissioner, and shall
be generally limited to applicants owning or occupying property adjacent to
the tree lawn or right-of-way where such tree, shrub or plant is located,
unless a public purpose is shown to the satisfaction of the Building
Commissioner.



      (3)   Said permits shall apply to utilities and all other
entities both public and private, digging, excavating, trenching, tunneling
and the like, in a manner and a location that might affect the health of
trees and shrubs covered by this chapter and shall further include any
activity that would include attaching any rope, wire, nail, sign or other
human-made object to a tree or shrub. Said permits shall not include
temporary/seasonal displays or lights that are not intended to remain for
more than 45 days and which do not cause damage or leave any object affixed
to the tree or shrub.



      (4)   Said permits may be issued or withheld so as to abate or
discourage any activity that may be detrimental to said trees or shrubs.



      (5)   Issuance of said permits may be subject to specific
conditions and terms that are deemed to be appropriate by the Building
Commissioner, including, but not limited to, requirements reasonably intended
to foster prudent care of the overall appearance of the tree lawn as well as
specific trees and shrubs within the tree lawn and rights-of-way, and each
applicant shall be required to review and read all appropriate reference and
educational materials designated by the Building Commissioner, such as the
Tree Plan and Guidelines Manual, originally prepared by the town’s Tree
Advisory Commission.



   (B)   Permits. The Building Commissioner may issue maintenance
permits allowing certain individuals or entities to maintain specific trees
and shrubs for specific areas, including several trees and shrubs in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the guidelines then in use
by the Building Commissioner and/or Tree Advisory Commission. Such permits
may be revoked or amended as is deemed necessary and appropriate by the
Building Commissioner.



   (C)   Planting and maintenance plan.



      (1)   All new development located adjacent to any tree lawn or
street right-of-way and any new parking areas, other than for
single-family-residential uses (but including any and all subdivisions),
shall submit with any improvement location permit or other similar
application, a plan or proposal incorporating the planting and maintenance of
appropriate trees and shrubs as a part of said development to be approved by
the Building Commissioner in accordance with the guidelines then in use by
the town. Such guidelines shall consider, among other concerns, provisions
for an appropriate percentage of the area included in said application to
become covered by tree canopies as a result of specific plantings required by
this chapter and related guidelines.



      (2)   All parking areas intended for the use of more than five
vehicles shall be required to provide for one or more planters within said
parking areas for trees and/or shrubs.



   (D)   Tree buffer. Where a permit is being sought for a property
that has a zoning classification that is more intense than adjoining property
(i.e., R-3 next to a R-2, or I-1 next to B-2), a planted buffer of trees,
shrubs or other appropriate plant material may be required to be placed
between said uses as a condition of issuance of a building or occupancy
permit.



   (E)   Conformance with site plan. When site plans are required by
any part of this chapter or other requirements of the town, said plans shall
specifically locate and identify the type of tree or shrub to be planted, and
the applicant or its successor in interest shall be required to provide such
planting and shall properly maintain said planting for a minimum period of
three years.



   (F)   Violation. Failure to plant and maintain trees or shrubs in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and within proper husbandry
guidelines shall be considered a violation of the terms of this chapter, and
the Building Commissioner and other appropriate entities of the town shall be
entitled to revoke any such permit issued, or to pursue such breach as a
violation of this chapter as is provided herein.



   (G)   Appeal. Any issues or questions regarding the interpretation
or application of the provisions of this section shall be referred to the
Board of Zoning Appeals for determination.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.352  LOT OF RECORD.



   A single-family dwelling may be located on any lot in any district in
which single-family dwellings are permitted if the lot was a single parcel in
single ownership or a single parcel separately described or included in a
deed or plat which was of record in the office of the county’s Recorder at
the time of passage of this chapter, even though the lot does not have the
minimum lot width, depth or area specified for its district as based on the
following regulations.



   (A)   The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be
proportionally applied by the Building Commissioner as based on the
proportion that the non-conforming lot is smaller than the minimum lot size
required in the district that the lot is located. Fractional numbers shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole number.







 



   (B)   In no case shall the side or rear yard be modified by more
than 50% of the minimum yard requirement for the district in which the lot of
record is located without requesting a variance before the Board of Zoning
Appeals pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   The front yard setback shall not be altered in order to keep
the continuity of the front yard setback of surrounding properties.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.353  PARTIAL USE OF ALLEY FOR YARD.



   (A)   One-half of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may be
included in the required rear yard if said alley is unimproved.



   (B)   In the case of non-residential uses, the alley portion shall
not be used for loading and unloading berths.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.354  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.



   Requirements for accessory buildings and uses shall be as follows.



   (A)   Accessory buildings and uses are allowed in all districts, but
not before the erection of the principal building.



   (B)   No detached accessory building shall be located closer to a
side or rear lot line than as identified in the district the accessory
building or use is located.



   (C)   Accessory uses such as public utility installations, walks,
driveways, curbs, retaining walls, mailboxes, fences, lamp posts, bird baths
and structures of a like nature are permitted in any required yard, and
without the issuance of any permit.



   (D)   The total area of all accessory buildings or uses, except
swimming pools, shall not exceed 750 square feet or 40% of the ground floor
gross floor area of the principal use or structure, whichever is larger. In
no case, however, shall the combined area of all accessory uses and permitted
uses on a lot exceed the maximum impervious surface coverage as established
in each district.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.355  BUILDING LINES.



   (A)   (1)   Where 25% or more of the lots in a block frontage are
occupied by buildings, the average setback of such buildings determines the
location of the building for the block frontage.



      (2)   However, the front yard setback dimension need not
exceed 40 feet in any case.



   (B)   Building lines established in a recorded subdivision shall
establish the setback of buildings in such subdivisions, except when such
building lines may be less restrictive than provided in this chapter.



   (C)   On any lot which has frontage on more than one street, the
front building line is required on each street.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.356  TAPERED YARD FORMULA.



   (A)   Where an interior lot fronts on a side street and is adjacent
to the rear of a corner lot (even if the two lots are separated by an alley),
an accessory building located on the rear lot line of the corner lot shall
set back from the side street as far as the dwelling on the interior lot.



   (B)   For each foot that such accessory building is placed from the
rear lot line toward the front lot line of the corner lot, the accessory
building may be set four inches closer to the front lot line along the side
street, but in no case closer than the building setback line along the side
street required by this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.357  SIDE YARDS.



   (A)   Where 60% or more of the lots in a block frontage are occupied
by buildings which provide side yards of less than the minimum required by
this chapter, this average side yard of such buildings may determine the
required side yard provided.



   (B)   (1)   However, no side yard shall be reduced to less than
three feet.



      (2)   Where an existing building is deficient in side yards,
any addition to such an existing building may maintain the existing side
yards.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.358  MOBILE HOME DWELLING.



   Mobile home dwellings shall not be permitted on any lot in any of the
residential districts except as permitted in mobile home parks or in mobile
home subdivisions as identified in each district.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.359  SINGLE-FAMILY CONVERSIONS.



   Single-family dwellings may be converted to multi-family dwellings only
in the RMF-L and RMF-H Zone Districts and must meet the lot size and density
requirements of the respective district.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.360  MODIFICATION OF STRUCTURE HEIGHT.



   (A)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
stacks, tanks, water towers, distribution poles and lines, transmission
towers or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not
prohibited by other applicable laws or ordinances.



   (B)   However, no structure may erected in excess of 35 feet in
height without the review and written approval of the town’s Fire
Department to ensure that there is adequate fire equipment available to the
town for the purposes of fire safety.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.361  WASTE MATERIALS.



   (A)   Trash and waste materials shall be stored in metal or other
approved containers in accordance with town codes and regulations as they are
adopted or modified from time to time.



   (B)   In all commercial districts, trash and waste storage
containers that are open to public view or the view of adjacent properties,
shall be screened from such view, in accordance with § 156.473 of this
chapter.



   (C)   All trash containers or receptacles in all multi-family,
commercial, office, office/industrial and industrial districts shall conform
to the following requirement:



      (1)   Have such areas enclosed or screened on at least three
sides by an evergreen hedge, solid wall or fence adequate in height to screen
the containers if such area is not within an enclosed building or structure.
Such enclosure shall be of the same type materials or be painted the same
color as the principal building.



      (2)   The enclosure or screening shall be at least six feet in
height. Screening with plant materials shall be attained within five years of
planting.



      (3)   Adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas
for the collection of trash and/or garbage shall be required and shall be of
concrete material.



      (4)   Trash containers shall not be located in the front yard
building setback and shall conform to side and rear yard pavement setbacks of
the appropriate district.



      (5)   A six inch raised curb shall be located one foot from
the interior walls of the enclosure to prevent the dumpster or refuse
container from damaging the walls of the enclosure.



      (6)   All trash container areas shall be enclosed on the
fourth side with a 100% opacity gate.







 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.362  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   Home occupations shall be regulated as accessory uses, pursuant to the
specific districts. A home occupation shall comply with the following
standards.



   (A)   The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the dwelling, and not more than 25% of the dwelling unit
floor area shall be devoted to the home occupation.



   (B)   The home occupation shall only occur within the principal
dwelling.



   (C)   Only members of the immediate family residing at the premises
shall engage in such occupation.



   (D)   External indication of a home occupation shall be limited to
one non-illuminated sign, not more than two square feet, attached against the
structure.



   (E)   Any need for parking generated by conduct of the home
occupation shall be met in the driveway.



   (F)   No equipment or process shall be used which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to
normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single- family
residence.



   (G)   The external appearance of the structure shall remain
residential in character.



   (H)   No commodity shall be sold upon the premises; except that,
which is prepared or maintained on the premises. No display of the products
shall be visible from the street.



   (I)   There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the
home occupation use.



   (J)   Any home occupation displaying a sign shall also be subject to
this code of ordinances.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.363  FENCES AND WALLS.



   Fences and walls are permitted in all districts, subject to the
following conditions.



   (A)   Location.



      (1)   No fence or wall shall be located in the front yard
within ten feet of any public right-of-way.



      (2)   Fences that are not more than 40% opaque may be
permitted in the front yard.



      (3)   No fence or wall shall be closer than three feet to any
right-of-way line in a rear or side yard unless approved by the Building
Commissioner.



   (B)   Height.



      (1)   Fences and walls shall not exceed four feet in height
for residential uses unless such fence or wall is used for screening purposes
in which case its height shall not exceed six feet. For the purposes of these
zoning regulations, any fence which achieves opacity of greater than 50%
shall be considered erected for screening purposes.



      (2)   Fences or walls shall not exceed eight feet in height
for non-residential uses.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   With the exception of fences used for agricultural uses
containing livestock, fences shall not contain an electric charge.



      (2)   Barbed wire shall only be permitted in an Industrial
District and only on the top of a perimeter fence.



      (3)   Materials used for fences or walls shall be of weather
resistant materials or treated so that they are weather resistant.



      (4)   Except in the case of dual-faced fences or walls, all
supporting posts must be located on the side facing the interior of the
property upon which the posts are located and may exceed the fence or wall
height by not more than six inches.



   (D)   Maintenance. Both sides of all fences or walls and the
surrounding property, where reasonably accessible, shall be maintained to
prevent unsightly and unsafe conditions.



   (E)   Vision clearance requirements. No fence or wall shall violate
the vision clearance requirements found in § 156.350 of this chapter.



   (F)   Zoning certificate.



      (1)   An improvement location permit is required for the
erection or installation of all fences and walls.



      (2)   Any deviation from these fence and wall regulations
shall require the review and approval by the town.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.364  SATELLITE DISHES.



   Satellite dishes, permitted as an accessory use, are subject to the
following conditions.



   (A)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Digital satellite dishes (DSS) of three feet or less, at
its widest point, shall be permitted to be placed on any dwelling or building
in any district. However, the satellite dish shall be placed in the most
inconspicuous place that permits reception on the property.



      (2)   These regulations shall not apply to wireless
telecommunication facilities or personal communication systems (PCS).



   (B)   Location.



      (1)   Satellite dishes may be erected or installed on the
ground of any property; provided that, in the commercial and industrial
districts, roof mounting shall also be permitted.



      (2)   Ground-mounted satellite dishes shall be set back a
minimum equal to the measurement of its height. However, in no case, shall
the ground-mounted satellite dish be located closer than five feet to the
property line.



      (3)   Satellite dishes shall be prohibited in the front and
side yards of the property on which the dish is located.



   (C)   Height and size.



      (1)   The maximum height of any ground-mounted satellite dish
shall not exceed 15 feet above the finished grade of the dish.



      (2)   The maximum height of any roof mounted satellite dish
shall not exceed the roof height it is mounted on by more than four feet.



      (3)   The maximum size, at the widest point of the dish, shall
not exceed eight feet.



   (D)   Landscaping and maintenance.



      (1)   The satellite dish apparatus, where mounted to the
ground, shall be screened with shrubbery and/or landscaped if viewed from the
public right-of-way.



      (2)   The satellite dish apparatus, landscaping and shrubbery
shall be properly maintained to prevent both unsightly and unsafe conditions.



   (E)   Historic or architectural standards compliance. When a
satellite dish is proposed to be located on a building or structure that is
listed on a federal, state or local historic register, or is in an historic
district established by the town, the dish shall be subject to review by the
town to ensure that architectural and design standards are maintained.



   (F)   Color and appearance standards.



      (1)   All satellite dishes shall be painted a non-contrasting
gray or similar color minimizing their visibility, unless otherwise required
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and/or by historical or architectural standards imposed
under division (E) above.



      (2)   No advertising, logo or corporate symbols other than
that of the dish manufacturer shall be permitted on the dish.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.365  BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   Bed and breakfast establishments shall only be located within
and accessory to an owner occupied single-family dwelling.



   (B)   Bed and breakfast establishments shall comply with all local,
county and state fire and health regulations.



   (C)   The operation of a bed and breakfast establishment shall not
be considered or classified as a home occupation.



   (D)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall include no more than
four guestrooms for rent.



   (E)   Kitchen or kitchenettes shall not be available in guest rooms
for in room food preparation.



   (F)   Accommodations shall not be provided to a particular guest for
more than 14 consecutive days.



   (G)   No ancillary commercial use shall be operated in connection
with an approved bed and breakfast establishment.



   (H)   All applicable off-street parking requirements shall be met as
identified in §§ 156.380 through 156.385 of this chapter.



   (I)   Exterior signage shall be limited to a sign mounted flat on
the wall of the bed and breakfast establishment, shall be less than two
square feet and shall be non-illuminated.



   (J)   The exterior appearance of the bed and breakfast establishment
shall maintain a residential character.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.366  DRIVE THROUGH FACILITIES.



   (A)   Location. Drive through facilities shall not be located in the
front of the principal building.



   (B)   Site design.



      (1)   A drive through facility shall not be provided a
separate curb cut.



      (2)   Maneuvering space for drive through facilities shall be
provided for to the side and rear of the principal building.



      (3)   The design of maneuvering and stacking aisles for the
drive through shall not interfere with circulation or visibility for traffic
either on or off site.



      (4)   A minimum of five stacking spaces shall be provided for
each drive through window or bay.



      (5)   Where abutting residential districts, drive through
facilities shall be fully screened from view.



      (6)   A drive through facility shall not conflict with
pedestrian circulation on site.







 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.367  PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the
use and location of portable storage units (e.g., PODS). These types of units
are used for moving, temporary storage during construction and other purposes
as listed below.



   (B)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT shall mean any enclosed unit of durable construction or
material, not to exceed eight feet in width by eight feet in height by 16
feet long, designed for permanent or temporary storage, which can be
transported by vehicle and left on site.



   (C)   General regulations. Portable storage units may be permitted
as a temporary use in any zoning district as follows.



      (1)   Location and timeframe.



         (a)   Temporary use for construction sites. Portable
storage units are to be removed within seven days after use of the unit is no
longer necessary or when construction is complete, whichever is sooner.



         (b)   Moving and relocating.



            1.   When the occupant of a property is moving or
relocating, a portable storage unit shall be located on a paved surface on
the property for a period of not more than seven days or for a period of 14
total days in any 365-day period.



            2.   Portable storage units shall not be located
any closer to an adjacent parcel than the required minimum side or rear yard
setback for accessory uses in the district the unit is located.



         (c)   Other temporary uses.



            1.   When necessary to facilitate general
temporary uses not described above, a portable storage unit shall be located
on a paved surface on the property for a period of not more than seven days
or for a period of 14 total days in any 365-day period.



            2.   Portable storage units shall not be located
any closer to an adjacent parcel than the required minimum side or rear yard
setback for accessory uses in the district that the unit is located.



      (2)   Prohibitions.



         (a)   No portable storage unit shall be used for human
or animal occupation.



         (b)   Portable storage units larger than those
identified in division (B) above shall be prohibited in the town.



         (c)   Only one portable storage unit shall be permitted
on any property at any time.



      (3)   Public nuisance. The placement of any portable storage
unit shall be located in such a manner on any property as not to create a
public nuisance.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.368  SECURITY AND WALL-MOUNTED LIGHTING.



   All lighting used for security purposes and/or is attached to the
facade of a building or structure shall be fully shielded so that the bulb or
glare from the bulb is visible from the property line. Lighting shall be
directed downward against the building.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.369  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The following provisions shall be made by the owner(s) and/or
operator(s) of industrial facilities which may use, create, discharge or
store various materials or components which may be hazardous to the citizens
of the town as well as public environmental resources. Permits, licenses and
all other approvals and inspection requirements of state and federal
agencies, boards and commissions shall supersede the provisions of this
chapter only if they are more restrictive than the provisions contained
herein.



   (A)   Smoke. For all industrial uses the emission of more than 70
smoke units per hour per stack and emissions in excess of Ringelmann No. 2
are prohibited; except that, for one hour during any 24-hour period this rate
may be increased up to 80 smoke units per hour per stack up to and including
Ringelmann No. 3 for the purposes of process purging, soot blowing and fire
cleaning.



   (B)   Particulate matter. The rate of emission of particulate matter
from an individual process within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed
a figure of 0.06 pounds per 1,000 pounds of effluent gas and not more than
50% by weight of particles larger than 44 microns (325 mesh) shall be allowed.



   (C)   Odor. Any activity or operation which releases odors to the
atmosphere shall be so controlled as to ensure that it will produce no public
nuisance or hazard at or beyond the nearest Residence District boundary line.



   (D)   Poisonous fumes and gases. The emission of any gas or fume
across lot lines in such concentrations as to be detrimental to our endanger
public health, safety, comfort and welfare or shall cause injury or damage to
property or business is prohibited.



   (E)   Glare and heat. No industrial operation, activity or structure
shall cause heat or glare in such a manner as to be a public nuisance at or
beyond any residence/business district boundary.



   (F)   Vibration. Any use creating intense earth-shaking vibrations
shall be set back from a residence district boundary at least 250 feet, or at
least 150 feet from a business district boundary.



   (G)   Noise. At no point 125 feet from the boundary of an L-I or I
District shall the sound pressure level of any operation of plant (other than
background noises produced by sources not under the control of this chapter)
exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below.



 


Maximum Permitted Sound Level Table




Octave Band Frequency (Cycles per Second)

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) Measured 125 feet from the L-I
District Adjoining Residential District Boundaries

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) Measured 125 feet from the I
District Adjoining Residential District Boundaries






0 to 75

 

75

 

80




75 to 150

 

70

 

75




150 to 300

 

65

 

70




300 to 600

 

59

 

64




600 to 1,200

 

53

 

58




1,200 to 2,400

 

48

 

53




2,400 to 4,800

 

44

 

49




Above 4,800

 

41

 

46





 



   (H)   Fire hazards. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted
provided the said materials shall be stored, utilized or manufactured in such
a manner and protected by such means as approved by the state’s Fire
Marshal and the state’s Administrative Building Council.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.370  DOWNTOWN FACADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.



   (A)   Title. This section and all ordinances supplemental or
amendatory hereto, shall be known as the "Downtown Facade Improvement
Program."



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to give downtown
building owners incentive to improve their facades in a way that enhances the
look of the downtown and maintains reasonable historic consistency in design.



   (C)   Area covered. All buildings along Main Street between Market
Street to the West and Mill Street to the East. All buildings on Walnut
Street between Main Street to the South and Second Street to the North.



   (D)   Funding.



      (1)   Funding for this program will be on a year by year
basis, as funds are available. There is no guarantee of funding each and
every year.



      (2)   Funding of projects will be on a first come first served
basis.



      (3)   Funding will be based on a 20% contribution by the
building owner and 80% by the town.



      (4)   If a project is not funded, because of limited funds, a
new application will need to be submitted in future years for consideration.



   (E)   Eligibility.



      (1)   Only buildings in the area covered will be eligible.



      (2)   Only properties in which the property taxes of those
applying for funding are current at the time of application and throughout
all phases, including payment, of the project will be eligible.



      (3)   Only those owners that submit complete and
comprehensible applications will be eligible,



   (F)   Design.



      (1)   Designated architect - The town shall designate the
architect to design or approve the design of the project.



      (2)   The costs of architect services, as long as the owner
uses the designated architect, will be covered 100% by program funds.



      (3)   Owner must follow designated architect's design for any
funding of the project to occur.



   (G)   Oversight. Applications will be accepted and reviewed by the
Town Manager. The Town Manager will also review the final request for funding
upon completion of the project. The Town Manager will have inspected the
completed project and certified that the project is eligible according to
division (F)(3).



   (H)   Forms.



      (1)   Application. Applications will be available in a form
created and maintained by the Clerk Treasurer.



      (2)   Request for payment. A request for payment form will be
available in a form created and maintained by the Clerk Treasurer.



   (I)   Payment. Payment will occur when the owner submits a request
for payment. The request for payment will not be processed or approved until
the project is complete.



   (J)   Contractor. The owner is responsible for selecting, paying,
and overseeing the contractor. This section does not create a relationship
between the town and owner or contractor. This section does not guarantee
payment to the contractor.



   (K)   Final decision. This section is drafted to meet the intended
purpose, if any clarification is needed it will be done by the Town Manager.



(Ord. 9, 2012, passed 9-5-2012)



 




OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING




§ 156.380  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to:



   (A)   Establish minimum off-street parking requirements for
permitted uses and special exceptions;



   (B)   Reduce traffic problems and hazards by eliminating unnecessary
on-street parking and loading/unloading of vehicles;



   (C)   Set forth standards by which to improve circulation within
parking lots; and



   (D)   Ensure adequate access onto the public right-of-way.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.381  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Group use parking requirements. Groups of uses requiring
parking space may join in establishing private parking areas with a capacity
aggregating that required for each participating use, provided that said
aggregate parking areas shall be reasonably convenient to the various uses.
However, upon request by the applicants, the Building Commissioner may permit
a reduction of the total number of required spaces not to exceed 15% when
combining parking requirements for groups of uses if the uses do not share
the same peak hour or the reduction in parking spaces does not impede the
future use of the building or structure.



   (B)   Off-street parking locations. Except as hereinafter provided,
all parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the structure or
use served. Required or additional off-street parking spaces, for any
permitted use or special exception, may be provided on a lot within 300 feet
of such use when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such parking areas
may be placed in any non-residential district. However, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may require rezoning to the same zone as the primary use for which
the parking is intended prior to its approval.



   (C)   Determination of spaces required for existing uses. Whenever a
building or use constructed or established prior to the effective date of
this chapter is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees,
number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise to create a need for
an increase of 10% or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such
spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever
a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this chapter is
enlarged to the extent of 25% or more in floor area or in the area used, such
building or use shall then comply with the parking requirements set forth
herein.



   (D)   Determination of spaces for new uses. For all uses established
or placed into operation after the effective date of this chapter, there
shall be constructed, provided, preserved and maintained the amount of
off-street parking space hereinafter set forth in the Table of Parking
Requirements.



   (E)   Off-street parking not required. Off-street parking areas are
not required for individual lots in the Central Business District; provided,
on-street parking and public parking areas are available within the district.



   (F)   Off-street parking in residential areas. Off-street parking in
residential areas shall only be on paved surfaces, approved by the town,
unless the vehicle is parked behind the front building line of the dwelling.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.382  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Location. Parking areas may occupy any portion of a lot;
provided that:



      (1)   In residential districts, open parking spaces or areas
may be located in any yard, except a front yard or the street-side of a
corner lot; and



      (2)   Garages and carports shall be subject to applicable side
yard requirements for accessory buildings and structures as identified in
each zoning district.



   (B)   Maneuvering. All parking areas shall be arranged so that
parking maneuvers shall be accomplished without entering a public
right-of-way, sidewalk or walkway within or adjoining the facility.



   (C)   Parking space dimensions. Minimum dimensions of parking areas
shall be determined according to current design standards for parking lots;
however, each space shall not be less than that identified in the table below:



 

Angle of Parking (Degrees)
 
Width
 
Depth
 
Aisle Width


45 degrees
 
9 feet
 
19 feet
 
12 feet


60 degrees
 
9 feet
 
20 feet
 
16 feet


90 degrees (perpendicular)
 
9 feet
 
18 feet
 
26 feet



 



   (D)   Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if parking areas
are used after 6:00 p.m., with such lighting of full cut-off design and
directed so as not to shine directly on adjacent properties.







 



   (E)   Screening.



      (1)   All parking areas intended to provide parking for more
than ten vehicles shall be effectively screened from adjacent residential
uses and rights-of-way in accordance with § 156.472(A) of this chapter. Such
screening shall be continuous, broken only for access drives and walkways.



      (2)   Such screen shall be established in a manner as to
effectively block the headlights of motor vehicles using the parking area.
The screening shall not violate the vision clearance requirements of §
156.350 of this chapter.



   (F)   Paving. All paved parking areas together with driveways,
aisles and the other circulation areas shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete or equivalent pavement material to provide a durable, dustless
surface in accordance with town design standards. Gravel may be considered an
appropriate pavement material in residential areas for access to the parking
area or driveway.



   (G)   Drainage. All parking areas intended to provide parking for
more than ten vehicles shall provide for proper drainage of surface water to
prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent properties and onto
sidewalks or to prevent pooling of water on the surface of the parking area.
Any parking area intended to provide parking for more than ten vehicles shall
obtain the approval of the Storm Water Board, to ensure that runoff and
drainage are adequately provided for.



   (H)   Interior landscaping. All parking areas intended to provide
parking for more than ten vehicles shall make appropriate provisions for
landscaping, tree islands or similar natural interior landscaping as
established in § 156.472(B) of this chapter.



   (I)   Wheel stops. Fencing, wheel stops, concrete curbs or other
suitable barriers shall be provided in the parking area in order to prevent
any part of a parked motor vehicle from extending beyond the parking area and
from destroying any screening, buffering, landscaping or other plant
materials.



   (J)   Visibility.



      (1)   Any parking area which uses a driveway leading to a
public street shall maintain an area of vision clearance at the intersection
of the driveway or curb cut and street right-of-way.



      (2)   An unobstructed vision clearance area within two
ten-foot triangles formed by the intersection of a driveway pavement edge and
street right-of-way shall be maintained at all times.



      (3)   No portion of a wall, fence or planting may exceed 36
inches above the pavement height within the vision clearance area.







 



   (K)   Marking. All paved parking areas shall mark all parking spaces
with paint lines or in some other manner approved by the town and shall be
maintained in a clearly visible condition.



   (L)   Maintenance. All parking areas shall be continually maintained
in satisfactory condition so as to be safe, attractive and free of any
debris, hazard, holes, nuisance or other unsafe condition.



   (M)   Stacking spaces for drive through businesses.



      (1)   Businesses utilizing drive through windows that offer
drive through facilities shall provide a minimum stacking space for four
vehicles for each drive through window or facility.



      (2)   Additional stacking space may be required based on the
number of vehicles utilizing the drive through at peak hour as determined by
the Building Commissioner.



      (3)   For the purposes of this chapter, one stacking space
shall be construed as a minimum of nine feet in width and 18 feet in length.



      (4)   Such stacking space shall begin at the point of business
transaction and shall accommodate four vehicles without obstruction to
through vehicular traffic or parked vehicle areas. The point of business
transaction shall include bank teller windows, fast food pick-up windows, a
car wash bay or the drive through automated teller machine.



   (N)   Parking of commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles, with or
without signage, which are over nine feet in width and 18 feet in length
shall not be stored in an off-street parking area. Such vehicles shall be
parked or stored in the required off-street loading space(s) when not in use
or during non- business hours.



   (O)   Parking for handicapped persons.



      (1)   Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall meet the
requirements of the Indiana Uniform Building Code and the Indiana Handicapped
Code.



      (2)   Each handicap space may be included in the computation
of spaces required by this subchapter. All handicap spaces shall be clearly
marked.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.383  UNITS OF MEASURE.



   In computing the minimum number of required parking spaces required by
this subchapter, the following shall apply.



   (A)   Where floor area is designated as the standard for determining
parking space requirements, floor area shall be the sum of the gross leasable
horizontal area of all floors of a non-residential building.



   (B)   A DWELLING UNIT shall mean one room, or a suite of two or more
rooms, designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping purposes
and having only one kitchen or kitchenette. In residential use areas, garages
or carports may be counted as a part of the required parking.



   (C)   A SEAT shall be the space intended for one individual; in
places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other seating
facilities, each 20 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one
seat.



   (D)   Employees shall be based on the maximum number of persons on
duty on the premises at any one time.



   (E)   When units of measurement result in the requirements of a
fractional space, any fraction shall require rounding up to the next whole
number.



   (F)   In the event that different classifications of use share a
facility, the total combined parking for all uses shall be required unless
the uses are not open at the same time; then, the larger of the parking
requirements shall apply.



   (G)   Changes of use of existing structures shall require conformity
to the parking provisions provided herein for the new use.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.384  TABLE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The minimum number of parking spaces shall be provided according to the
following table:



 


 
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required




Residential Uses


Bed and breakfast establishment
 
1 space for each guest room and 2 spaces for the occupant owner


Group home
 
1 space for every 2 group home beds


Mobile home park
 
2 spaces for each mobile home


Multi-family dwelling



   Up to 2 bedrooms

 
1-1/2 spaces for each dwelling unit



   3 or more bedrooms

 
2 spaces for each dwelling unit



   Visitor parking

 
In addition to the above, ½ a visitor parking space per unit unless on
street parking is available


Nursing home, assisted living facility or retirement home
 
2 spaces for each room


Recreational vehicle park
 
1 space for each 200 square feet of common building area


Single-family and two-family dwellings
 
2 spaces for each dwelling unit


Non-Residential Uses


Adult business
 
1 space for each 75 square feet of floor area


Agri-business
 
1 per 500 square feet of display and sales area


Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics
 
1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area


Auditorium
 
1 space for each 4 seats at maximum seating capacity


Automobile dismantling or impound yard
 
1 space for each acre of storage


Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck repair service
 
4 spaces for each service bay (service bays do not count as a parking space)


Automobile, motorcycle, RV, farm equipment and truck sales
 
1 space for each 500 square feet of display and sales lot area or service area


Bar or tavern
 
1 space for each 3 seats at maximum seating capacity or 1 per each 75 square
feet of floor area, whichever is greater


Building materials wholesale
 
1 space for each 400 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space for each 2,000
square feet of outdoor storage or outdoor display yard area


Car wash
 
2 for facility in addition to the required stacking spaces for each bay in §
156.382(M) of this chapter


Club or lodge
 
1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area


Commercial entertainment; indoor or outdoor
 
1 space for each 3 seats at maximum capacity or 1 space for each 100 feet of
floor area or outdoor entertainment area, whichever is greater


Contractor offices and yard
 
1 for every 100 square feet of office space, plus 1 for each vehicle operated
by the establishment, plus 1 for each 800 square feet of display and sales
area, plus 1 for each 800 square feet of storage area


Day care center
 
2 spaces for each classroom or child care room. In no case shall there be
less than 6 spaces. In addition, a minimum of 3 short-term parking shall be
provided for drop-off and pick up


Financial institution
 
1 space for each 300 square feet in addition to the required stacking spaces
for each bay in § 156.382(M)


Funeral home and mortuary
 
1 space for each 50 square feet of floor area or 1 space for every 3 seats at
maximum capacity, whichever is greater


Gasoline service station
 
1 space for each dispensing pump, plus 2 spaces for each service bay or work
area. Automotive filling stations with convenience retail uses shall also
provide 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area associated with the
retail use


Golf course
 
4 spaces for each regulation hole plus 1 space for each 400 square feet of
clubhouse gross floor area


Greenhouse, commercial
 
1 space for each 1,000 square feet of indoor and outdoor display and sales
area


Hospital
 
2-1/2 spaces for each bed


Hotel/motel
 
1 space for each sleeping room, plus 1 space for each 100 square feet of
meeting area and/or restaurant space or cocktail lounge


Manufacturing, heavy or light
 
1 space for every 1,000 square feet of floor area


Office



   Administrative, business or professional

 
1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area



   Medical or dental

 
1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area


Personal service
 
1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area


Professional service
 
1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area


Recreational facility, indoor
 
1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space for each 100 feet of floor area,
whichever is greater


Recreational facility, outdoor (excluding golf courses)
 
2 spaces for each participant at maximum utilization, plus 1 per each 6 seats
in stadium seating


Recycling center
 
1 space for each 500 square feet of floor area. A minimum of 5 spaces is
required


Research and development laboratory
 
1 space for each 500 square feet of floor area


Restaurant



   Fast food

 
1 per 3 persons at maximum seating in addition to the required stacking
spaces for each bay in § 156.382(M)



   Full service

 
1 per 4 persons at maximum seating in addition to the required stacking
spaces for each bay in § 156.382(M)


Retail sales
 
1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area


Shopping center or multi-tenant
 
1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area


Retail greenhouse or garden center
 
1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area, plus 1 per 2000 square feet
of outdoor display or sales area


Roadside business or stand
 
1 for each 125 square feet of sales or display area


Sanitary landfill
 
1 space for each 100 square feet of office space


Storage



   Indoor commercial

 
1 space for each 200 square feet of indoor storage area, plus 1 for each 400
square feet of office area



   Outdoor commercial

 
1 space for each 500 square feet of outdoor storage area, plus 1 for each 400
square feet of office area



   Personal

 
1 space for every 5 rental storage units


Tavern or bar
 
1 space for every 75 square feet of floor area


Temporary or seasonal sales lots
 
1 space for every 200 square feet of display or sales area


Truck facility
 
1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area exclusive of designated truck
storage areas


Truck, heavy equipment sales and service
 
1 space for each 5,000 square feet of sales lot area used for truck or
equipment display, plus 1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area of
showroom, office or service area


Warehousing
 
1 space for each 2,000 square feet of floor area


Wholesaler
 
1 space for every 1,000 square feet of floor area


Public and Semi-Public Uses


Club
 
1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area


Cemetery
 
1 space for each full time employee


Educational institutions



   Elementary and middle school

 
2 spaces for each classroom, plus 1 space for each 60 square feet of floor
area in the auditorium and assembly areas. In addition a minimum of 3
short-term parking shall be provided for drop-off and pick up



   High school, vocational school, technical school or college

 
2 spaces for each classroom, plus 1 for every 10 students for which the
facility is designed, plus 1 space for each 60 square feet of floor area in
the auditorium and assembly areas. In addition, a minimum of 3 short-term
parking shall be provided for drop-off and pick up


Fraternity, sorority or student cooperative
 
1 space for each 3 beds


Public facility, public buildings and services
 
1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area


Religious place of worship
 
1 space for each 30 square feet of floor area of the sanctuary, auditorium
and main place of worship


NOTES TO TABLE:

Any use not listed in the foregoing table shall have parking requirements
determined by the Building Commissioner. Any petitioner not satisfied with
the requirements set forth by said Commissioner shall have 30 days within
which to appeal said determination to the Board of Zoning Appeals, by
requesting such an appeal in writing and delivering same to the town’s
Clerk-Treasurer, the Executive Secretary of the Plan Commission or the
Chairperson of the Board of Zoning Appeals.




 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.385  LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section to establish loading
requirements so that adequate space for standing, loading and unloading
services adjacent to the opening used for loading and unloading is provided
in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Permanent loading facilities shall be provided on the
same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and
occupied for uses involving the receipt or distribution of materials or
merchandise via vehicular transportation, in accordance with the provisions
of this section and in the amount set forth in the Table of Loading
Requirements.



      (2)   Loading and unloading berths shall not be required for
uses which demonstrably do not receive or transmit goods or wares by truck
delivery.



   (C)   Design standards.



      (1)   Location. Loading berths may occupy any portion of a
lot; provided that, loading berths shall not be permitted in any required
front or side yard.



      (2)   Access.



         (a)   All loading facilities shall be arranged so that
all maneuvers shall be accomplished without blocking a public right-of-way or
walkway;



         (b)   All required off-street loading spaces shall have
access to a public street or alley in such a manner that any vehicle leaving
or entering the premises shall be traveling in a forward motion;



         (c)   Shall only be from the district in which the
facility is located; and



         (d)   Shall be directly accessible to the building or
structure served.



      (3)   Dimensions. Loading berths shall be a minimum of ten
feet in width and 50 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space, and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet.



      (4)   Pavement.



         (a)   All loading berths and maneuvering areas shall be
paved in conformance with the standards of the town.



         (b)   As a minimum, all loading spaces shall be graded
and provided with a durable and dustless surface of asphalt, concrete,
crushed stone or other suitable materials capable of withstanding 1,000
pounds per square inch (psi).



      (5)   Drainage. Loading areas shall be designed to prevent the
rate of increase of surface water onto adjacent properties, sidewalks or
public streets. Where adequate storm systems exist, the water shall be
directed to those systems. Loading areas shall obtain the approval of the
Storm Water Board to ensure that runoff and drainage are adequately provided
for.



      (6)   Lighting. Any loading area used during non-daylight
hours shall be illuminated. All lights used to illuminate a loading area
shall be of a full cut-off fixture and be arranged to reflect the light away
from adjoining property.



      (7)   Screening.



         (a)   Loading facilities shall be effectively screened
from an adjacent residential district of principal residential use, in
accordance with § 156.472 of this chapter.



         (b)   Screening shall be continuous, broken only for
access drives and walkways.



      (8)   Minimum number of off-street loading spaces. Loading
requirements shall be computed on the basis of the gross floor area as
determined in division (C)(11) below.



      (9)   Exclusions. These provisions shall not apply to uses in
the CBD Central Business District, with the Board of Zoning Appeals to define
and delineate said area from time to time.



      (10)   Maintenance. The owner of property used for off-street
loading and unloading shall maintain such area in good condition without
holes and free of all trash, abandoned or junk vehicles and other rubbish.



      (11)   Table of minimum loading requirements. Minimum loading
requirements shall be established for permitted uses and special exceptions
irrespective of the zoning district in which they are located.



 

Use
 

Gross Floor Area
(square feet)

 

Minimum Loading Spaces Required





Industrial uses
 

Less than 15,000

 

1




15,001-40,000

 

2




40,001-100,000

 

3




Each additional 40,000

 

1



Office uses
 

100,000 or less

 

1




100,001-336,000

 

2




Each additional 200,000

 

1



Retail, wholesale, storage and other business uses
 

Less than 3,000

 

None Required




3,001-15,000

 

1




15,001-40,000

 

2




Each additional 25,000

 

1





 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




SIGNS




§ 156.400  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is recognized that certain uses need and/or require
advertisements through the use of sign displays.



   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to:



      (1)   Encourage creative and imaginative design and use of
signs in order to create a more attractive economic and business climate;



      (2)   Foster and improve the economic vitality of the
community by enhancing and protecting the physical appearance of the
community;



      (3)   Reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging
or projecting into the public right- of-way;



      (4)   Provide each legal property owner or tenant an
opportunity for effective identification;



      (5)   Prevent the distraction of the motoring public;



      (6)   Minimize the obstruction of views from roadways to
adjacent properties.



   (C)   In order to accomplish these sometime conflicting purposes, it
is necessary to regulate the size, location, construction and manner of
display of signs as set forth in this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.401  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A construction sign is a temporary sign identifying
an architect, contractor, subcontractor and/or material supplier
participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located.



   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A directional sign is any on-premise sign giving
directions, instructions or facility information, but shall not contain the
name or logo of an establishment, nor any advertising copy.



   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A freestanding sign is any permanent sign not
attached to a building. This shall include signs attached to poles and signs
attached directly to the ground.



   SIGN, NON-CONFORMING. A non-conforming sign is a sign which was erected
legally, but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign
restrictions and regulations.



   SIGN, POLITICAL. A political sign is a temporary sign which announces
the candidacy of a person or slate or persons running for elective office, or
a political party or issue.



   SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A portable sandwich board is a sign with two
display surfaces that is not permanently anchored to the ground or a
structure and has a hinged, or A-frame construction that allows the sign to
be displayed indoors or outdoors.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. A portable sign is a sign which is movable and which is
not permanently attached to the ground, a structure or other signs, and is
designed or constructed in such a manner that it can be moved or relocated
without involving any structural or support changes.



   SIGN, PROJECTING. A projecting sign is a sign supported by a building
wall or column and extending a distance exceeding 12 inches from the wall.



   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A real estate sign is a temporary sign advertising
the property or land upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease
or sale.



   SIGN, SUBDIVISION. A subdivision sign is any ground-mounted or wall
sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium complex or residential
development.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A temporary sign is any sign not constructed or
intended for long-term use and is not permanently mounted.



   SIGN, WALL. A wall sign is any sign which is located on or formed by
the surface of the wall of a building. A Mansard roof facade on a building
shall be considered part of the wall.



   SIGN, WINDOW. A window sign is a sign installed inside a window and
intended to be viewed from the outside.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.402  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   The following types of signs shall be exempt from the requirements of
this subchapter:



   (A)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area, bearing only
property or address numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises
or home occupations when affixed flat to the face of a building or structure;



   (B)   Flags and insignia of any government;



   (C)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings,
except letters, trademarks, logos, moving parts or moving lights;



   (D)   Signs, directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter, including logos;



   (E)   Signs no larger than two square feet identifying or providing
directions for historical sites, governmental buildings, churches, retirement
homes/communities or similar buildings;



   (F)   Window signs for all uses, in all districts. Such signs may
not occupy more than 50% of the area of the window in or on which they are
displayed;



   (G)   A commemorative plaque, historical sign, cornerstone or
similar sign. Such sign shall not exceed nine square feet and shall not be
illuminated; and/or



   (H)   Signs identified in § 156.407 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.403  ON-PREMISES SIGNS; GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   In any district, except as noted, the provisions of this
subchapter shall be applied to affect the safety of motorists and facilitate
traffic movement.



      (1)   No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location
where, by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or
color, may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be
confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.



      (2)   No sign shall contain or make use of any phrase, symbol,
shape, form or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or
confuse moving traffic.



      (3)   No exterior sign shall be permitted to display flashing,
intermittent, revolving, rotating or animated lighting or illumination, nor
any illumination which simulates or displays motion in the Central Business
District (CBD). All other districts are subject to approval by the Board of
Zoning Appeals by variance, after application for variance.



      (4)   Except as may be permitted herein, portable signs are
prohibited.



      (5)   All signs not expressly exempted or permitted by this
chapter are prohibited.



   (B)   In all districts, the provisions of this subchapter shall
apply.



      (1)   No sign shall be erected in the town unless it is in
full compliance with these sign regulations.



      (2)   No sign shall be erected unless it is in compliance with
all applicable regulations of the town’s Building Code.



      (3)   Any sign which is permanently mounted shall bear, in a
permanent position, a clearly legible identification stating the name and
address of the owner of the sign, and the person, firm or corporation
responsible for its construction, and the date of erection.



      (4)   No sign shall be permitted as the principal use on any
property. Signs shall only be permitted as accessory uses with the exception
of the standards of § 156.408 of this chapter.



      (5)   No part of any sign which is attached to the exterior
wall of a building shall be erected to a height in excess of the roof or
parapet line of such building.



      (6)   No illuminated sign shall be permitted within 50 feet of
property in any residential district unless the illumination of such sign is
so designed that it does not reflect or shine light onto such property.



      (7)   No part of any freestanding sign shall be erected to a
height greater than that specified for other structures in the district in
which the sign is located.



      (8)   Rooftop sign structures shall not extend above the roof
line, nor shall such sign structures extend beyond or overhang any exterior
wall of the building upon which they are secured.



      (9)   The minimum setback of freestanding signs from street
rights-of-way shall not be less than those given below. Setback shall be
measured to the nearest point of the sign structure to the edge of the
right-of-way.



 


Minimum Sign Setbacks from the Public Right-of-Way




Area of Sign (per face)

 

Minimum Setback




Less than 5 square feet

 

2 feet




5 square feet to 14.9 square feet

 

10 feet




15 square feet to 49.9 square feet

 

20 feet




50 square feet or larger

 

30 feet




 



      (10)   The area of a sign shall be determined by the smallest
circle, triangle, or rectangle that can be used to enclose the sign,
exclusive of supporting members that bear no message.



      (11)   No freestanding sign shall be erected or maintained on
or within any easement on right-of-way, public or private, without special
permission in writing from that person or persons entitled to give such
permission.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 6, 2014, passed 10-1-2014)



§ 156.404  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SIGNS.



   In any residential district, the provisions of this section shall apply.



   (A)   Multi-family developments may display identification signs
indicating nothing other than name and/or address of the premises and/or the
name of the management. Such sign shall not exceed nine square feet in area
and may be illuminated.



   (B)   Entrance signs for subdivision developments may only display
the name of the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in
area and shall not exceed six feet in height. Such sign may be illuminated.



   (C)   Only one sign per street frontage shall be permitted for
subdivisions and multi-family developments; except that, uses occupying
extended frontages shall be permitted one such sign per 500 feet of frontage.



   (D)   The base of residential signs which are affixed to the ground
shall be landscaped in area at least equal to the total square footage of the
sign face.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.405  BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT SIGNS.



   In any business or industrial district, the provisions of this section
shall apply.



   (A)   Multi-family developments shall be subject to the provisions
of § 156.403 of this chapter.



   (B)   Freestanding signs shall be permitted as accessory uses for
non-residential uses according to the number and net area of signs set forth
below:



 


Maximum Sign Area for Business and Industrial Freestanding Signs




District

 

Maximum Net Sign Area*




B-L

 

40 square feet




B-G

 

60 square feet




CBD

 

40 square feet




L-I and I

 

60 square feet



NOTES TO TABLE:

Total combined area of all sign faces of freestanding signs on the lot or
property.



 



   (C)   No wall-mounted sign shall project over a lot line and no sign
shall project into a required yard by more than two feet.



   (D)   In any industrial district, each business or industrial use
shall be permitted identification signs on the lot only as incidental uses,
not to exceed two such signs or a total net area of 100 square feet.



   (E)   To encourage design excellence, the maximum sign areas for
business and industrial signs, as set forth in §§ 156.404(B) and (D) of
this chapter, may be increased by the percentages as provided for herein. A
separate bonus is granted for compliance with each of the criteria and the
area is cumulative, but the percentage increase is based on the original sign
area limitation.



      (1)   Freestanding signs may be increased in sign face area as
follows:



         (a)   Twenty percent when the sign is constructed of
solid wood and uses only colors approved by the Plan Commission;



         (b)   Twenty percent when the sign is installed in a
landscaped planter having an area four times the area of the resultant sign
and the entire design is approved by the Plan Commission; and



         (c)   Ten percent if the sign is not designed or used
with illumination, either internal or external.



      (2)   Wall or facade signs may be increased in sign face area
as follows, but only if the projection of the sign does not exceed 12 inches
from the wall or facade on which it is mounted:



         (a)   Ten percent if the sign is not designed or used
with illumination, either internal or external;



         (b)   Ten percent if the wall sign is the only sign
identifying the establishment or its principal product;



         (c)   Ten percent if the sign is designed to contain
only the identification of the establishment without advertisement of any
products sold on the premises; and



         (d)   Five percent if the sign face is made from
unbreakable material.



      (3)   For the purposes of the foregoing sections, the total
increase of sign area shall not exceed 25% regardless of the combination of
criteria that are met.



   (F)   Window signs shall be permitted in any business or industrial
district provided that such window signs do not cover more than 50% of the
total area of the windows visible from any public right-of-way.



   (G)   Sandwich board signs may be permitted in the CBD not to exceed
12 square feet per sign face (each side) as follows.



      (1)   The sidewalk on which the sandwich board sign is located
shall be at least six feet in width.



      (2)   The sign shall not interfere with pedestrian movement on
the sidewalk.



      (3)   The sign shall only be located outdoors between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.406  AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT SIGNS.



   In any agriculture district, the provisions of this section shall apply.



   (A)   Agricultural uses shall be permitted one sign not to exceed 30
square feet. Such sign shall not be illuminated.



   (B)   Business uses shall be permitted two signs not to exceed 30
square feet each.



   (C)   Other non-residential uses shall be permitted one
identification sign, indicating nothing other than name and/or address of the
premises, and schedule of services or other information relevant to the
operation of the premises. Such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
unless erected along an abutting street or road having a speed limit in
excess of 40 mph; then the area of such sign shall not exceed 30 square feet.
Only one sign per street frontage shall be permitted; except that, uses
occupying extended frontages shall be permitted one such sign per 500 feet of
frontage.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.407  SIGNS PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT.



   The signs permitted by this section shall be permitted in any district:



   (A)   One “For Sale” or “For Rent” or “For Lease” sign
not more than nine square feet in area for each parcel with dwelling unit,
garage or other living quarters, where appropriate. Such sign shall not be
illuminated;



   (B)   One sign, not more than 12 square feet in area, for
construction and development, giving the name of the contractors, engineers
or architects, shall be permitted, but only during the time that construction
or development is actively underway. Such sign shall not be illuminated;



   (C)   One portable or temporary sign on premise, not in excess of
the number or size provisions of this chapter may be permitted up to, but not
to exceed, 45 days, if the portable sign is being used in lieu of a permanent
sign, or during the period while commercial construction or remodeling is
actively underway, to be removed when the permanent sign is erected in the
first case, or when construction is completed under that improvement location
permit in the second case. Such sign shall not be illuminated;



   (D)   One portable sign not over 50 square feet in area, on the
premises on which the event will take place, shall be permitted. Such sign
shall not be erected more than 30 consecutive days before the event in
question and shall be removed immediately after such event. Also, directional
signs may be permitted not more than three square feet in area, showing only
a directional arrow and the name of the event of public interest; such signs
shall not be erected more than 14 days before the event in question, and
shall be removed immediately after such event. Such signs shall not be
illuminated and shall only be permitted twice a year;



   (E)   Political advertisement signs on private property may be
erected, with the owners’ permission, no more than 30 days prior to the
election and are to be removed within five days after said election. Such
sign shall not be illuminated; and



   (F)   For each major entrance to a real estate subdivision one sign
containing the name of the subdivision only shall be permitted. Such sign
shall not exceed 20 square feet and shall have a maximum height of six feet.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.408  OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS.



   (A)   Outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted in L-I, I and A
Districts only.



   (B)   Outdoor advertising signs shall be separated by 1,000 feet in
all directions from each other.



   (C)   No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted if it is
located within 300 feet of land that has been platted for residential use or
is zoned RE, RSF, RTF, RMF-L, RMF-H or RU.



   (D)   No outdoor advertising sign structure shall contain more than
two facings.



   (E)   The maximum area for any one sign shall be 1,000 square feet
and the maximum width 25 feet and maximum length of 60 feet, exclusive of any
border, trim, ornamental base, apron, supports, embellishments and other
structural members, if the exclusions do not exceed 20% of the sign area. The
area shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or
combination thereof which will encompass the area affected.



   (F)   Revolving signs shall be prohibited.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.409  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   An improvement location permit shall be required based on the following
conditions.



   (A)   Permanent and temporary signs shall require an improvement
location permit. Fees shall be as identified in the schedule of fees as
adopted by the Town Council.



   (B)   No person shall locate or display any sign unless all
provisions of this chapter have been met. An improvement location permit
shall be required for each sign unless specifically exempted in the
subchapter.



   (C)   A sign for which a permit has been issued shall not be
modified, relocated, altered or replaced unless an amended or new permit is
obtained from the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.410  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   All signs erected following the effective date of these
regulations shall comply with all the provisions of these regulations when
erected.



   (B)   All signs which are in existence on the effective date of
these regulations, which do not conform to the standards of this subchapter,
shall be considered non-conforming signs and shall be subject to the
following provisions.



      (1)   No non-conforming sign shall have any changes made in
the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign unless the
sign is specifically designed for periodic change of message.



      (2)   No non-conforming sign shall be structurally altered so
as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign, nor shall any
non-conforming sign be relocated.



      (3)   No non-conforming sign shall be allowed to remain after
the use of land or building which has ceased by discontinuance or abandonment
to which the sign relates.



      (4)   The normal maintenance of non-conforming signs shall be
permitted. However, not more than 50% of a non-conforming sign shall be
replaced without modifying the non-conforming sign so that it conforms to
these regulations.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.411  ABANDONMENT OF SIGNS.



   (A)   If any sign is abandoned for a period of at least six
consecutive months in any 18-month period, such sign shall be considered a
nuisance affecting or endangering surrounding property values and shall be
deemed detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community.



   (B)   Such sign shall be abated within 60 days of notification by
the Building Commissioner either by:



      (1)   Removing the sign in question. Removal includes the
total disassembly of the sign structure including the base, to the grade on
which the sign was erected. Any sign not removed within the specified 60-day
time period may be removed by the town at the property owner’s expense and
assessed to that property owner on the next property tax statement; and



      (2)   Altering the sign and its structure so that it conforms
to the regulations and provisions of this code.



   (C)   The failure of any owner to comply with these regulations will
constitute a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




NON-CONFORMITIES




§ 156.425  INTENT.



   (A)   Within the districts established by this chapter or by
amendments that may later be adopted, there may exist:



      (1)   Non-conforming lots;



      (2)   Non-conforming structures;



      (3)   Non-conforming uses of land;



      (4)   Non-conforming uses of land and structures in
combination; and



      (5)   Non-conforming characteristics of use.



   (B)   These non-conformities were lawful before this chapter was
passed or amended, but they are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this chapter or may be under future amendments hereto. It is the
intent of this chapter to permit these non-conforming uses to continue until
they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the
intent of this chapter that non-conforming uses shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses which are prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Illegal uses
existing at the time this chapter is enacted shall not be validated by virtue
of its enactment.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.426  INCOMPATIBILITY OF NON-CONFORMING USES.



   Non-conforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts in which such use is located. A
non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land or a
non-conforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be
extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by the addition of other
uses or structures or enlargements of existing uses or structures, of a
nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which the use
or structure is located.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.427  SINGLE NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.



   (A)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record after the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this chapter. Such lots must be in separate ownership or
included in a subdivision of record in the office of the county’s Recorder
at the time of passage of this chapter. This provision shall apply even
though such lots fail to meet the requirements for area or width, or both,
that are generally applicable in the district; provided that, yard dimensions
and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the
lots shall conform to regulations for the district in which such lots are
located. Variances of requirements, other than lot area or lot width, shall
be obtained only through action of the Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided
herein.



   (B)   Non-conforming lots of record may be developed under the
following conditions.



      (1)   The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be
proportionally applied by the Building Commissioner as based on the
proportion that the non-conforming lot is smaller than the minimum lot size
required in the district that the lot is located. Fractional numbers shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole number.







 



      (2)   In no case shall the side or rear yard be modified by
more than 50% of the minimum yard requirement for the district in which the
lot of record is located without requesting a variance before the Board of
Zoning Appeals pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   The front yard setback shall not be altered in order to
keep the continuity of the front yard setback of surrounding properties.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.428  NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD IN COMBINATION.



   If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage
or amendment of this chapter and if all or part of the lots with no buildings
do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of
this chapter and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with the lot width and area requirements
established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made
which creates a lot width or area below the requirements stated in this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.429  NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   Where, at the time of adoption of this chapter, lawful uses of land
exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this
chapter, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful;
provided:



   (A)   No such non-conforming uses shall be enlarged or increased,
nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;



   (B)   No such non-conforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part
to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;



   (C)   If any such non-conforming uses of land are discontinued or
abandoned for more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in
which such land is located; and



   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of
this chapter shall be erected in connection with such non-conforming use of
land.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.430  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not now be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its
location on the lot, bulk or other requirements concerning the structure,
such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in
a way which increases its non- conformity, but any structure or portion
thereof may be altered to decrease it non-conformity.



   (B)   Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion
of structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50% of the
fair market value of the building immediately prior to the damage, it shall
not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.



   (D)   Normal maintenance may be conducted on the structure in order
to keep it safe, neat and orderly in appearance.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.431  NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND LAND IN
COMBINATION.



   If a lawful use involving individual structures and/or the use of land,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that
would not be allowed in the district or under the terms of this chapter the
prior use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions.



   (A)   No existing structure devoted to use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.



   (B)   A non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended
to occupy any land outside such building.



   (C)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on
which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district, and the non- conforming use may
not thereafter be resumed.



   (D)   When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and
land in combination is discontinued or abandoned for more than one year
(except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure
or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used, except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.



   (E)   Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and
land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate
the non-conforming status of the land.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.432  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   On any non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
non-conforming use, repairs and maintenance may be done as needed including,
but not limited to, the replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or
plumbing; provided that, the square footage of when it became non-conforming
shall not be increased. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon order of such official. If a non-conforming structure or
portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use becomes physically
unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter
be restored, repaired or rebuilt, except in conformity with the regulations
of the district in which it is located.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES




§ 156.445  PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION
USES.



   Special exception uses shall conform to the procedures and requirements
of this subchapter. Special exception use permits shall be required for types
of uses designated as special exception uses in each particular use district.
Such special exception use may be permitted and desirable in certain
districts, but not without consideration in each case of the effect of the
use upon neighboring land and the effect the neighboring land will have on
the use. The application of the planning standards for determining the
location and extent of such use is a planning function and not in the nature
of a variance or appeal.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.446  AUTHORITY.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth herein, may approve, approve with supplementary
conditions or deny an application for a special exception use.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.447  PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The owner or lessee of the subject property or other person having a
legal or equitable interest in the subject property may file an application
for a special exception use with the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.448  PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND DECISION.



   (A)   Application.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application and
development plan for a special exception use permit, the Building
Commissioner shall transmit to the Plan Commission for investigation as to
the manner in which the proposed location and character of the special
exception use will affect the comprehensive development plan of the town.



      (2)   The Plan Commission shall report the results of its
study of the application to the Board of Zoning Appeals including the
recommendation of any additional conditions recommended by the Commission and
shall be scheduled for a public hearing in accordance with state statues.



   (B)   Notice. Notice of the public hearing for the special exception
use shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of I.C. 36-7-4-920
through 36-7-4-921.



   (C)   Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals, shall, after public notice
and the close of the hearing according to law, take one of the following
actions:



         (a)   Approve the application as submitted;



         (b)   Approve the application subject to the additional
conditions as recommended by the Plan Commission and set forth above in
division (A) above;



         (c)   Table the application for further consideration; or



         (d)   Deny the application.



      (2)   Upon reaching a decision, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall instruct the Building Commissioner to notify the applicant, in writing,
of its decision. If the application is approved or approved with conditions,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall also instruct the Building Commissioner to
issue a special exception permit which shall specify all conditions
associated with the special exception approval.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.449  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   Special exception uses may be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals
only for those uses specifically designated and within those districts
specified in the district in which the property is located.



   (A)   Basis for determination. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
establish that the following general standards and such other specific
standards as the Board deems fit to impose for each specific use are
satisfied before approval of each proposed special exception use.



   (B)   General standards. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review
the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed special exception use
in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing
that such a use on the proposed location:



      (1)   Is, in fact, a permitted special exception use in the
district in which the property is located;



      (2)   Is compatible with and in accordance with the general
objectives or with any specific objectives of the master plan of current
adoption;



      (3)   Is designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as
to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such a use will not change the
essential character of the same area unless such change is appropriate for
such area;



      (4)   Is not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;



      (5)   Is served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, water, sewer, police and fire protection,
drainage structures, refuse disposal or schools, or that the persons or
agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able
to provide adequately any such service;



      (6)   Will not create excessive additional requirements at
public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to
the economic welfare of the community;



      (7)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to persons,
property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes, glare, light or odors;



      (8)   Is compatible to adjacent properties and neighborhoods;



      (9)   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a
natural, scenic or historic feature of major importance; and



      (10)   Is consistent with the intent and purposes of this
subchapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.450  FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED.



   Factors to be considered in evaluating the standards for special
exception uses may include, but are not limited to, the following:



   (A)   Land use;



   (B)   Height;



   (C)   Setbacks;



   (D)   Business or other activities;



   (E)   Open space;



   (F)   Density;



   (G)   Location of structures and uses on the site;



   (H)   Screening;



   (I)   Signs/advertisements;



   (J)   Paving;



   (K)   Entrances;



   (L)   Hours of operation;



   (M)   Lighting;



   (N)   Landscaping;



   (O)   Fencing/walling;



   (P)   Location and screening of mechanical systems/HVAC (noise
issues);



   (Q)   Dumpster locations; and



   (R)   Parking.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.451  SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   The following minimum standards shall apply to the special exception
uses listed below. In such cases where the Board of Zoning Appeals attaches
additional conditions, the more restrictive condition shall apply.



   (A)   Animal hospitals and veterinarian clinics.



      (1)   Such facilities shall be located on sites having a
minimum of 20,000 square feet in area.



      (2)   Such facilities shall have no outside pens or runs.



      (3)   Buildings or structures shall be located a minimum of 50
feet from adjacent property lines; provided that, where such uses are located
adjacent to a residential district the side and rear yard requirements shall
be increased to 100 feet.



      (4)   If a kennel is included as part of an animal hospital or
veterinary clinic, the requirements of division (L) below shall also be
observed.



   (B)   Automobile dismantling and impound yards.



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on sites having a minimum of
two acres in area.



      (2)   Buildings or structures shall be located on a minimum of
50 feet from adjacent property lines; provided, there where such use is
located adjacent to a residential district, the side and rear yard
requirements shall be increased to 100 feet.



      (3)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



   (C)   Cemetery or crematory.



      (1)   Minimum lot area of 20 acres.



      (2)   There shall be two side yards with a minimum setback of
50 feet each and a rear yard setback of 50 feet.



      (3)   Entrances and driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board.



      (4)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



      (5)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes shall meet with the
approval of the state’s Board of Health.



   (D)   Confined feeding operations.



      (1)   All structures and confined lots designed to house or
contain livestock shall be set back 500 feet from any existing residence,
except that of the confined feeding operator.



      (2)   All structures and confined lots designed to house or
contain livestock shall be set back 1,000 feet from any existing church,
school recreational area (public or private), commercial use or any other
public buildings.



      (3)   All structures and confined lots designed to have or
contain livestock shall be set back 1,300 feet from any zoning district not
otherwise zoned A-1 Agricultural, except for those lands zoned as Floodplain
District.



      (4)   All structures shall be set back 40 feet from all
highway and road rights-of-way.



   (E)   Country club/golf course.



      (1)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



      (2)   Parking shall be a minimum of 25 feet from an adjacent
residential use.



      (3)   Entrance driveways shall be subject to approval by the
Board.



      (4)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



      (5)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes shall meet the
approval of the state’s Board of Health.



   (F)   Essential services.



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on sites having an adequate
area to accommodate all activities.



      (2)   The installation and operation of such uses shall be
subject to approval under the provisions of applicable codes and ordinances.



      (3)   Buildings occurring in the RSF, RTF, RMF-L, RMF-H and RU
Zone Districts shall be of an architectural style that is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood in which it is located.



      (4)   Buildings and structures shall be located a minimum of
50 feet from adjacent residential uses.



      (5)   Operations not completely contained within buildings
shall have adequate screening as required in §§ 156.465 through 156.476 of
this chapter, and adequate fencing subject to approval by the Board.



      (6)   Entrances or driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (G)   Gasoline service stations.



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on sites having a minimum of
15,000 square feet, with an additional 2,000 square feet required for each
service bay over two operated in connection with the service station or in
connection with an accessory automobile washing and waxing facility.



      (2)   Buildings or structures shall be located a minimum of 25
feet from the nearest properly line of an adjacent residential district.



      (3)   All exterior lighting shall be so arranged and sheltered
as to prevent illumination, glare or reflection on adjacent properties or on
the public right-of-way.



      (4)   Except for vehicles in the process of being serviced,
vehicles of employees, service and tow trucks used by the establishment and
rental vehicles, no vehicles shall be parked on the premises.



      (5)   Abandoned vehicles shall not be stored on the premises.



      (6)   Whenever a gasoline service station is abandoned for a
period of one year, the owner shall remove all appurtenances connected
therewith, such as, but not limited to, gasoline pumps and signs and shall
fill or otherwise vacate underground storage tanks in accordance with the
provisions of applicable fire codes and safety standards and shall maintain
the premises so as not to become a public nuisance.



   (H)   Greenhouse, commercial.



      (1)   Minimum lot area of 25,000 square feet.



      (2)   There shall be a front yard with a minimum setback of
100 feet, two side yards with a minimum setback of 40 feet each, and a rear
yard with a 40-foot minimum setback.



      (3)   Minimum gross floor area of principal building(s) shall
be 1,000 square feet.



      (4)   Loading berths shall be a minimum of 50 feet from an
adjacent residential use.



      (5)   Entrances and driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board.



      (6)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



      (7)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes shall meet the
approval of the state’s Board of Health.



   (I)   Heliport.



      (1)   Minimum lot area of one acre.



      (2)   Maximum height of structure shall be as required by
appropriate state and federal agency.



      (3)   Adequate fencing shall be provided subject to approval
by the Board.



      (4)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



      (5)   Parking shall be a minimum of 25 feet from an adjacent
residential use.



      (6)   Loading berths shall be a minimum of 100 feet from
adjacent residential use.



      (7)   Entrances and driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (8)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes shall meet the
approval of the state’s Board of Health.



   (J)   Hospital.



      (1)   Minimum lot area of five acres.



      (2)   There shall be a front yard with a minimum setback of
100 feet and two side yards with a minimum setback of 40 feet each, and a
rear yard with a minimum setback of 40 feet.



      (3)   A plan of landscape development shall be submitted with
application.



      (4)   Maximum height of structure shall be 35 feet.



      (5)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



      (6)   Parking shall be a minimum of 25 feet away from an
adjacent residential use.



      (7)   Loading berths shall be a minimum of 50 feet from an
adjacent residential use.



      (8)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



   (K)   Junk yard.



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on sites having a minimum of
two acres in area.



      (2)   Buildings or structures shall be located a minimum of 50
feet from adjacent property lines; provided that, where such use is located
adjacent to a residential district, side and rear yard requirements shall be
increased to 100 feet.



      (3)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



   (L)   Kennel.



      (1)   Such facilities, including outdoor pens and runs, shall
be located a minimum of 100 feet from adjacent property lines; provided,
however, that, where such facilities are located adjacent to a residential
district side and rear yard setbacks shall be increased to 300 feet.



      (2)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes shall meet the
approval of the state’s Board of Health.



   (M)   Licensed day care center.



      (1)   Minimum lot area of 110 square feet per child.



      (2)   There shall be two side yards with a minimum setback of
20 feet each.



      (3)   Minimum gross floor area of the principal building(s)
shall be determined by the number of children to be accommodated and shall be
subject to approval by the Board.



      (4)   Adequate fencing shall be provided subject to approval
by the Board.



      (5)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



      (6)   Entrances and driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board.



      (7)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



   (N)   Mobile home parks.



      (1)   Mobile home parks shall be located on sites having a
minimum of ten acres in area.



      (2)   The density of a mobile home park shall not exceed eight
dwelling units per gross acre.



      (3)   Mobile home units within a mobile home park shall be
located a minimum of 25 feet from adjacent property lines; provided that,
where mobile home parks are located adjacent to another residential use, side
and rear yard requirements shall be increased to 50 feet.



      (4)   There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between
mobile home units.



      (5)   Mobile home parks shall be served by both public water
and public sewer and shall the requirements as set forth in applicable state
statutes.



      (6)   The mobile home park shall be adequately lighted;
provided that, all lights shall be shielded so as to protect mobile home
units as well as adjacent residential properties from glare.



      (7)   All roads shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and
shall be paved.



      (8)   Two off-street parking spaces per mobile home shall be
provided.



      (9)   All mobile homes shall be secured to the ground by
tie-downs.



   (O)   Mobile home subdivision.



      (1)   Mobile home subdivisions shall be located on sites
having a minimum of ten acres in area.



      (2)   Each lot in the subdivision shall be served by public
water and public sewer.



      (3)   The minimum lot size for individual mobile home lots
within the subdivision shall be 5,000 square feet.



      (4)   All mobile home subdivisions shall conform to the
procedures, design standards and improvement requirements established in the
Subdivision Ordinance.



      (5)   No more than one mobile home shall be placed on any one
lot.



      (6)   Mobile home unites within a mobile home subdivision
shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from property lines of the subdivision;
provided that, where mobile home subdivisions are located adjacent to another
principal residential use, side and rear yard requirements shall be increased
to 50 feet.



      (7)   All roads shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and
shall be paved.



      (8)   All mobile homes shall observe a minimum setback from
the edge of the road of 15 feet.



      (9)   Two off-street parking spaces per mobile home shall be
provided.



      (10)   All mobile homes shall be secured to the ground by
tie-downs.



   (P)   Nursing home.



      (1)   Minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet, but not less
than 1,500 square feet per person cared for.



      (2)   There shall be two side yards with a minimum setback of
30 feet each.



      (3)   Minimum gross floor area of principal building(s) shall
be 1,000 square feet.



      (4)   A plan of landscape development is to be submitted with
application.



      (5)   Maximum height of structure shall be 35 feet.



      (6)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



      (7)   Parking shall be a minimum of 25 feet from adjacent
residential use.



      (8)   Loading berths shall be a minimum of 50 feet from an
adjacent residential use.



   (Q)   Outdoor theater.



      (1)   There shall be one front yard with a minimum setback of
100 feet, two side yards with a minimum setback of 40 feet each, and one back
yard with a minimum setback of 40 feet.



      (2)   Adequate fencing shall be provided subject to approval
by the Board.



      (3)   Entrances and driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board.



      (4)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



      (5)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes shall meet the
approval of the state’s Board of Health.



   (R)   Park and playground.



      (1)   No building or structure shall be located closer than 25
feet to an adjacent residential use.



      (2)   All exterior lighting shall be so arranged and sheltered
as to prevent illumination, glare or reflection on adjacent properties.



   (S)   Planned unit development. Subject to the provisions of §§
156.330 through 156.335 of this chapter.



   (T)   Private parking area on other lot.



      (1)   Minimum lot area of 1,500 square feet.



      (2)   Entrances and driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board.



      (3)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



      (4)   There shall be no sales, dead storage, repair work or
dismantling on the lot.



   (U)   Recreation facilities, outdoor.



      (1)   Such outdoor athletic facilities, including, but not
limited to, golf courses, swimming pool, tennis courts and other similar
athletic facilities shall be permitted in the RSF, RTF, RMF-L, RMF-H and RU
Zone Districts.



      (2)   Such outdoor commercial recreational facilities,
including, but not limited to, miniature golf courses, driving ranges,
baseball batting cages, go-cart tracks and other similar commercial
recreational facilities, plus all other athletic facilities permitted within
the RSF, RTF, RMF-L, RMF-H and RU Zone Districts, shall be permitted in the
RE, B-L, B-G and L-I Zone Districts.



      (3)   Building or structures shall be located a minimum of 50
feet from an adjacent residential use.



      (4)   Off-street parking shall not be located in the required
front or side yards.



   (V)   Religious place of worship.



      (1)   Such use shall have side and rear yards equal to a
minimum of one-half of the height of the building.



      (2)   Off-street parking shall not be located in the required
front or side yards adjoining a public street right-of-way.



   (W)   Sanitary landfill.



      (1)   The location, installation and operation of such
facilities shall be subject to approval by the Health Officer in accordance
with applicable codes and ordinances.



      (2)   Such operations shall be constructed a minimum of 50
feet from adjacent property lines; provided, however, that, where a sanitary
landfill is located adjacent to a residential district, the side and rear
yard requirements shall be 100 feet.



      (3)   Such facilities shall be located on sites containing no
less than ten acres in area.



      (4)   Prior to commencing such operation, the owner shall file
a reclamation plan with the Plan Commission and any other indemnity agreement
as may be required by the Plan Commission for the purpose of assuring the
restoration and reclamation of the site according to the following
specifications and within a specified period of time as established in the
agreement.



      (5)   A uniform contour which blends in with the topography of
the surrounding area shall be established throughout the area.



      (6)   Soil suitable for growing vegetation shall be replaced
over the slopes to a permanent uniform depth of not less than six inches and
the area shall be seeded, landscaped and maintained with perennial plant
material until a permanent type ground cover is established to prevent
erosion.



   (X)   Truck freight terminal.



      (1)   Use permitted not closer than 300 feet to an adjacent
residential use.



      (2)   Adequate screening shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 156.465 through 156.476 of this chapter.



      (3)   Entrances or driveways shall be subject to approval by
the Board.



      (4)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§ 156.400 through
156.411 of this chapter.



      (5)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes shall meet the
approval of the state’s Board of Health.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.452  SUPPLEMENTAL CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose additional conditions and
safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of
individual property rights and for insuring that the intent and objectives of
this subchapter are be observed. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall also
review the guidelines contained in Appendix B and may impose those guidelines
or other regulations as it deems appropriate.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.453  NO PRESUMPTION OF APPROVAL.



   The listing of a special exception use within each zoning district
shall not constitute an assurance or presumption that such special exception
use will be approved. Rather, each proposed special exception use shall be
evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to its compliance with the
standards and conditions set forth herein and with the development standards
for the district in which it is to be located.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.454  EXPIRATION OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE PERMIT.



   (A)   A special exception permit shall be deemed to authorize only
one particular special exception use and the permit shall automatically
expire if, for any reason, the has not begun within one year after the
special exception permit was issued or the use ceases operation or existence
for more than one year.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals can extend the time frame for one
additional year for good cause shown by the applicant. The extension must be
applied for prior to the expiration of the special use permit on which the
extension is being sought.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS




§ 156.465  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum standards
involving the development of land to:



   (A)   Provide attractive views from roads and adjacent properties;



   (B)   To screen from view visually undesirable uses;



   (C)   To require screening between incompatible land uses; and



   (D)   To protect the health, safety and welfare of the community
through the reduction of noise, air and visual pollution and artificial light
glare.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.466  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to new property development and
any collective substantial expansion or change in land use, except for the
Residence Estate, Residence Single-Family and Residence Two-Family Districts.
Substantial expansion or modification of the existing structures shall be
defined based on the criteria established below:



 


When Existing Structure is

 

A Substantial Expansion is




0 - 1,000 square feet

 

50% or greater




1,001 - 10,000 square feet

 

40% or greater




10,001 - 25,000 square feet

 

30% or greater




25,001 - 50,000 square feet

 

20% or greater




50,001 square feet and larger

 

10% or greater




 



   (B)   Greenbelt areas shall be required within ten feet of, and
immediately adjacent to, the existing or proposed right-of-way of any public
roadway as established in § 156.471 of this chapter.



   (C)   Buffer areas shall only be required along side and rear
property lines as established in § 156.474 of this chapter. Buffer areas
shall not be required along street frontage or along other rights-of-way
unless required by the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.467  SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Submission of landscape plans shall be as follows.



      (1)   No site or development plan required under this chapter
shall receive final approval unless a landscape plan has been submitted and
approved.



      (2)   No zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued unless such plan has been fully implemented on the site.



      (3)   Any property or site to which this subchapter applies
shall illustrate all proposed buffers, screening and greenbelt materials on a
site plan or on a separate landscape plan at a reasonable scale.



      (4)   All plans submitted shall include a table listing all
plant materials within the required greenbelt and buffer areas. This table
shall include the common and botanical names, sizes and other such
information as necessary to fully describe the plant material selection.



      (5)   Detailed cross-sections shall be provided identifying
the proper planting of trees, shrubs and ground cover within the required
greenbelt and buffer areas.



   (B)   Approval of landscape plans shall be as follows.



      (1)   Landscape plans including the information as identified
in division (A) above shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner for
review as part of the application for a location improvement permit.



      (2)   The Building Commissioner shall review the information
and approve, deny or approve with modifications the plans as submitted.



      (3)   The Building Commissioner may seek professional advice
from a licensed landscape architect or nurseryman in the review of the
submitted plans. The cost of such consultation may be passed on to the
applicant.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.468  BUFFER AREA MATERIALS AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   New development, changes of use or substantially expanded
structures shall provide landscape and buffer areas as provided in this
subchapter.



   (B)   The following items are suitable for screening purposes
individually or in combination with each other; provided, they create a dense
screen, and are subject to review and approval by the Building Commissioner.



      (1)   Walls and fences. Walls and fences are subject to the
conditions found here and in § 156.363 of this chapter.



         (a)   When walls or fences are used to fulfill screening
requirements, they shall be detailed on the plan. They are to be constructed
of weather resistant materials. This includes pressure treating or painting
of lumber if it is not redwood or cedar and using aluminum or galvanized
hardware. Chain link fences with or without wooden or synthetic slat material
shall not be permitted to satisfy buffering requirements.



         (b)   Any wall or fence used for buffering shall be
constructed so that the finished, or most visually appealing side of the wall
or fence, is facing the adjacent property.



      (2)   Plants.



         (a)   Plant materials used in conformance with the
provision of this subchapter shall conform to the standards of the American
Association of Nurserymen and shall have passed any inspection required under
state regulations. Trees shall be balled and burlapped or in containers.
Shrubs, vines and ground covers shall be balled and burlapped or in
containers. The height of all trees shall be measured from the top of the
root ball to the top of the tree mass.



         (b)   Nursery stock identification tags shall not be
removed from any planting prior to inspection and approval of final
installation by the town.



            1.   Deciduous trees. Deciduous trees shall have a
minimum caliper of at least two inches with a single central leader, for
large and medium trees, conforming to acceptable nursery industry procedures
at the time of planting. If deciduous trees are to be used for screening
purposes, additional materials listed in § 156.468 of this chapter must be
used to create a dense buffer.



            2.   Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a
minimum of five feet in height at the time of planting and shall be
unsheared, full and branched to the ground. Evergreen plantings used for
screening shall be designed to provide an effective, dense screen within four
years after the date of final approval of planting.



            3.   Shrubs and hedges.



               a.   Shrubs and hedges used for screening
shall be at least two-thirds of their mature height, but never less than 24
inches in height at the time of planting. All shrubs and hedges used for
screening shall be designed to provide an effective, dense screen and mature
height within four years after the date of the final approval of planting.



               b.   The height at installation of the
planting shall be measured from the level of the surface of the plant base at
the edge closest to the screening.



            4.   Grass or ground cover. Grass shall be planted
in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the county. In swales or
other areas subject to erosion, solid sod, erosion reducing net or suitable
mulch and temporary seeding shall be used for immediate protection until
complete coverage otherwise is achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and free of
weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Grass shall be sown or placed in any
area not landscaped or paved. Ground cover shall be planted in such a manner
as to provide 75% complete coverage after two growing seasons.



            5.   Existing plant material.



               a.   Existing vegetation shall be preserved,
as much as feasibly possible, in accordance with acceptable nursery industry
procedures.



               b.   The Plan Commission may approve a
landscape plan which utilizes existing vegetation in lieu of new plantings;
providing, the landscape plan:



                  i.   Demonstrates that sufficient
trees or landscape vegetation shall be preserved to equal or exceed the
requirements of this subchapter;



                  ii.   Provides that, in the event the
preserved vegetation is damaged or dies within one year of completion of
construction on the site, equivalent replacement vegetation shall be planted
to provide landscaping which, at a minimum, meets or exceeds the requirements
of this subchapter.



            6.   Earth mounds. Earth mounds may be used as
physical barriers which block or screen a view. A difference in elevation
between areas requiring screening does not constitute an earth mound. Earth
mounds shall be constructed of earthen materials and shall conform to the
following standards.



               a.   The maximum side slope shall be three
horizontal to one vertical (3:1) and the design shall be reviewed by the
Building Commissioner to ensure that proper erosion prevention and control
practices have been utilized.



               b.   Berms and earth mounds shall be
designed with physical variations in height and alignment throughout their
length, and shall not be a detriment to natural or proposed drainage ways.



               c.   The landscape plan shall show
sufficient detail, including a plan and profile of the berm or earth mound,
soil types and construction techniques to demonstrate compliance with the
above provisions.



               d.   Berms and earth mounds shall be located
and designed to minimize the disturbance to existing trees located on the
site or adjacent thereto.



               e.   No part of any berm or earth mound
which is elevated more than 30 inches above natural grade shall be located
within ten feet of any right-of-way or property line.



               f.   Adequate ground cover shall be used and
maintained to prevent erosion of the earth mound.



      (3)   Maintenance of buffer areas.



         (a)   All landscape materials shall be installed and
maintained according to accepted nursery industry procedures. The owner of
the property shall be responsible for the continued maintenance of all buffer
and landscape materials, and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly
appearance, free from refuse and debris at all times. All unhealthy or dead
plant material shall be replaced within one year, or by the next planting
period, whichever comes first, by plant material similar in size and type to
that which was removed. The owner or developer must show a proof of
maintenance plan which indicates how the established buffer areas and
landscaping will be maintained.



         (b)   Violation of these installation and maintenance
provisions shall be a violation of this chapter.



      (4)   Buffer establishment. Once a buffer as required in §
156.474 of this chapter has been approved by the Building Commissioner and
established by the owner, it may not be used, disturbed or altered for any
purpose other than for buffering purposes.



      (5)   Location of buffer. A required buffer area may be
erected in the required yard as established by this chapter in § 156.474 of
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.469  CONFLICTS IN REQUIREMENTS.



   When an activity or land use falls under more than one category, the
most stringent of the requirements shall be applied.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.470  EASEMENTS AND SETBACKS.



   (A)   (1)   Required landscaping may be placed wholly or
partially in utility or other easements providing all requirements can be
fulfilled and approval is granted by the holder of the easements.



      (2)   The planting of trees directly under utility wires shall
be avoided.



   (B)   (1)   In no case, however, shall buffer areas be
established that block the sight distance at street or driveway intersections.



      (2)   In the case of a town street intersection, the sight
triangle shall consist of the area between points 35 feet from the
right-of-way line along both intersecting streets.



   (C)   Buffer areas are not required in the front yard or in side
yards closer to the street than the front building line of the structure
unless screening an off-street parking area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.471  GREENBELT AREAS.



   At a minimum, that portion of any lot which is within ten feet of, and
immediately adjacent to, the existing or proposed right-of-way of any public
roadway shall be reserved as a greenbelt. In the case where a treelawn is
present, the treelawn can count towards the greenbelt requirement.



   (A)   Applicability. Greenbelt requirements shall apply to all
districts, except Residence Estate, Residence Single-Family, Residence
Two-Family and the Central Business Districts.



   (B)   Greenbelt requirements.



      (1)   Landscape in the greenbelt area shall include one or
more of the following items:



         (a)   One shade tree for each 40 lineal feet of
frontage. Such trees may be evenly spaced at 40 feet on center or grouped
together; provided that, in no case shall spacing between trees exceed 80
feet;



         (b)   One ornamental tree for each 25 lineal feet of
frontage. Such trees may be evenly spaced at 25 feet on center or grouped
together; provided that, in no case shall spacing between trees exceed 50
feet;



         (c)   One shrub for each five lineal feet of frontage.
Such shrubs may be evenly spaced at five feet on center or grouped together;
provided that, in no case shall spacing between shrubs exceed 15 feet; or



         (d)   Grass maintained free of weeds and debris.



      (2)   A combination of shade and ornamental trees may be used;
provided that, in no case shall spacing between trees exceed 50 feet.



      (3)   Greenbelt areas shall be composed of trees, grass and
other softscape treatment only, except that it may include pedestrian
walkways; provided, the walkway does not occupy more than 25% of the
greenbelt area and green space is maintained on both sides of the walkway by
the property owner or the owner of the property to which the greenbelt abuts.



      (4)   (a)   Access roads and driveways may cut through a
greenbelt area perpendicular to the public roadway or parallel to a lot line
without replacement requirements.



         (b)   If access roads and driveways are located within a
greenbelt area in any other manner, the greenbelt area shall be increased by
at least an equal amount of area.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.472  SCREENING AND INTERIOR LANDSCAPING OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND
OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS.



   (A)   Screening of off-street parking and loading areas.



      (1)   Whenever a parking area for ten or more vehicles or an
off-street loading area is located in, or adjacent to a residential district,
or is adjacent to a religious place of worship, educational institution, or
other institution located on an adjoining lot, it shall be effectively
screened on all sides which adjoin or face any property used for these
purposes. Screening shall be as follows.



         (a)   Screening shall be by an acceptably designed wall,
fence or evergreen planting screen that is approved by the Building
Commissioner.



         (b)   Such fence, wall or opaque planting shall not be
less than three feet, nor more than four feet in height for off-street
parking areas and six feet in height for off-street loading areas. Such
fence, wall or opaque planting shall be maintained in good condition.



         (c)   The space between such fence, wall or planting
screen and the lot line of the adjoining premises in any residential district
shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover and
maintained in good condition.



         (d)   The finished face of the fence or wall shall face
the adjoining property.



      (2)   In the event that terrain or other natural features are
such that the erection of such fence, wall or planting screen will not serve
the intended purpose, then the Building Commissioner may allow an exception,
so that no such fence, wall or planting screen and landscaping shall be
required.



   (B)   Interior landscaping of off-street parking areas. Off-street
parking areas containing more than 6,000 square feet of area or 20 or more
vehicular parking spaces, whichever is less, shall provide interior
landscaping. For each 100 square feet or fraction thereof of vehicular use
area, at least five square feet of interior landscape area shall be provided.



      (1)   Interior landscape requirements. Interior landscaping
shall be dispersed throughout the parking area. Landscaping shall be situated
such that large, unbroken areas of pavement are avoided.



         (a)   Minimum area. The minimum landscape area permitted
shall be 180 square feet, excluding curbs, with a four-foot minimum dimension
to all trees from edge of pavement where vehicles overhang.



         (b)   Interior landscape dispersion. Fifty percent of
the required interior landscaped areas shall be installed at the end of
parking bays. The balance of the required interior landscaped area may be
installed anywhere within the parking lot.



         (c)   Landscape area barriers. A permanent barrier, such
as curbing or wheel stops, shall enclose each interior landscaped island or
peninsula in order to minimize damage from vehicles and pedestrians.
Landscape areas shall be filled with uncompacted, well-drained soil.



      (2)   Minimum tree specifications.



         (a)   In addition to greenbelt and screening
requirements, a minimum of one tree shall be planted for each 3,000 square
feet of impervious surface.



         (b)   Trees located at the end of a parking bay shall be
deciduous shade or deciduous ornamental.  Trees located in any other portion
of the interior landscaped area may be deciduous shade, deciduous ornamental
or evergreen.



         (c)   To retain visibility within the parking area,
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least six feet above the ground. The
remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs, herbaceous plants, ornamental
grasses and/or ground cover, not to exceed three feet in height.



         (d)   All plant material shall at minimum meet the
standards established in § 156.468 of this chapter.



   (C)   Vehicle overhang. Parked vehicles may hang over the interior
landscaped area no more than two and one-half feet. Concrete or other wheel
stops shall be provided to ensure no greater overhang or penetration in the
landscaped area.



   (D)   Grass and ground cover. Grass or ground cover shall be planted
on all portions of the landscaped areas not occupied by other landscaped
material.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.473  SCREENING OF SERVICE STRUCTURES.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Screening of service structures is subject to the
conditions found in this subchapter and in §§ 156.361 and 156.363 of this
chapter.



      (2)   Service structures shall include, but not be limited to,
loading docks, propane tanks, dumpsters, electrical transformers, utility
vaults which extend above the ground; ground-mounted utility equipment and
electrical and other equipment or elements providing service to a building or
a site. The screening height shall be based upon the tallest point of the
structure(s) being buffered.



   (B)   Location of screening. A continuous planting of evergreen,
fence or wall must enclose any service structure on all sides, unless such
structure ventilation and/or must be frequently moved or accessed, in which
case screening material shall be established to allow for such ventilation
and/or access to the structure.



   (C)   Curbs to protect screening material.



      (1)   Whenever screening material is placed around any
dumpster or waste collection unit that is emptied or removed mechanically on
a regular basis, a curb to contain the placement of the container shall be
provided within the screening material.



      (2)   The curbing shall be at least one foot from the material
and shall be designed to prevent possible damage to the screening when the
container is moved or emptied.







 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.474  BUFFER AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   The following table establishes the minimum buffer
area requirements.



      (2)   When any activity or use of land falls under one or more
of the categories listed, the most stringent of the requirements shall apply
to the entire property or project.



 

When
 
Is Proposed to Abut
 
The Minimum Buffer Area Shall Be
 
With the Following Materials




Any multi-family use in the Residential Multi-Family Low Density or
Residential Multi-Family High Density Districts
 
Any Single-Family or Two- Family Residential District or residential land use
 
A width sufficient to erect and maintain an acceptable buffer area
 
A 6-foot fence, wall or earthen mound/berm and a mix of evergreen trees,
deciduous trees and/or shrubs to soften the fence, wall or mound/berm


OR


A buffer area planted and maintained with evergreens at least 5 feet in
height or an evergreen hedge at least 4 feet in height, situated so as to
provide an effective opaque and permanent visual buffer upon installation


Any non-residential use in the Business Local District
 
Any residential district or residential land use
 
A width sufficient to erect and maintain an acceptable buffer area
 
A 6-foot fence, wall or earthen mound/berm and a mix of evergreen trees,
deciduous trees and/or shrubs to soften the fence, wall or mound/berm


OR


A buffer area planted and maintained with evergreens at least 5 feet in
height or an evergreen hedge at least 4 feet in height, situated so as to
provide an effective opaque and permanent visual buffer upon installation


Any non-residential use in the Business General District
 
Any residential district or residential land use
 
A width sufficient to erect and maintain an acceptable buffer area
 
A 6-foot fence, wall or earthen mound/berm and 3 evergreen trees, plus 3
shrubs for every 50 lineal feet of buffer area. Evergreen shrubs may be
substituted where space does not permit planting of evergreen trees at a rate
of 3 shrubs per tree


OR


5 evergreen trees, planted in an staggered manner as to create an opaque
screen, plus 5 shrubs for every 50 lineal feet of buffer area


Any industrial use in the Limited Industrial District
 
Any non-industrial land use
 
30 feet in width
 
A 6-foot fence, wall or earthen mound/berm and 6 evergreen trees, plus 4
deciduous trees, plus 8 shrubs for every 75 lineal feet of buffer area


OR


12 evergreen trees, plus 4 deciduous trees, plus 14 shrubs for every 75
lineal feet of buffer area


Any industrial use in the Industrial District
 
Any non-industrial or light industrial land use
 
40 feet in width
 
A 6-foot fence, wall or earthen mound/berm and 8 evergreen trees, plus 5
deciduous trees, plus 10 shrubs for every 75 lineal feet of buffer area


OR


14 evergreen trees, plus 6 deciduous trees, plus 16 shrubs for every 75
lineal feet of buffer area




 



   (B)   The following graphic is to be used as an example where
staggered or offset plantings are indicated in the table above.







 



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.475  MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner may approve modifications to the
landscape and buffer requirements.



   (B)   The Administrator shall base his/her decision on all of the
following criteria:



      (1)   The specific conditions which are unique to the
applicant’s land;



      (2)   The manner in which the strict application of the
provision of this subchapter would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use
of the land in a manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in
the same zone;



      (3)   The unique conditions and circumstances are not the
result of actions of the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this
subchapter;



      (4)   Reasons that the modification shall preserve, not harm,
the public safety and welfare and shall not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood; and



      (5)   A demonstration that the applicant has provided for a
buffer that achieves the spirit of this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.476  APPEALS.



   The Plan Commission may hear appeals on the decision of the Building
Commissioner. Further appeal of the Plan Commission decision shall be to the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 156.490  BUILDING COMMISSIONER; DUTIES.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner is hereby designated and authorized
to enforce this chapter.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the Building Commissioner
shall have the following duties:



      (1)   Upon finding that any of the provisions of this chapter
are being violated, the Building Commissioner shall notify in writing the
person responsible for the violation, ordering the action necessary to
correct the violation;



      (2)   Order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings
or structures;



      (3)   Order removal of illegal buildings or structures or
illegal additions or structural alterations;



      (4)   Order discontinuance of any illegal work being done; and



      (5)   Take any other action authorized by this chapter to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violations of this chapter. This may
include the issuance of and action on zoning and certificate of occupancy
permits and other similar administrative duties as are permissible under the
law.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.491  PLAN COMMISSION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the Plan Commission shall have the
following duties:



   (A)   Initiate proposed amendments to this chapter;



   (B)   Review all proposed amendments to this chapter and make
recommendations to the Town Council; and



   (C)   Review all planned unit developments as provided in §§
156.330 through 156.335 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.492  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   The Board shall have the following powers, and it shall be its
duty to:



      (1)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Commissioner in
the enforcement of this chapter;



      (2)   Permit and authorize exceptions to the district
regulations only in the classes or cases or in particular situation as
specified in the ordinance or by state law;



      (3)   Hear and determine appropriate action on permits for
special exception uses as identified in §§ 156.445 through 156.454 of this
chapter, development plans or other uses upon which the Board is required to
act under this chapter; and



      (4)   Authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases such variances
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where owing to special conditions, fully demonstrated on the basis
of the facts presented, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done.



   (B)   Processes and procedures for the Board of Zoning Appeals are
located in §§ 156.510 through 156.519 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.493  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   Improvement location permit required. Within the
jurisdictional area of the town’s Plan Commission no structure,
improvement, or use of land may be altered, changed, placed, erected or
located on platted or unplatted lands, unless the structure, improvement or
use and its location conform with the ordinances of the town, and an
improvement location permit for such structure, improvement or use has been
issued; except that, no permit is required for buildings used exclusively for
agricultural purposes on a tract of land containing 40 acres or more, unless
used for residential purposes. Improvement location permits shall be required
for all structures as is set forth in the town’s Building Code, as amended
from time to time.



   (B)   Application for a location permit. Every person shall make
application for an improvement location permit before beginning construction
and shall at the time of making such application furnish a site plan or
development plan of the real estate upon which said application for an
improvement location permit is made, at least five days prior to the issuance
of said improvement location permit, unless said five-day period has been
waived. Said site plan shall be drawn to scale showing the following items:



      (1)   Legal or site description of the real estate involved;



      (2)   Location and size of all buildings, structures, setbacks
and yard;



      (3)   Width and length of all entrances and exits to and from
said real estate;



      (4)   All adjacent and adjoining roads or highways; and



      (5)   Surface water drainage, detention or retention plan and
such other pertinent information as may be required by the Building
Commissioner on a case by case basis.



   (C)   Certificate of compliance necessary.



      (1)   An application for an improvement location permit for
any use that is commercial or industrial in nature shall be accompanied by a
“certificate of compliance” subscribed by a professional engineer or
registered architect of the state, certifying that the use intended will
satisfy the performance standards of commercial, limited industrial use or
industrial use, as the case may be, and in the district in which it is to be
located. The Building Commissioner may take ten days in which to study the
application; during which time, he or she may consult with appropriate
technical consultants. If, after the ten-day period, the Building
Commissioner has not required any additional information or stated any
objections in writing, the Building Commissioner shall issue the improvement
location permit.



      (2)   No improvement location permit shall be issued for
excavation for or the erection, reconstruction or structural alteration of
any building, before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   Development plan required. The development plan which
accompanies the application for an improvement location permit for a use
which is multiple family, business, industrial, a special exception or a
planned unit development shall include a certification made by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the proposed
development will not increase the volume or rate of flow of surface water
from the site onto adjacent property or, if the volume of run-off or the rate
of flow of surface water will be increased, that the development plan
includes detention or retention structures which will not increase the volume
or rate flow of surface water onto adjacent property. The Building
Commissioner shall forward the application and development plan to the
Department of Storm Water Management and shall take no further action on the
application until the development plan has been accepted as proposed or as
modified and approved by the Department of Storm Water Management and
returned to the Building Commissioner. Development plans so furnished shall
be filed and retained as a permanent public record.



   (E)   Issuance of improvement location permit. The Building
Commissioner shall issue an improvement location permit, upon written
application as follows:



      (1)   When the proposed structure, improvement or use and its
location conform in all respects to the master plan for the town; and



      (2)   For a conditional use or special exception only
following receipt of notice from the Board of Zoning Appeals that an
application therefor has been approved by said Board.



   (F)   Posting of improvement location permit. Within seven days
following the issuance of an improvement location permit, the applicant shall
post such permit in a conspicuous place, on the lot for which said permit was
issued.



   (G)   Appeal of improvement location permit issuance. Any decision
of the Building Commissioner of the town concerning the issuance of an
improvement location permit may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by
any person claiming to be adversely affected by such decisions, within 60
days from such decision. However, it shall be the responsibility of the party
appealing such decision to take such action promptly to avoid additional
costs or losses to the person or entity obtaining such permit.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.494  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, reconstructed or structurally altered (reconstruction or structural
alteration shall not include residential remodeling unless specifically
applied by the Building Commissioner) shall be occupied or used, in whole or
in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued stating that the building and use comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the building or premises of the use
in the district in which it is to be located, to the extent that the town is
presently issuing such permits. The failure of the town to use or issue such
certificates shall not be cause to preclude it from requiring such
certificates at any future time.



   (B)   When the improvement covered by the improvement location
permit has been completed in substantial conformity with the site plan or
development plan submitted in the application pursuant to this subchapter, a
certificate of occupancy shall then be issued. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner or the contractor to notify the Building Commissioner of the
need for inspections prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



   (C)   No change shall be made in the use of land or in the use of
any building or part thereof, now or hereinafter erected, reconstructed or
structurally altered, without a certificate of occupancy having been issued,
and no such certificate shall be issued to make such a change unless it
conforms with the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally
with the application for an improvement location permit and shall be issued
within ten days after the lawful erection, reconstruction or structural
alteration of such building or other improvement of the land shall have been
completed; provided that, all pertinent laws, statutes, regulations and
ordinances have been complied with.



   (E)   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on
file in the office of the Building Commissioner and copies shall be furnished
upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building or land affected.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.495  TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
Building Commissioner for a period of six months during alterations or
partial occupancy of a building or structure pending its completion.



   (B)   The temporary certificate of occupancy may be renewed by the
Building Commissioner for a period not to exceed six additional months for
good cause shown by the applicant.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)




BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS




§ 156.510  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established with membership and
appointment provided in accordance with the laws of the state (I.C. 36-7-4).



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.511  ORGANIZATION.



   At the first meeting of each year, the Board shall elect a Chairperson
and a Vice-Chairperson from among its members, and it may appoint and fix the
compensation of a Secretary and such employees as are necessary for the
discharge of its duties, all in conformity to and compliance with salaries
and compensation theretofore fixed by the legislative authority.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.512  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to
effectuate the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.513  MEETINGS AND RECORDS.



   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep written minutes of its proceedings, keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, prepare findings and record the vote of each member
voting upon each question. All minutes and records shall be filed in the
office of the Board and shall be a public record.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.514  APPEAL.



   Any decision of the Building Commissioner in the enforcement of this
chapter may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any aggrieved
person or party that is or may be adversely affected by such decision within
60 days of such decision.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.515  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   The Board shall have the following powers, and it shall be its
duty to:



      (1)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Commissioner in
the enforcement of this chapter;



      (2)   Permit and authorize exceptions to the district
regulations only in the classes or cases or in particular situation as
specified in the ordinance or by state law;



      (3)   Hear and determine appropriate action on permits for
special exception uses as identified in §§ 156.445 through 156.454 of this
chapter, development plans or other uses upon which the Board is required to
act under this chapter; and



      (4)   Authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases such variances
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where owing to special conditions, fully demonstrated on the basis
of the facts presented, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done.



   (B)   In exercising its powers, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from as in its opinion ought to be done in the
premises, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the Building
Commissioner from whom the appeal is taken.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.516  VARIANCES.



   (A)   General. The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal
in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not
be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in
unnecessary hardship. No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures
or buildings in the same district and no permitted or non-conforming use of
lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds
for issuance of a variance. variances shall not be granted on the grounds of
convenience or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of
this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship.



   (B)   Submission requirements. The following information is required
for the application of a variance request:



      (1)   Name, address and phone number(s) of applicants;



      (2)   Legal description of property and location of map
(sketch) showing relation of property to adjacent roads and property;



      (3)   Description of nature of variance requested; and



      (4)   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested
variance conforms to the requirements of this section.



   (C)   Granting variances. In carrying into effect its powers to
grant variances, the Board shall be guided by the following criteria:



      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property or to the intended use that do not
apply generally to the other property or class of use in the same vicinity
and district;



      (2)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape
or topographic conditions of the specific property involved, an unusual and
unnecessary hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience or economic hardship, if the strict letter of the ordinance
were to be carried out;



      (3)   Such variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the
same vicinity and district, but which is denied to the property in question;



      (4)   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by the
ordinance and has not been caused by any persons presently having an interest
in the property;



      (5)   Granting of the variance will not constitute a change of
use in the district or classification;



      (6)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property
included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse
manner;



      (7)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community; and



      (8)   The approval does not interfere substantially with the
comprehensive plan then in effect.



   (D)   Additional conditions and safeguards. The Board may further
impose such conditions and restrictions on the use benefitted by a variance
as are necessary to meet the standards established and the intent of this
chapter.



   (E)   Expiration of variance. A variance granted by the Board shall
be deemed null and void unless a building permit was issued and work thereon
is substantially underway within 12 months of the granting of said variance,
or within the period of time beyond 12 months as may be granted by the Board.



   (F)   Restrictions on Board actions on variances.



      (1)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review
by certiorari.



      (2)   No variance in the application of the provisions of this
chapter or to development standards (such as height, bulk, area or setbacks)
shall be made by the Board relating to buildings, land or premises, now
existing or to be used or constructed, unless after public hearing, the Board
shall find that:



         (a)   The approval will not be injurious to the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community;



         (b)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner; and



         (c)   The strict application of the terms of the
ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property.



      (3)   No variance in the application of the provisions of this
chapter as to use shall be made by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The use of
property shall be determined by the zoning districts provided or by the
special exception provisions.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.517  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING IN NEWSPAPER AND TO INTERESTED PARTIES.



   Notice of public hearings for amendments to this chapter shall be as
prescribed in I.C. 5-3-1.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.518  ACTION BY THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   Within 35 days after the public hearing required in § 156.517 of this
chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall either approve, approve with
supplementary conditions or disapprove the request for an appeal or variance.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.519  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   (A)   Application. Upon receipt of a properly completed application
and development plan for a special exception use permit, the Building
Commissioner shall transmit to the Plan Commission for investigation as to
the manner in which the proposed location and character of the special
exception use will affect the comprehensive development plan of the town. The
Plan Commission shall report the results of its study of the application to
the Board of Zoning Appeals including the recommendation of any additional
conditions recommended by the Commission and shall be scheduled for a public
hearing in accordance with state statues.



   (B)   Notice. Notice of the public hearing for the special exception
use shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of I.C. 36-7-4-920
through 36-7-4-921.



   (C)   Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals, shall, after public notice
and the close of the hearing according to law, take one of the following
actions:



         (a)   Approve the application as submitted;



         (b)   Approve the application subject to the additional
conditions as recommended by the Plan Commission and set forth in §
156.448(A) of this chapter;



         (c)   Table the application for further consideration; or



         (d)   Deny the application.



      (2)   Upon reaching a decision, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall instruct the Building Commissioner to notify the applicant, in writing,
of its decision. If the application is approved or approved with conditions,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall also instruct the Building Commissioner to
issue a special exception permit which shall specify all conditions
associated with the special exception approval.



      (3)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall deny, approve or
approve with conditions, special exception uses as identified in §§ 156.445
through 156.454 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)



§ 156.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Notice. Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall alter the use of land or build,
reconstruct or structurally alter any building without first securing an
improvement location permit, or who shall build, reconstruct or structurally
alter any building in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted
and approved thereunder, or who shall occupy such altered land use or new or
structurally altered building prior to securing a certificate of occupancy,
shall, for each and every violation or non-compliance be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined up to the maximum permitted
by state law per day that said violation continues to exist.



   (B)   Notice of violation. The notice of any violation of this
chapter shall be as follows.



      (1)   Whenever the Building Commissioner determines that there
is a violation of any provision of this chapter, a notice of such violation
shall be issued. Such notice shall:



         (a)   Be in writing;



         (b)   Identify the violation;



         (c)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why
it is being issued and refer to the subchapter and section of this chapter
being violated; and



         (d)   State the time by which the violation shall be
corrected.



      (2)   Service of notice of the violation shall be as follows:



         (a)   By personal delivery to the person or persons
responsible, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of residence of the
owner with a person of 16 years or older;



         (b)   By certified mail, and first class mail
simultaneously, addressed to the person or persons responsible at a last
known address. Service shall be deemed complete when the fact of the mailing
is entered of record, provided that the first class mail envelope is not
returned by the postal authorities with an endorsement showing failure of
delivery; or



         (c)   By posting a copy of the notice form in a
conspicuous place on the premises found in violation.



   (C)   Remedies.



      (1)   The Commission, the Board, the Building Commissioner or
any designated enforcement official or any person or persons, firm or
corporation jointly or severally aggrieved, may institute a suit for
injunction in the Circuit Court of the county to restrain an individual or a
government unit from violating the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The Commission or the Board may also institute a suit
for mandatory injunction directing any individual, a corporation or a
governmental unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or the requirements thereof.



      (3)   Any building, erected, raised or converted, or land or
premises used in violation of any provisions of this chapter or the
requirements thereof, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and as such
may be abated in such a manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be
abated under existing law.



(Ord. passed 9-26-2006)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS



      II.   BONDS



      III.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



      IV.   FUNDS



      V.   TAXES



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord./Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


-
 
- -
 
Cable television franchise between the town and Mediacom Indiana LLC
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. II, Art. I)


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE II:  BONDS



 

Ord./Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




6, 1975
 
12-19-1975
 
Omega Cable Project economic development bond authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. I)


3, 1976
 
12-1-1976
 
Park and recreation bond authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. I, Art. II)


6, 1978
 
11-1-1978
 
Omega Cable Company Project economic development bond authorization and
issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. II)


1, 1981
 
7-15-1981
 
Hi-Grade Egg Producers and Processors Project economic development bond
authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. III)


Res. 4, 1985
 
8-7-1985
 
Sheller Hotel, Inc., Project economic development bond authorization and
issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. IV)


Res. 2, 1986
 
3-5-1986
 
North Manchester Foundry, Inc., Project economic development bond
authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. V)


Res. 11, 1988
 
8-24-1988
 
Church of the Brethren Home, Inc., Project economic development bond
authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. VI)


5, 1990
 
6-6-1990
 
Estelle Peabody Memorial Home Project economic development bond authorization
and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. VII)


1, 1991
 
6-5-1991
 
Estelle Peabody Memorial Home Project economic development bond authorization
and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. VIII)


5
 
4-1-1992
 
Waterworks revenue bond authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. I, Art. I)


7, 1992
 
6-3-1992
 
Sewage works revenue bond authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. II, Art. I)


-
 
12-6-1994
 
Storm water management revenue bond authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title V, Ch. VI, Art. II)


7, 1997
 
8-18-1997
 
Eften, Inc., Project economic development bond authorization and issuance


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title VI, Ch. III, Art. IX)


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord./Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1, 2015
 
- -2015
 
Amending the zoning map to rezone land commonly known as 502 State Road East
from BG General Business to RSF Residential Single-Family


5, 2016   
 
- -2016
 
Amending the zoning map to rezone 92.43 acres of land from A Agricultural to
RSF Residential Single-Family


-, 2017
 
- -2017
 
Amending the zoning map to rezone land commonly known as 216 E. Old Wabash
Road from LI Limited Industrial to RE Residential Estate


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE IV:  FUNDS



 

Ord./Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
- -
 
Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. I)


-
 
- -
 
Sanitation Revenue Fund (repealed)


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. II)


-
 
- -
 
Cumulative Capital Development Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. V)


-
 
- -
 
Special Vehicle Inspection Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. VI)


-
 
- -
 
Sidewalk Replacement Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. IX)


-
 
- -
 
Tactical Equipment Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. X)


-
 
- -
 
Street Cut Deposit Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XI)


-
 
- -
 
Fire Fighting Equipment Donations Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XII)


-
 
8-16-1989
 
Cumulative Building and Equipment Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. VIII)


-
 
7-6-1994
 
Storm Water Management Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XIII)


-
 
11-2-1994
 
Drug Forfeiture Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XV)


-
 
1-1-1995
 
Revolving Concession Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XIV)


-
 
3-4-1998
 
Police Donations Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XVI)


-
 
8-6-2003
 
Riverboat Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XVII)


-
 
12-1-2004
 
Ordinance Enforcement Expense Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XVIII)


-
 
12-15-2004
 
Emergency Telephone System Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XIX)


-
 
5-4-2005
 
Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XX)


-
 
11-1-2006
 
Major Moves Constructions Fund


 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. XXI)


7, 2013
 
7-10-2013
 
TIF District Fund for the Cinergy Metronet Allocation Redevelopment District


-, 2015
 
- -2015
 
Fund No. 249, LOIT, Public Safety Fund


8, 2015
 
10-7-2015
 
General Development and Improvement Fund


2, 2016
 
5-4-2016
 
LOIT Special Distribution Fund


10, 2016
 
12-7-2016
 
Local Road and Bridge Matching Grant Fund


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  TAXES



 

Ord./Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


-
 
8-8-1997
 
Abatement of residentially distressed area: commencing at the intersection of
Wabash Road and South Street; thence east on the centerline of South Street
to the point where South Street would intersect the centerline of Maple
Street, if South Street were projected east and Maple Street were projected
south to a point where the streets would intersect; thence north on the
projected centerline of Maple Street to the centerline of South Street;
thence east on the centerline of South Street to the centerline of Elm
Street; thence north east on the centerline of South Street to the centerline
of Elm Street; thence north on the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline
of Fifth Street; thence west on the center of Fifth Street to the centerline
of Beckley Street; thence south on the centerline of Beckley Street to the
centerline of Fourth Street; thence west on the centerline of vacated portion
of Fourth Street and Fourth Street to the centerline of Weimer Street; thence
south on the centerline of Weimer Street to the centerline of Main Street;
thence east and southeasterly on the centerline of Main Street to the
centerline of the intersection of Main Street and Wabash Road; thence
southerly on the centerline of Wabash Road to the centerline of its
intersection with South Street, the place of beginning

(Prior Code, Title I, Ch. III, Art. III)


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Indiana Code





References to Prior Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Cites
 
Code Section




1-1-1-5
 
10.04


1-1-1-7
 
10.12


1-1-1-8
 
10.06


1-1-4-5
 
10.05


1-1-5-1
 
10.11


1-1-6-1
 
10.08


4-21.5-3-7
 
53.26; 152.26


5-3
 
156.333


5-3-1
 
90.02; 91.24; 156.517


5-3-1-1 et seq.
 
32.09


5-11-13-1
 
31.06


5-14-1.5 et seq.
 
32.10


5-14-1.5
 
30.08


5-14-1.5-1 et seq.
 
32.09


5-16-9 et seq.
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


5-16-9-5
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


5-16-9-8
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


Title 5, Art. 22
 
33.01


5-22
 
31.06


5-22-2-28
 
33.01


5-22-2-32
 
33.01


5-22-5-1
 
33.01


6-1.1-10-1 et seq.
 
52.15


Title 8, Art. 1.5, Ch. 5
 
32.07


8-1.5-3-4
 
52.01


8-1.5-3-4(a)
 
32.07


8-1.5-3-5
 
52.01


8-1.5-3-5(a)
 
32.07


8-1.5-3-8
 
52.01; 52.15


8-1.5-3-9.1
 
52.01


8-1.5-5
 
32.07


8-1.5-5-1 et seq.
 
32.07


8-1.5-5-6
 
32.07


9-13 et seq.
 
91.01


9-13-2-1
 
91.01


9-13-2-6
 
70.01


9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-16
 
91.07


9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32
 
91.06


9-22-1-11
 
91.02


9-22-1-19
 
91.03; 91.04


9-25-5
 
113.04


13-19
 
156.017


14-28-1
 
153.05


22-3
 
51.01


22-9.1-4 et seq.
 
94.02


22-9.5-1 et seq.
 
94.01


22-9.5-2-2
 
94.02


22-9.5-2-3
 
94.02


22-9.5-2-4
 
94.02


22-9.5-2-8
 
94.02


22-9.5-2-9
 
94.02


22-9.5-2-11
 
94.02


22-9.5-2-13
 
94.02


22-9.5-3 et seq.
 
94.09


22-9.5-3
 
94.03


22-9.5-4-8
 
94.10


22-9.5-5
 
94.02


22-9.5-5-1
 
94.03


22-9.5-6
 
94.02; 94.10


22-13-2-7
 
152.26


22-13-2-7(b)
 
152.17


22-15-4
 
152.18


25-25-2-1
 
110.03


32-25-1 through 32-25-9
 
156.017


32-28-3
 
151.05


34-28-5
 
53.04


34-28-5-4
 
53.99


34-28-5-7
 
70.26


35-44-1-3
 
31.06


36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B)
 
53.22


36-1-8-11
 
50.16


36-1-11 et seq.
 
91.24


36-1-12
 
31.06


36-4-5-5
 
110.05; 113.05


36-5-2-2
 
10.15


36-5-5-8
 
31.05


36-5-6-6
 
31.04


36-7-4
 
156.510


36-7-4 et seq.
 
156.002


36-7-4-100 et seq.
 
32.02


36-7-4-200 et seq.
 
32.02


36-7-4-207
 
32.02


36-7-4-214
 
32.02


36-7-4-600
 
156.033


36-7-9-1 et seq.
 
152.40; 152.44; 152.47; 152.48


36-7-9-2
 
152.47


36-7-9-5
 
152.43


36-7-12-1 et seq.
 
32.03


36-7-14
 
32.08


36-7-14.5
 
32.08


36-8-3-20
 
32.05


36-9-23-31 through 36-9-23-34
 
53.02; 53.65


36-9-23-32
 
53.65


36-9-23-33
 
53.65


36-9-23-34
 
53.65


36-10-3
 
32.01


36-10-3 et seq.
 
32.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code
 
2018 Code




Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 1
 
30.01; 30.20


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 2
 
30.02; 30.21


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 3
 
30.03


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 4
 
30.04


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 5
 
30.05


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 6
 
30.05


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 7
 
30.06


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 8
 
30.07


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 9
 
30.08


Title I, Ch. I, Art. I, § 10
 
30.09


Title I, Ch. I, Art. III
 
31.04


Title I, Ch. I, Art. IV
 
31.03


Title I, Ch. I, Art. V
 
31.05


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XI
 
32.02


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XII
 
32.03


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XIII
 
32.04


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XIV
 
32.05


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XV
 
32.06


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 1
 
93.15


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 2
 
93.16


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 3
 
93.17


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 4
 
93.18


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVI, § 5
 
93.18


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVII
 
32.07


Title I, Ch. I, Art. XVIII
 
32.08


Title I, Ch. II, Art. I
 
11.01


Title I, Ch. II, Art. II
 
10.99


Title I, Ch. II, Art. III
 
33.01


Title I, Ch. II, Art. IV
 
33.02


Title I, Ch. III, Art. I
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. II
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. III
 
TSO Table V


Title I, Ch. III, Art. IV
 
32.09


Title I, Ch. III, Art. V
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. VI
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. VII
 
32.10


Title I, Ch. III, Art. VIII
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. IX
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. X
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XI
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XII
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XIII
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XIV
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XV
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XVI
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XVII
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XVIII
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XIX
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XX
 
TSO Table IV


Title I, Ch. III, Art. XXI
 
TSO Table IV


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 1
 
153.01


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2
 
153.02


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 3
 
153.03


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 4
 
153.04


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 5
 
153.05


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 6
 
153.06


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 7
 
153.07


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 8
 
153.08


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 9
 
153.09


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 10
 
153.10


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 11
 
153.11


Title II, Ch. I, Art. II, § 12
 
153.12


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 1
 
94.01


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 2
 
94.02


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3
 
94.03


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 4
 
94.04


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 5
 
94.05


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 6
 
94.06


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 7
 
94.07


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 8
 
94.08; 94.99


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 9
 
94.09


Title II, Ch. I, Art. III, § 10
 
94.10


Title II, Ch. III, Art. I
 
155.01


Title II, Ch. IV, Art. I
 
150.01


Title II, Ch. V, Art. I
 
151.08


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 1
 
152.15


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 2
 
152.16


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 3
 
152.17


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 4
 
152.18


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 5
 
152.19


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 6
 
152.20


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 7
 
152.20


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 8
 
152.20


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 9
 
152.21


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 10
 
152.20


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 11
 
152.21


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 12
 
152.21


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 13
 
152.21


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 14
 
152.22


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 15
 
152.23


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 16
 
152.24


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 17
 
152.25


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 18
 
152.26


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 19
 
152.27


Title II, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 20
 
152.99


Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 1
 
91.01


Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2
 
91.02


Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 3
 
91.03


Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 4
 
91.04


Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 5
 
91.05


Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 6
 
91.06


Title III, Ch. I, Art. II, § 7
 
91.07; 91.99


Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 1
 
91.20


Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 2
 
91.21


Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3
 
91.22


Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 4
 
91.23


Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 5
 
91.24


Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 6
 
91.24


Title III, Ch. I, Art. III, § 7
 
91.99


Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 1
 
73.40


Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 2
 
73.41


Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 3
 
73.42


Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4
 
73.43


Title III, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 5
 
73.44


Title III, Ch. I, Art. V
 
70.15


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 1
 
74.01


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 2
 
74.02


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 3
 
74.02


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 4
 
74.03


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 5
 
74.04


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 7
 
74.05


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 8
 
74.06


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 9
 
74.07


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 10
 
74.08


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 11
 
74.09


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 12
 
74.10


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 13
 
74.11


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 14
 
74.12


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 1
 
72.01


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 2
 
72.01


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 3
 
72.02


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 4
 
72.03


Title III, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 5
 
72.04


Title III, Ch. II, Art. I
 
151.01


Title III, Ch. II, Art. II
 
151.02; 151.99


Title III, Ch. II, Art. III
 
151.03


Title III, Ch. II, Art. IV
 
151.04


Title III, Ch. II, Art. V
 
151.05


Title III, Ch. III, Art. I
 
152.01; 152.99


Title III, Ch. IV, Art. I
 
152.02; 152.99


Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 1
 
90.35


Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 2
 
90.36


Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 3
 
90.37


Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 4
 
90.37


Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 5
 
90.99


Title III, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 6
 
90.38


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 1
 
90.50


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 2
 
90.51


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 3
 
90.52


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 4
 
90.52


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 5
 
90.52


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 6
 
90.53


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 7
 
90.99


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 8
 
90.99


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 9
 
90.55


Title III, Ch. VI, Art. I, § 10
 
90.54


Title III, Ch. VIII, Art. I
 
130.01


Title III, Ch. IX, Art. I
 
90.02; 90.99


Title III, Ch. X, Art. I
 
151.06; 151.99


Title III, Ch. XI, Art. I
 
93.01


Title III, Ch. XI, Art. II, § 1
 
93.02


Title III, Ch. XI, Art. II, § 2
 
93.99


Title III, Ch. XII, Art. I
 
90.01


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 1
 
90.15


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 2
 
90.16


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 3
 
90.17


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 4
 
90.17


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 5
 
90.18


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 6
 
90.19


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 7
 
90.20


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 8
 
90.99


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 9
 
90.99


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. I, § 10
 
90.21


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. II, § 1
 
90.22


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. II, § 2
 
90.22


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. II, § 3
 
90.99


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. III
 
90.23


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 1
 
152.40


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 2
 
152.41


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 3
 
152.42


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 4
 
152.43


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 5
 
152.44


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 6
 
152.45


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 7
 
152.46


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 8
 
152.47


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 9
 
152.48


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 10
 
152.49


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. IV, § 11
 
152.50


Title III, Ch. XIII, Art. V
 
151.07; 151.99


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 1
 
110.01


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 2
 
110.02


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 3
 
110.03


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 4
 
110.04


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 5
 
110.04


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 6
 
110.05


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 7
 
110.06


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 8
 
110.07


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 9
 
110.08


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 10
 
110.09


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 11
 
110.10


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. I, § 12
 
110.05


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 1
 
111.01


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2
 
111.02


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 3
 
111.03


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 4
 
111.04


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 5
 
111.05


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 6
 
111.05


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 7
 
111.05


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 8
 
111.06


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 9
 
111.07


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 10
 
111.08


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 11
 
111.09


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. II, § 12
 
111.10


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. III, § 1
 
112.01


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. III, § 2
 
112.02


Title IV, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3
 
112.03


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 1
 
113.01


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 2
 
113.02


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 3
 
113.03


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 4
 
113.04


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 5
 
113.03


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 6
 
113.05


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 7
 
113.06


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 8
 
113.05


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 9
 
113.07


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 10
 
113.08


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 11
 
113.09


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 12
 
113.10


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 13
 
113.11


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 14
 
113.12


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 15
 
113.13


Title IV, Ch. II, Art. I, § 16
 
113.14


Title IV, Ch. III, Art. I, § 1
 
114.01


Title IV, Ch. III, Art. I, § 2
 
114.01


Title V, Ch. I, Art. I
 
TSO Table II


Title V, Ch. I, Art. III
 
52.02; 52.15


Title V, Ch. I, Art. IV
 
52.01


Title V, Ch. I, Art. V
 
52.16


Title V, Ch. I, Art. VI
 
52.03; 52.99


Title V, Ch. II, Art. I
 
TSO Table II


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 1
 
53.01; 53.40; 53.99


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 2
 
53.02


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 3
 
53.02


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 4
 
53.03


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 5
 
53.03


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 6
 
53.04


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 6
 
53.25


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 8
 
53.05


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 9
 
53.06


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 10
 
53.06


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 12
 
53.41


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 13
 
53.41


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 14
 
53.41


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 15
 
53.42


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 16
 
53.43


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 17
 
53.44


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 18
 
53.45


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 19
 
53.07


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 20
 
53.08


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 21
 
53.08


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 22
 
53.09


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 23
 
53.09


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 24
 
53.09


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 25
 
53.60


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 26
 
53.60


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 27
 
53.60


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 28
 
53.60


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 30
 
53.61


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 31
 
53.61


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 32
 
53.61


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 33
 
53.62


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 34
 
53.63


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 35
 
53.64


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 36
 
53.64


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 37
 
53.64


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 38
 
53.64


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 39
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 40
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 41
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 42
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 43
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 45
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 46
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 47
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 48
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 49
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 51
 
53.65


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 52
 
53.20


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 56
 
53.21


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 57
 
53.22


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 58
 
53.23


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 59
 
53.24


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 61
 
53.25


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 62
 
53.26


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 63
 
53.26


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 64
 
53.26


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 65
 
53.26


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 66
 
53.26


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 67
 
53.26


Title V, Ch. II, Art. II, § 68
 
53.26


Title V, Ch. III, Art. I
 
50.02


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. I
 
51.01


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 1
 
51.15


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 2
 
51.16


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 3
 
51.17


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 4
 
51.18


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 5
 
51.19


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 6
 
51.20


Title V, Ch. IV, Art. II, § 7
 
51.21


Title V, Ch. V, Art. I
 
50.15


Title V, Ch. V, Art. II
 
50.16


Title V, Ch. VI, Art. I
 
154.01


Title V, Ch. VI, Art. II
 
TSO Table II


Title V, Ch. VII, Art. I
 
50.01


Title VI, Ch. I, Art. I
 
32.01


Title VI, Ch. I, Art. II
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. II, Art. I
 
TSO Table I


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. I
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. II
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. III
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. IV
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. V
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. VI
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. VII
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. VIII
 
TSO Table II


Title VI, Ch. III, Art. IX
 
TSO Table II


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. I
 
70.01


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.1
 
70.16


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.2
 
70.17


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.3
 
70.18


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.4
 
70.19


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.5
 
70.19


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.6
 
70.19


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.7
 
70.20


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.8
 
70.21


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.9
 
70.22


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.10
 
70.23


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.11
 
70.24


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.12
 
70.25


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.13
 
70.25


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2.14
 
70.25


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.1
 
70.40


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.3
 
70.40


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.2
 
70.41


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.4
 
70.42


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.6
 
70.43


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.7
 
70.44


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.8
 
70.44


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.9
 
70.45


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.10
 
70.45


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.11
 
70.45


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. III, § 3.12
 
70.45


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.1
 
71.01


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.2
 
71.02


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.3
 
71.03


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.4
 
71.04


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.5
 
71.05


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.6
 
71.06


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.7
 
71.07


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.8
 
71.08


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.9
 
71.09


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.10
 
71.10


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.11
 
71.11


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.12
 
71.11


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.13
 
71.06


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4.14
 
71.12


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. V
 
Ch. 76, Schd. I


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VI
 
72.05


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VII
 
Ch. 76, Schd. II


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.1
 
72.30


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.2
 
72.30


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.3
 
72.31


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.4
 
72.32


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.5
 
72.33


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.6
 
72.33


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.7
 
72.34


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.8
 
72.35


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. VIII, § 8.9
 
72.36


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.1
 
72.06


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.2
 
72.07


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.3
 
72.08


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.4
 
72.08


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.5
 
72.08


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.6
 
72.09


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.7
 
72.10


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.8
 
72.11


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.9
 
72.12


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.10
 
72.13


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.11
 
72.14


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. IX, § 9.12
 
72.15


Title VIII, Ch. I, Art. X
 
72.16


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.1
 
75.01


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.2
 
75.02


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.3
 
75.03


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.4
 
75.04


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.5
 
75.05


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.6
 
75.06


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.7
 
75.07


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.8
 
75.08


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.9
 
75.09


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XI, § 11.10
 
75.10


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.1
 
73.25


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.2
 
73.26


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.3
 
73.26


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.4
 
73.26


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XII, § 12.5
 
73.27


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.1
 
73.01


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.2
 
73.02


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.3
 
73.03


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.4
 
73.04


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.5
 
73.05


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.6
 
73.06


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.7
 
73.07


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.8
 
73.08


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.9
 
73.08


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.10
 
73.09


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.11
 
73.10


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIII, § 13.12
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIV
 
73.11


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.1
 
70.60


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.2
 
70.61


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.3
 
70.62


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.4
 
70.62


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.5
 
70.62


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.6
 
70.63


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.7
 
70.64


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.8
 
Ch. 76, Schd. V


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.9
 
70.65


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.10
 
70.65


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.11
 
70.65


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.12
 
70.65


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XV, § 15.13
 
70.99


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XVI
 
70.02


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XVII
 
70.26


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XVIII
 
70.99


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XIX
 
70.99


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI
 
Ch. 76, Schd. I; Ch. 76, Schd. III; Ch. 76, Schd. IV


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.3
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.4
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.5
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXI, § 21.6
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


Title VII, Ch. I, Art. XXII
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




2, 1961
 
6-5-1961
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


4, 1963
 
6-24-1963
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


5, 1967
 
5-1-1967
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


8, 1967
 
6-5-1967
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
7-7-1971
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
7-2-1997
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


4, 1985
 
8-7-1985
 
TSO Table II


2, 1986
 
3-5-1986
 
TSO Table II


11, 1988
 
8-24-1988
 
TSO Table II


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


-
 
3-2-1940
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
11-29-1958
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


6, 1975
 
12-19-1975
 
TSO Table II


3, 1976
 
12-1-1976
 
TSO Table II


6, 1978
 
11-1-1978
 
TSO Table II


1, 1981
 
7-15-1981
 
TSO Table II


-
 
10-3-1984
 
90.35—90.38


-
 
4-1-1989
 
154.01


-
 
6-5-1989
 
52.01


-
 
8-16-1989
 
TSO Table IV


5, 1990
 
6-6-1990
 
TSO Table II


1, 1991
 
6-5-1991
 
TSO Table II


14, 1992
 
- -1992
 
53.01—53.09; 53.20—53.26; 53.40—53.45; 53.60—53.65; 53.99


5
 
4-1-1992
 
TSO Table II


7, 1992
 
6-3-1992
 
TSO Table II


-
 
7-1-1992
 
92.01


-
 
10-7-1992
 
32.07


-
 
7-6-1994
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
11-2-1994
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
12-6-1994
 
TSO Table II


-
 
1-1-1995
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
2-2-1995
 
50.15


-
 
3-1-1995
 
90.35—90.38; 90.99


-
 
6-7-1995
 
70.26


-
 
4-10-1996
 
52.15


-
 
7-10-1996
 
90.20


-
 
9-4-1996
 
91.24


-
 
10-2-1996
 
51.15


-
 
12-4-1996
 
90.23


7, 1997
 
8-18-1997
 
TSO Table II


-
 
11-5-1997
 
153.01—153.12


-
 
12-3-1997
 
93.02; 93.99; 151.02; 151.99


-
 
3-4-1998
 
TSO Table IV


4, 1998
 
3-4-1998
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
4-1-1998
 
52.03; 52.99


-
 
7-1-1998
 
33.01


-
 
10-1-1998
 
90.02


-
 
11-12-1998
 
50.15


14, 1998
 
11-12-1998
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
4-14-1999
 
90.35—90.38; 90.99


-
 
6-2-1999
 
152.15—152.27; 152.99


-
 
4-12-2000
 
33.02; 52.16


-
 
5-3-2000
 
70.99


3, 2000
 
5-3-2000
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
7-12-2000
 
74.01—74.12


-
 
7-12-2000
 
151.07; 151.99


-
 
3-7-2001
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


-
 
6-6-2001
 
Ch. 76, Schd. II; Ch. 77, Schd. I


-
 
7-2-2001
 
90.16; 90.22; 90.99


-
 
9-5-2001
 
51.16; 51.17


-
 
2-6-2002
 
Ch. 76, Schd. IV; Ch. 77, Schd. II


2, 2001
 
5-1-2002
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
6-6-2002
 
152.01; 152.99


-
 
7-11-2002
 
30.21; Ch. 77, Schd. II; 90.02


-
 
12-5-2002
 
52.15


-
 
12-18-2002
 
50.01


2, 2003
 
2-6-2003
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
3-5-2003
 
50.15


3, 2003
 
4-2-2003
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
8-6-2003
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
10-1-2003
 
73.10


-
 
11-5-2003
 
70.99; Ch. 77, Schd. II


-
 
9-1-2004
 
73.01; Ch. 77, Schd. I; Ch. 77, Schd. II


-
 
11-3-2004
 
50.16


-
 
12-1-2004
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
12-1-2004
 
70.01; 70.19; 70.99; 74.01—74.12; 91.01; 91.21; 91.23; 91.99


-
 
12-15-2004
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
5-4-2005
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
12-7-2005
 
74.10; Ch. 76, Schd. II


-
 
2-2-2006
 
50.16; 52.15


-
 
4-12-2006
 
53.61; Ch. 76, Schd. II


-
 
9-1-2006
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I; Ch. 77, Schd. II


-
 
9-6-2006
 
52.16; 90.16—90.20; 90.99


-
 
9-26-2006
 
156.001—156.018; 156.030—156.037; 156.050—156.057; 156.070—156.077;
156.090—156.097; 156.110—156.117; 156.130—156.137; 156.150—156.157;
156.170—156.177; 156.190—156.197; 156.210—156.217; 156.230—156.237;
156.250—156.257; 156.270—156.277; 156.290—156.297; 156.310—156.317;
156.330—156.335; 156.350—156.369; 156.380—156.385; 156.400—156.411;
156.425—156.432; 156.445—156.454; 156.465—156.476; 156.490—156.495;
156.510—156.519; 156.999


-
 
11-1-2006
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
5-2-2007
 
52.15


7, 2007
 
6-6-2007
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


-
 
8-1-2007
 
Ch. 76, Schd. I


-
 
8-1-2007
 
151.06; 151.99


-
 
1-2-2008
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


5, 2008
 
7-2-2008
 
Ch. 76, Schd. VI


8
 
10-1-2008
 
32.08


-
 
11-5-2008
 
52.15


-
 
12-3-2008
 
152.40—152.50


4, 2012
 
4-11-2012
 
53.01; 53.22; 53.24; 53.26; 53.43


5, 2012
 
6-6-2012
 
31.06


6, 2012
 
7-11-2012
 
90.02


7, 2012
 
9-5-2012
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


9, 2012
 
9-5-2012
 
156.370


10, 2012
 
11-7-2012
 
90.02


2, 2013
 
3-13-2013
 
94.01—94.10


7, 2013
 
7-10-2013
 
TSO Table IV


10, 2013
 
11-6-2013
 
151.06


1, 2014
 
4-2-2014
 
52.15


3, 2014
 
7-2-2014
 
92.01


6, 2014
 
10-1-2014
 
156.054; 156.074; 156.094; 156.114; 156.134; 156.154; 156.174; 156.403


8, 2015
 
10-7-2015
 
TSO Table IV


9, 2015
 
12-16-2015
 
32.01


1, 2015
 
- -2015
 
TSO Table III


-, 2015
 
- -2015
 
TSO Table IV


1
 
- -2016
 
31.02


5, 2016
 
- -2016
 
TSO Table III


-, 2017
 
- -2017
 
31.01; TSO Table III


2, 2016
 
5-4-2016
 
TSO Table IV


10, 2016
 
12-7-2016
 
TSO Table IV


4
 
8-2-2017
 
52.15


5
 
8-2-2017
 
53.61


3, 2018
 
8-1-2018
 
90.65—90.82; 90.99


 
 
 
 
 




 


