
New Albany, IN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF NEW ALBANY, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance G-17-16, passed 11-6-2017; and
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Service, 2017 Acts,
Pamphlet #5



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         11.   CITY STANDARDS




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of New Albany shall
be designated as the "Code of New Albany" and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I, compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITYor TOWN. The City of New
Albany, Indiana.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY. Floyd County, Indiana.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
SWEARand SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission or department of the city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Indiana.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the Common Council or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or", if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the Common Council requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect
from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall, in any way, be effected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall by itself be repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the Common Council shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed
5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25,
passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example: (I.C. 36-5-2-2)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



   § 31.10  MAYOR.



      The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the legislative body.



   (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-1980)



   Statutory reference:



      Powers and duties of the Mayor, see I.C. 36-4-5-3



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500 for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS



Section



New Albany Flag



   11.01   Description of flag



   11.02   Adoption as official flag



Official Time



   11.10   Official time



Cross-reference:



   City divided into six districts, see § 30.65



NEW ALBANY FLAG



§ 11.01  DESCRIPTION OF FLAG.



   A green background, symbolic of the green hills and of the many
different kinds of trees native to the area and Indiana, on which the
following are emblazoned:



      White shield edged in gold, symbolic of the character and courage
of the varied nationalities of our ancestors, with a gold torch thereon,
representing enlightenment and liberty; and the numerals "1813", the year of
the establishment of the City of New Albany, all within a semicircle of 19
gold stars, representing Indiana as the nineteenth state; and a gold pilot
wheel in the lower right-hand corner, symbolic of our historic background as
a river city.



(Res. R-62-7, passed 10-1-1962)



§ 11.02  ADOPTION AS OFFICIAL FLAG.



   The flag as described in § 11.01 is adopted as the official flag of
the City of New Albany, Indiana, and shall be displayed and flown as the
official city flag on all proper occasions.



(Res. R-62-7, passed 10-1-1982)



OFFICIAL TIME



§ 11.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the City of New Albany, Indiana, shall be as
established by state law.



Statutory reference:



   Standard time, see I.C. 1-1-8.1



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   COMMON COUNCIL





         31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES





         32.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS





         33.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         34.   EMPLOYMENT POLICIES





         35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION; PURCHASING





         36.   PUBLIC RECORDS





         37.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU




CHAPTER 30:  COMMON COUNCIL



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Submission of documents and reports



   30.02   Public and private agreements



Rules of Procedure



   30.15   Meetings



   30.16   President



   30.17   Vice President



   30.18   Duties of City Clerk



   30.19   Sergeant-at-arms



   30.20   Election of members of commissions at first meeting each year



   30.21   Certain city officials to attend Council meetings when
requested



   30.22   Order of business



   30.23   Conducting business in Common Council



   30.24   Amending or modifying rules



Ordinances and Resolutions



   30.35   Classification of ordinances



   30.36   Ordinances from time of introduction



Committees



   30.50   Standing committees



   30.51   Duties of various committees



   30.52   Voting on subjects introduced to committees



   30.53   Reports



   30.54   Forming committee of the whole; ordinances committed; rules



Councilmanic Districts



   30.65   City divided into six districts



Cross-reference:



   Submission of preliminary annual budget to Common Council, see § 35.01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  SUBMISSION OF DOCUMENTS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   The following boards and commissions shall submit the minutes
of their regular and special meetings to the City Clerk:



      (1)   The city's Board of Public Works and Safety;



      (2)   The city's Sewer Board;



      (3)   The New Albany-Floyd County Park and Recreation Board;



      (4)   The city's Police Merit Commission;



      (5)   The city's Plan Commission;



      (6)   The city's Board of Zoning Appeals;



      (7)   The New Albany-Floyd County Health Department Board;



      (8)   The Economic Development Commission Board;



      (9)   The city's Redevelopment Commission Board; and



      (10)   The Building Commission.



   (B)   The City Controller shall submit to the members of the Common
Council a monthly budget printout and a year-end income-expenditure report.
At the second regular monthly meeting of the Common Council each month, the
City Controller shall deliver and present to the Common Council the following
reports:



      (1)   Monthly bank reconciliations showing bank accounts
reconciling to balances in the fund report with any variances clearly
identified;



      (2)   Monthly fund reports showing beginning cash balances,
receipts, disbursements, and ending cash balances;



      (3)   Monthly budget to actual report which shows our
departments and pecentages of the budget that has been used year-to-date;



      (4)   Monthly appropriations report which shows what has been
budgeted and how much in appropriations left out of our budget; and



      (5)   Any other items that the City Council should notify the
City Controller of a need for during the first regular Common Council meeting
of that month.



   (C)   All documents shall be submitted to the City Clerk for
reproduction and distribution upon request of the individual members of the
Common Council at its regular monthly work session and caucus.



(Ord. G-87-179, passed 2-2-1987; Ord. G-15-03, passed 5-21-2015)



§ 30.02  PUBLIC AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The Common Council hereby recognizes and formally adopts I.C.
5-23 in its entirety effective immediately upon its passage.



   (B)   All contracts to which this section applies shall be void if
the procedures provided for therein are not followed.



(Ord. G-08-15, passed 5-15-2008)



RULES OF PROCEDURE



§ 30.15  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings of the Common Council shall be held on the
first Monday and third Tuesday of each month, at 7:00 p.m.; provided that,
when the meeting day falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on
the immediately following Monday or Thursday, unless otherwise determined by
a majority of the members at the regular meeting immediately preceding the
date on which the holiday falls.



   (B)   If two regularly-scheduled meetings happen to occur during the
same workweek, the second meeting or Thursday meeting shall be held on the
immediately following Thursday, unless otherwise determined by a majority of
the members at the regular meeting immediately preceding the second or
Thursday meeting.



   (C)   Special meetings of the Common Council shall be held upon the
call of the Mayor or any five members of the Common Council, subject to the
following.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the City Executive or five
Common Council members calling the same to duly notify the City Clerk thereof
in writing including confirmed electronic communication prior to the City
Clerk sending out notice for the special meeting and in time to reasonably
permit the City Clerk to prepare and serve notice on all members in time to
allow them to be present at the meeting. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to
cause notice of the meetings to be served, in writing, upon each member,
either in person or by notice left at his or her place of residence.



      (2)   Only such ordinances, resolutions or other business
shall be considered or acted upon, or the communications received, as are
specifically stated in the call for the meeting.



      (3)   Provided, however, that special meetings may be held
upon call, waiver of notice and consent, signed by all members of the Common
Council, in which case the requirements of divisions (C)(1) and (2) above
shall not apply.



   (D)   (1)   This section shall govern the submission of items for
the Common Council meeting agenda by Common Council members. For the first
Monday meeting of the month, items to be placed on the Common Council's
agenda shall be submitted to the City Clerk no later than 12:00 p.m. on the
Tuesday preceding the meeting. For the third Thursday meeting of the month,
items to be on the agenda shall be submitted to the City Clerk no later than
12:00 p.m. on the Thursday preceding the meeting. If any regular meeting is
not on the first Monday or third Thursday, the items to be on the agenda
shall be submitted by 12:00 p.m. four business days prior to the date the
meeting will be held. Any items on the agenda for a special meeting shall be
contained within and delivered in the notice for the call of the special
meeting.



      (2)   In rare situations items can be added to the City
Council agenda after the deadline for the submission of agenda items. In
those situations, the City Clerk will attempt to distribute by electronic
form or other delivery method the item to each City Council member. At the
Council meeting, the agenda can only be amended for introduction of the item
by a unanimous vote of approval by the City Council members.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-88-103, passed 2-1-1988; Ord. G-92-135,
passed 12-7-1992; Ord. G-15-05, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. G-17-03, passed
4-3-2017; Ord. G-17-04, passed 4-20-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Scheduling of Council meetings, see I.C. 36-4-6-7



§ 30.16  PRESIDENT.



   (A)   The President shall preside at all meetings, preserve order,
decorum and decide all questions of order subject to appeal to the Common
Council. He or she shall appoint all standing committees and all special
committees that may be ordered by the Council. All standing committees shall
be appointed at the commencement of each year of the term of Council and
shall serve only during the term of the President appointing same. He or she
shall fill all existing vacancies that may thereafter occur in any of the
committees.



   (B)   He or she shall sign all ordinances, orders and resolutions
passed by the Council before their presentation to the Mayor, as well as the
journal of proceedings.



   (C)   He or she shall vote on all issues, his or her name being
called last.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



§ 30.17  VICE PRESIDENT.



   The Vice President shall preside at all meetings of the Common Council
and perform all other duties of the President in the absence of the latter. 
In the event the Office of President shall become vacant, he or she shall
automatically succeed thereto.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-13-05, passed 3-4-2013)



§ 30.18  DUTIES OF CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep an accurate journal of the
proceedings of the Common Council.



   (B)   He or she shall keep a permanent file of all original papers,
documents, reports and correspondence filed with or submitted to the Council,
subject to the orders thereof. He or she shall also keep and maintain a
separate file of duplicate copies of each ordinance and resolution
introduced, in the order of introduction, identified by bill number assigned,
at all times available to the members of the Council. He or she shall provide
an additional duplicate copy of each ordinance and resolution referred to a
committee to the chairperson thereof.



   (C)   He or she shall be custodian of all ordinances, resolutions,
petitions, memorials and all other papers pertaining to the business of the
Common Council, except when the ordinances, resolutions, petitions, memorials
or other papers are necessarily in the hands of any commission, board or
official for the consideration thereof.



   (D)   He or she shall call the roll of the members of the Common
Council in numerical order of districts, then in alphabetical order of
Council member-at-large, at each meeting.



   (E)   He or she shall make available to chairpersons of committees
of the Council and to officers, boards and commissions within five days after
adjournment of any meeting of the Common Council all ordinances, resolutions,
petitions, memorials or other papers which shall have been referred to the
committees, officers, boards or commissions at the meeting.



   (F)   The various city departments, commissions, boards and
permanent committees that meet regularly and keep minutes of their public
meetings shall forward to the Clerk a copy of all minutes of those meetings
as soon as they are approved each month. The Clerk shall make available a
copy of those minutes to each Council member upon his or her request.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-47-6, passed 6-3-1957; Res. R-84-17,
passed 8-6-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Clerk's duties, see I.C. 36-4-6-9



§ 30.19  SERGEANT-AT-ARMS.



   (A)   The sergeant-at-arms shall be the Chief of Police or his or
her duly appointed deputy who must be a member of the city's Police
Department with the rank of sergeant or higher, shall preserve order in the
lobby outside the Council chambers and assist the President in doing so
within the chambers. He or she shall act as messenger of the Common Council
while in session.



   (B)   He or she shall deliver all notices to each member of the
Common Council and all papers to the chairpersons of the committees, that may
be placed in his or her hands by the City Clerk, within 24 hours after
receiving them.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



§ 30.20  ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF COMMISSIONS AT FIRST MEETING EACH YEAR.



   The Common Council member of the city's Plan Commission and of any
other special body to which the Council shall be entitled to name a member or
members, shall be elected by the Council at its first meeting in January of
each year, to serve until the end of the current calendar year.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



§ 30.21  CERTAIN CITY OFFICIALS TO ATTEND COUNCIL MEETINGS WHEN REQUESTED.



   The City Controller, City Engineer and City Attorney or their deputy
are invited to attend all meetings of the Common Council for consultation if
requested by the Council.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-57-6, passed 6-3-1957)



§ 30.22  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The following order of business shall be observed by the Common Council
at its meetings:



   (A)   Call to order;



   (B)   Invocation to be given by ministers of different faiths, if
present. If none are present, then a moment of reflection;



   (C)   Pledge of allegiance;



   (D)   Roll call;



   (E)   Approval of minutes;



   (F)   Communications:



      (1)   Public: agenda items;



      (2)   Common Council;



      (3)   Mayor; and



      (4)   Communications from other city departments or officials;



   (G)   Reports from committees, boards, or other officials as
requested by a majority vote of the Council;



   (H)   Approval of CF-1 forms;



   (I)   Introduction of ordinances;



   (J)   Introduction of resolutions;



   (K)   Board appointments;



   (L)   Communications from public: non-agenda items; and



   (M)   Adjourn.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-10-12, passed 4-15-2010; Ord. G-15-04,
passed 6-1-2015)



§ 30.23  CONDUCTING BUSINESS IN COMMON COUNCIL.



   (A)   Rules of order.Robert's Rules of Order, Revised (latest
edition), shall be the controlling authority on all questions of
parliamentary law and procedure not specifically covered by these rules or by
statute or ordinance.



   (B)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of all
members-elect, but no ordinance, order or resolution shall be passed which
shall not have received the votes of the majority of all members-elect of the
Common Council.



   (C)   Determination of results of voting. The Presiding Officer
shall decide whether any question is carried by affirmative or negative vote;
but if in doubt or if a roll call vote be demanded, the Council shall decide
by roll call vote.



   (D)   Roll call vote.



      (1)   All votes upon the passage of ordinances, upon motions
to suspend the rules or motions to reconsider, shall be by the roll call.



      (2)   All votes upon the passage of resolutions may be by roll
call or show of hands.



      (3)   Upon a roll call vote on any question, after any one
member shall have voted, it shall not be in order for any member to offer
remarks except in explanation of his or her vote, which he or she may do only
simultaneously with the casting of his or her vote.



      (4)   Any member may demand a roll call upon any question to
be voted upon by the Council and, when the demand is made, the City Clerk
shall call the roll.



   (E)   Motions, their procedure and the like.



      (1)   When any motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated
by the Presiding Officer, or, being in writing it shall be handed to the
Clerk and read aloud, after which debate thereon shall be in order, and it
shall be entered upon the journal with the name of the members making it,
unless it is withdrawn at the same meeting.



      (2)   Every motion shall be reduced to writing, except to
adjourn, to adjourn to a day certain, to reconsider at the same meeting, to
lay on the table, to postpone to a day certain, to postpone indefinitely, for
the previous question, to commit, to suspend the rules, to concur, to
approve, to make a matter of record, to place on file, to read a second time
by title, to refer to committee, to read a third time and to place on
passage; and every other motion not so reduced to writing shall be out of
order.



      (3)   A motion to "lay on the table" or for the "previous
question" shall not be in order if prefaced by any speech or remarks;
provided, however, that, when a motion is made to "lay on the table" any
ordinance, the person introducing the ordinance, and he or she only, shall
have the right to explain the ordinance before the motion is put to vote.



      (4)   Any motion or resolution which in effect contemplates a
violation of law or is in conflict with any ordinance shall be out of order.



      (5)   A motion to adjourn cannot be reconsidered.



      (6)   Any matter laid on the table may be taken up by a vote
of the Council at any meeting after the meeting at which it is tabled.



      (7)   A motion to "reconsider" and "that when the Council
adjourn it adjourn to meet on a day certain" are privileged questions and are
debatable.



      (8)   Any business which by law or necessity must or should be
transacted within or by a certain time will be considered a question of
privilege.



      (9)   A motion to "suspend the rules" is a privileged
question, is debatable. A two-thirds vote of all the elected members, after
unanimous consent of the members present to consider the ordinance, is
required to pass an ordinance of the legislative body on the same day or at
the same meeting at which it is introduced.



   (F)   Reconsideration. When any question has been once decided in
the affirmative or negative, any member voting with the majority may move a
reconsideration thereof at the same or next regular meeting; provided that,
no such motion shall be introduced at the next regular meeting unless the
member intending to make the same shall have given written notice of the
intention at the meeting at which the vote which he or she desired to have
reconsidered was taken.



   (G)   Previous question. The "previous question" shall be put in
this form:  "Shall the main question be now put?" It shall preclude all
other motions or amendments except the motion to adjourn. If the motion be
sustained, the Chair shall, at once, put the question, first upon the pending
amendments in their order and then upon the main question.



   (H)   Decorum and debate.



      (1)   When any member is about to speak or deliver any matter
to the Council, he or she shall address himself or herself to the Presiding
Officer and, on being recognized, may address the Council and shall confine
himself or herself to the question in debate.



      (2)   All speeches and discussions by Council members will be
limited to five minutes, unless extended at the discretion of the Presiding
Officer.



      (3)   When two or more members request to be recognized at the
same time, the Presiding Officer shall decide which shall speak first.



      (4)   No member shall impugn the motive of any other.



      (5)   Any member may change his or her vote before the
announcement of the result by the Chair.



   (I)   Colorable amendments. No matter or proposition on a subject
different from that under consideration shall be admitted under color of an
amendment.



   (J)   Postponements. When any matter is postponed indefinitely, it
shall not be again voted upon during that or the next two succeeding meetings.



   (K)   Division of question. Any member may demand a division of a
question when the question is capable of a division.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-92-135, passed 12-7-1992)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum, see I.C. 36-4-6-10



§ 30.24  AMENDING OR MODIFYING RULES.



   The rules of Common Council may be amended, modified or annulled by a
majority vote of all the members-elect of the Common Council. All proposed
amendments to the rules shall be referred to the Committee on Rules without
debate, which Committee shall consider and report to the Council on the same
in accordance with the procedure required of it with regard to ordinances.
The Committee shall also have the authority to recommend changes in the
rules, on its own volition, at any time; provided only that, no vote may be
taken on any such recommendation unless notice of its proposal shall have
been given by the Committee to the Council in writing at a regular meeting of
the Council, not later than the meeting immediately preceding that at which
the Committee proposes to submit its recommendation.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS



§ 30.35  CLASSIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   Ordinances shall be of four distinct classes:  First, appropriation
ordinances; second, general ordinances; third, zoning map ordinances; fourth,
annexation ordinances. Appropriation  ordinances shall be limited to those
appropriating the funds of the city. General ordinances shall be limited to
those relating to contracts and the general business affairs of the city.
Zoning map ordinances shall be limited to those amending the zoning map of
the city. Annexation ordinances shall be limited to those annexing territory
to the city.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



§ 30.36  ORDINANCES FROM TIME OF INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   Immediately prior to introduction, each ordinance and
resolution shall have assigned to it by the City Clerk a bill number. The
bill number shall consist of a letter prefix, as hereinafter prescribed,
followed by the last two digits of the calendar year in which introduced, and
followed by the number in the sequence of introduction within each particular
month. All bills, regardless of subject matter shall be numbered in the same
sequence for the year. Upon passage of an ordinance, the Clerk shall assign
to it a number in the order of its passage, each of the four types of
ordinances to be numbered in a separate sequence, beginning with number one
for each such type, together with the appropriate prefix therefor as
hereinafter prescribed. The prefix for appropriation ordinances, to be used
both on bill numbers and ordinance numbers shall be the letter "A". The
prefix for zoning map ordinances both for bill numbers and ordinance numbers
shall be the letter "Z". The prefix for annexation ordinances, both for bill
numbers and ordinance numbers shall be the letter "X". The prefix for general
ordinances, both for bill numbers and ordinance numbers shall be the letter
"G". The Clerk shall also assign a number to each resolution upon its
adoption. Resolutions shall be numbered in a separate sequence, beginning
with number one, to which number there shall be added the prefix "R". The
same prefix shall be used with bill numbers assigned to the resolution at the
time of introduction.



   (B)   All ordinances shall be read at least three times by the Clerk
and no ordinance shall be passed upon the same day or at the same meeting it
is introduced except by unanimous consent of the members present, at least
two-thirds vote of the elected members of the Council.



   (C)   An ordinance upon introduction shall be read by the Clerk the
first time in full; thereupon, it shall be on second reading. While on the
second reading, the ordinance shall be open for amendments; thereafter, upon
motion duly adopted, it shall be read the second time by title and referred
to the proper committee and engrossed.



   (D)   After second reading and referral to committee, the committee
shall report out its recommendation as to whether the ordinance shall pass;
whereupon, after concurrence or nonconcurrence by the Common Council in the
committee report, the ordinance shall be on third reading, at which time it
shall again be subject to amendment; thereafter, on motion duly adopted, it
may be placed upon its passage and in such instance shall be finally voted
upon.



   (E)   The committee to which an ordinance is referred may recommend
the amendment thereof in its report thereon, and concurrence in such a report
shall cause the ordinance so reported on to be so amended.



   (F)   Any ordinance failing to receive a majority of the votes upon
second reading shall still proceed to a third reading and final vote, unless
stricken from the files or otherwise disposed of by the Common Council.



   (G)   Any ordinance failing to receive a sufficient number of votes
on final passage will be considered as lost; provided that, the vote thereon
may be reconsidered within the time and in the manner provided in § 30.22.



   (H)   Any amendment to an ordinance may be referred, delayed or
otherwise disposed of without delay or prejudice to the ordinance itself.



   (I)   A resolution may be acted upon at the meeting at which it is
introduced or may be referred to the appropriate committee as determined by a
majority of the Council; further any member may request a reading of the
resolution in its entirety and when the request is made, the Clerk shall read
the resolution.



   (J)   No appropriation ordinance requiring approval of the state’s
Tax Board shall be passed on more than two readings at any one meeting of the
Council.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-92-135, passed 12-7-1992; Ord. G-13-05,
passed 3-4-2013)



COMMITTEES



§ 30.50  STANDING COMMITTEES.



   There shall be ten standing committees in the Common Council, appointed
by the President, which shall consist of three members each, except the
Committee on Budget and Finance which shall consist of all the members of the
Council; provided that, the President shall appoint a chairperson of each
committee from its members:



   (A)   Budget and Finance;



   (B)   Rules;



   (C)   Public Utilities and Transportation;



   (D)   Police Department;



   (E)   Fire Department;



   (F)   Public Safety and Traffic;



   (G)   Public Works;



   (H)   Public Health and Welfare;



   (I)   Schools and Library; and



   (J)   Development and Annexation.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



§ 30.51  DUTIES OF VARIOUS COMMITTEES.



   The duties of the various standing committees shall be as follows:



   (A)   Budget and Finance. Fees, salaries, budgets, appropriations,
tax levies, revenue bonds, claims, litigation, contracts, supervision and
investigation. The Chairperson shall maintain liaison with City Controller;



   (B)   Rules. To establish and maintain rules under which Common
Council shall operate;



   (C)   Public Utilities and Transportation. To consider and report on
all ordinances affecting the public utilities, electric, gas, water or any
public transportation, such as bus, rail, truck, boat or air;



   (D)   Police Department. To consider and report on all ordinances or
resolutions concerning matters pertaining to the Police Department;



   (E)   Fire Department. To consider and report on all ordinances or
resolutions concerning matters pertaining to the Fire Department;



   (F)   Public Safety and Traffic. To consider and report on all
matters pertaining to the flow of traffic, traffic signs and signals, to the
regulation of and parking of cars in the city limits. Also, to consider and
report on all ordinances and resolutions pertaining to pedestrian traffic and
safety and to the general safety of residents of the city;



   (G)   Public Works. To consider and report on all matters pertaining
to streets, alleys, sewers (sanitary and storm), drainage and garbage
collections;



   (H)   Public Health and Welfare. To consider and report on all
matters pertaining to the public health and welfare. To maintain close
liaison with Floyd-Harrison Health Department and administrator of the Floyd
County Memorial Hospital. To consider and report on all ordinances concerning
parks and recreation;



   (I)   Schools and Library. To consider and report on all matters
concerning public schools and city library; and



   (J)   Development and Annexation. To consider and report on all
matters pertaining to the general development and improvement of the city, to
planning and zoning and annexation.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



§ 30.52  VOTING ON SUBJECTS INTRODUCED TO COMMITTEES.



   When a subject is referred to a standing committee or to a special
committee, the member introducing the same shall be a member of the committee
during its deliberation thereon, but, as such, shall have no right to vote,
except if he or she is already a member of the committee. He or she shall be
notified by the chairperson of the time and place of meeting of the committee.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



§ 30.53  REPORTS.



   All reports from committees shall be made in writing, giving the title
and bill number thereof, and must be signed by a majority of the members
thereof; and all committees shall return all ordinances, resolutions and
papers referred to them and report upon the same to the Common Council not
later than the regular meeting night after the same are so referred; provided
that, the Council may, at its discretion, extend the time for making the
report. This section does not include reports from committees created by the
Council and containing members of the Council. These reports may be presented
orally to the Council upon the request of any Council member; provided that,
the Council may, at its discretion, extend the time for making the report.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957; Ord. G-92-135, passed 12-7-1992)



§ 30.54  FORMING COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE; ORDINANCES COMMITTED; RULES.



   (A)   In forming a Committee of the Whole Council, the Presiding
Officer, leaving the chair, shall appoint a Chairperson to preside, unless
the Chairperson Pro Tempore of the Council is present, in which case he or
she shall preside.



   (B)   Ordinances which have been committed to a Committee of the
Whole Council shall be read throughout by the City Clerk, and then again read
and debated by sections. The body of the ordinances shall not be defaced or
interlined, but all amendments, noting the line and page, shall be duly
entered by the Clerk upon separate paper, as the same shall be agreed to by
the Committee, and so reported to the Council. After report, the ordinance
shall again be subject to debate on the floor.



   (C)   The rules of parliamentary law and of proceedings in the
Council shall be observed in a Committee of the Whole Council, so far as they
may be applicable, except the rule limiting the time of speaking; but no
member shall speak more than two times on any question until every member
choosing to speak shall have spoken.



(Ord. 4600, passed 3-4-1957)



COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS



§ 30.65  CITY DIVIDED INTO SIX DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-3, the Common Council shall divide the
city into six districts that:



      (1)   Are composed of contiguous territory;



      (2)   Are reasonably compact;



      (3)   Do not cross precinct boundary lines, except as provided
in subsection (c) or (d) of I.C. 36-4-6-3; and



      (4)   Contain, as nearly as is possible, equal population.



   (B)   The division of the city shall be made in 1992 and every ten
years after that, and when required to assign annexed territory to a district.



   (C)   The districts are divided as follows.



      (1)   First District shall be composed of Precincts 1, 21 and
23.



      (2)   Second District shall be composed of Precincts 16, 18,
19, 22 and 29.



      (3)   Third District shall be composed of Precincts 3, 5, 7
and 10.



      (4)   Fourth District shall be composed of Precincts 11, 13,
20, 24 and 25.



      (5)   Fifth District shall be composed of Precincts 9, 14, 26,
28, and 40.



      (6)   Sixth District shall be composed of Precincts 27, 41,
42, 43, and 44.



(Ord. G-66-242, passed 2-2-1966; Ord. G-74-19, passed 12-16-1974; Ord.
G-82-961, passed 12-15-1982; Ord. G-90-239, passed 10-18-1990; Ord. G-92-139,
passed 12-17-1992; Ord. G-07-59, passed 12-27-2007; Ord. G-12-37, passed
12-27-2012; Ord. G-14-16, passed 8-12-2014)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Bond for County Treasurer while serving as ex-officio
treasurer



   31.02   Inspector of Weights and Measures; bond



   31.03   Service Officer for veterans



   31.04   Nepotism and contracting with a unit by a relative



City Liability Protection



   31.15   City Attorney responsible for investigation, legal defense



   31.16   Claims Review Committee



   31.17   Liability Reserve Fund



Cross-reference:



   Duties of City Clerk, see § 30.18



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  BOND FOR COUNTY TREASURER WHILE SERVING AS EX-OFFICIO TREASURER.



   The Treasurer of Floyd County, Indiana, while serving as ex-officio
treasurer of the city, shall execute a bond to the approval of the Mayor
payable to the city in the penal sum of $250,000, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of his or her office and for the payment
to the proper person of the monies received by the officer, with good and
sufficient surety or sureties thereon. The bond shall be filed in the City
Controller's office.



(Ord. A-58-42, passed 10-6-1958)



§ 31.02  INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES; BOND.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city is authorized
and directed to appoint an Inspector of Weights and Measures for the city, to
serve beginning January 1, 1958.



   (B)   The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall give bond in the
sum of $2,500, with sureties to be approved by the Board of Public Works and
Safety of the city for the faithful performance of the duties of his or her
office, for the safety of the local standards and the appliances for
verification as are committed to his or her charge and for the surrender
thereof immediately to his or her successor in office, or to the person
appointed by the proper authority to receive them.



(Ord. G-58-26, passed 2-3-1958)



§ 31.03  SERVICE OFFICER FOR VETERANS.



   The Mayor is authorized to employ a city Service Officer to render
service to the veterans of the city. The Mayor shall include in the budget a
sum not to exceed $3,600 per year to cover the salary and incidental expenses
of the city's Service Officer.



(Ord. G-58-37, passed 8-4-1958)



§ 31.04  NEPOTISM AND CONTRACTING WITH A UNIT BY A RELATIVE.



   (A)   The Common Council finds that it is necessary and desirous to
immediately adopt a policy of conduct with regard to nepotism in employment
with the city,  and in contracting with the city,  in order to continue to
be able to provide local government services to its residents, and to comply
with the new laws effective July 1, 2012, known as I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C.
36-1-21, respectively.



   (B)   On July 1, 2012, the city shall have a nepotism and a
contracting with a unit policy that complies with the minimum requirements of
I.C. 36-1-20.2 (hereinafter “nepotism policy”) and I.C. 36-1-21
(hereinafter “contracting with a unit by a relative policy”), and
implementation will begin.



   (C)   The city nepotism policy is hereby established effective July
1, 2012, by adopting the minimum requirements provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2,
and including all future supplements and amendments thereto, which become law
from time to time, and making them a part hereof as if fully set out herein.
In addition, a copy of I.C. 36-1-20.2, Nepotism, is attached to Resolution
R-12-10.



   (D)   The city contracting with a unit by a relative policy is
hereby established effective July 1, 2012, by adopting the minimum
requirements provisions of I.C. 36-1-21, and including all future supplements
and amendments thereto, which become law from time to time, and making them a
part hereof as if fully set out herein. In addition, a copy of the I.C.
36-1-21, Contracting with a Unit by a Relative, is attached to Resolution
R-12-10.



   (E)   The Common Council finds that both I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C.
36-1-21 specifically allow a unit to adopt requirements that are “more
stringent or detailed” and that more detailed requirements are necessary.



   (F)   The Common Council further finds that a single member of the
legislative body cannot act for the body to make work assignments,
compensation, grievances, advancement or a performance evaluation without
prior authority of a majority of the body, and therefore, without such
authority by the majority, he or she will not be in the direct line of
supervision. (See I.C. 36-4-6-11, I.C. 36-5-2-9.4)



   (G)   The Common Council finds that a single member of a governing
body with authority over employees in the city cannot act for the governing
body to make work assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement or a
performance evaluation without prior authority of a majority of the body,
when a statute provides that a majority is needed to act, and therefore,
without such authority by the majority, the single member will not be in the
direct line of supervision.



   (H)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the city
are hereby directed to cooperate fully in the implementation of the policies
created by this section, and in demonstrating compliance with these same
policies.



   (I)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the contracting with unit by a
relative policy is a violation, and may result in the discipline, including
termination, of an employee or a curative action. An elected or appointed
official of the city who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, with the compliance and with mandated certifications of the
contracting with unit by a relative policy may be subject to action allowed
by law.



   (J)   The polices created by this section are hereby directed to be
implemented by any of the following actions:



      (1)   Posting a copy of Resolution R-12-10, in its entirety,
in at least one of the locations in the city where it posts employer posters
or other notices to its employees;



      (2)   Providing a copy of Resolution R-12-10 to its employees
and elected and appointed officials;



      (3)   Providing or posting a notice of the adoption of this
Resolution R-12-10; or



      (4)   Any such other action or actions that would communicate
the polices established by this Resolution R-12-10 to its employees and
elected and appointed officials.



      Upon the taking of any of these actions, the policies are deemed
implemented by the city.



   (K)   A copy of the provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21,
effective July 1, 2012, are adopted by reference as if set forth in there
entirety herein.



   (L)   Two copies of I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21, and as
supplemented or amended, are on file in the Office of the City Clerk for
public inspection as may be required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



(Res. R-12-10, passed 6-25-2012)



CITY LIABILITY PROTECTION



§ 31.15  CITY ATTORNEY RESPONSIBLE FOR INVESTIGATION, LEGAL DEFENSE.



   The City Attorney shall have the responsibility for providing an
investigation and legal defense of all claims filed against the city. He or
she shall have the discretion to employ others for the investigation and
defense of a claim should he or she deem it in the best interest of the city
to do so. Counsel shall be paid at the rates set forth as provided by
resolution.



(Ord. G-86-142, passed 6-2-1986)



§ 31.16  CLAIMS REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   A Claims Review Committee is established. It shall consist of the City
Attorney and the attorneys for the following boards or commissions:  New
Albany Parks Board, city Plan Commission, Police Merit Board and New Albany
Housing Authority. The City Attorney shall act as chairperson of the
Committee. The Committee shall:



   (A)   Approve or disapprove the settlement of any claims to be paid
from the Liability Reserve Fund;



   (B)   Make recommendations as to a city-wide program of loss control
and risk management to minimize the liabilities of the city;



   (C)   Contract with any persons or entities to obtain or to provide
the service of risk managers, loss control specialists, claims adjusters,
attorneys and other professionals in carrying out the powers and duties under
this subchapter and to pay for those services from the Fund;



   (D)   In case of liability settlement in excess of the amount
remaining in the funds in any one year, the Committee may approve the payment
of the settlement or judgment over a period of three years, with the interest
at the rate of 8% per annum; and



   (E)   Approve a structured settlement of any claim.



(Ord. G-86-142, passed 6-2-1986)



§ 31.17  LIABILITY RESERVE FUND.



   (A)   Creation.



      (1)   A general nonreverting fund is created to be known as
the Liability Reserve Fund. The Fund is created for the purpose of setting
aside monies assessed on all operations and departments of the city for the
payment of claims arising from liability obligations for the payment of money
in an amount established under I.C. 34-13-3-4 or any other claim for which
insurance coverage is not provided for, including related expenses for
processing and defending the claims.



      (2)   The City Attorney may use, in his or her discretion, a
portion of the Liability Reserve Fund to purchase liability insurance to
insure all or a part of the city's liability obligations.



   (B)   Payment of claims. The Liability Reserve Fund shall be allowed
to accumulate to a total of $400,000. Claims payable from the Fund for any
liability whether or not it is covered under I.C. 34-4-16.5 shall be limited
as follows:



      (1)   Up to $200,000 for injury, death or damage suffered by
any one person as the result of the act or omission from which the liability
arises;



      (2)   Up to $400,000 for all injury, death or damage suffered
by all persons as the result of the act or omission from which the liability
arises;



      (3)   No amount may be paid from the Fund in respect to
punitive damages paid by or assessed against the city; and



      (4)   No claim may be settled and payment made from the Fund
without the recommendation of a majority of the members of the Claims Review
Committee.



   (C)   Investment. The Fund shall be invested by the Controller, with
all earned interest belonging to the Fund in its entirety.



   (D)   Source of funds. The Fund shall be funded by the amounts
appropriated by the Council as a part of the annual general budgeting process
for all departments, bureaus and boards of the city. Initially, the Fund
shall be funded by way of a transfer from presently appropriated accounts. In
addition, the Council may approve additional appropriations from time to time
as needed. 



(Ord. G-86-142, passed 6-2-1986; Ord. G-97-215, passed 11-21-1997)



Cross-reference:



   Allowance of city claims; authority, see § 35.03



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   32.001   Pension fund benefits; computation



   32.002   Firefighters' Pension Fund; Board of Trustees



Police Department Regulations



   32.015   Department governed by Board of Public Works and Safety



   32.016   Forty-hour week



   32.017   Charge for out-of-state motor vehicle identification number
inspections



   32.018   Motor Vehicle Inspection Fund



   32.019   False alarms



   32.020   Fees and costs for reports and records



Police Merit System



   32.035   Definitions



   32.036   Police Merit Commission



   32.037   Rules and procedures adopted by Commission



   32.038   Qualifications



   32.039   Eligibility list



   32.040   Residency requirement



   32.041   Factors considered in rating for promotions and demotions



   32.042   Performance ratings



   32.043   Service in rank required for promotion



   32.044   Filling vacancies; written exam



   32.045   Penalty for solicitation to favor promotion



   32.046   Promotions probationary for first year



   32.047   Powers to appoint or remove members; staff of Police Chief



   32.048   Salary differential



   32.049   Dismissal, suspension and punishment



   32.050   Mandatory retirement age



   32.051   Reduction of force; leave of absence



Firefighters and Police Officers Arbitration Act



   32.065   Title



   32.066   Scope



   32.067   Definitions



   32.068   Collective bargaining; right of departments



   32.069   Organization selected to be exclusive bargaining agent



   32.070   City to act in good faith; written agreement



   32.071   Requirement of arbitration



   32.072   Selection of arbitrators; compensation



   32.073   Arbitration



   32.074   Effective time period



   32.075   Fiscal matters; notice to city required



New Albany Fire Department Candidate Selection Process Act



   32.080   Title



   32.081   Agility test



   32.082   Written test



   32.083   Local police check



   32.084   Interview



   32.085   Combined final rank



   32.086   Offer of employment



   32.087   Notification of candidates



   32.088   Scores and appeal



Cross-reference:



   Chief of Police to be Sergeant-at-Arms for Common Council meetings, see
§ 30.19



Editor's note:



   City personnel policies do not apply in any situation covered by a
collective bargaining agreement.



   During the 2008 recodification, the sections of this chapter have been
changed from two digit (i.e., 32.01) to three digit (i.e., 32.001) for ease
of expansion and for consistency.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.001  PENSION FUND BENEFITS; COMPUTATION.



   (A)   Definitions. For the sole purpose of using these terms in
determining pension fund benefits, the following terms are defined. This
section shall not alter or vacate any rights of a police officer or a
firefighter as may be established under state law.



      FIRST CLASS FIREFIGHTER. A regular, uniformed and permanent
firefighter, other than the Fire Chief or any other ranking officer, with not
less than 20 years of active service on the Fire Department of the city.



      FIRST CLASS PATROL OFFICER. A  regular, uniformed and permanent
police officer, other than the Chief of Police or any other ranking officer,
with not less than 20 years of active service in the Police Department of the
city.



   (B)   Computation of benefits.



      (1)   The pension of a patrol officer shall be computed by
using as the base the salary of a first class patrol officer. Calculation
will also include longevity increases of a first class patrol officer with 30
years of service.



      (2)   The pension of a firefighter covered by the 1937 Act
shall be computed by using as the base the salary of a first class
firefighter. The calculation will also include longevity increases of a first
class firefighter with 30 years of service.



(Ord. G-87-186, passed 6-1-1987; Ord. G-99-306, passed 3-2-1999; Ord.
G-99-345, passed 8-4-1999; Ord. A-03-34, passed 5-15-2003)



§ 32.002  FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND; BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   (A)   There is created and established a Firefighters' Pension Fund
as provided for and by authority of I.C. 36-8-7 et seq.



   (B)   There is created a Board of Trustees of the Firefighters'
Pension Fund of the city as provided for and by authority of I.C. 36-8-7 et
seq.



   (C)   The surviving spouse of a deceased member of the Firefighters'
Pension Fund shall be paid an amount equal to 40% of a fully paid first-class
firefighter pursuant to I.C. 36-8-7-12.1(b)2(A). This section applies only to
those surviving spouses of members of the Firefighters' Pension Fund who were
hired as members of the city's Fire Department prior to May 1, 1977, and did
not convert benefits under I.C. 36-8-8-9.



(Ord. 4116, passed 9-5-1938; Ord. G-84-1, passed 1-9-1984; Ord. G-96-154,
passed 11-21-1996; Ord. A-03-34, passed 5-15-2003)



POLICE DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS



§ 32.015  DEPARTMENT GOVERNED BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   The  Police Department of this city shall be under the control of and
be governed by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city, in
accordance with I.C. 36-8-3-2.



§ 32.016  FORTY-HOUR WEEK.



   No member of the Police Department shall be required, except in case of
public emergency as determined by the Mayor, to work more than an average of
40 hours per week in any one calendar year; provided, however, that, this
section shall not apply to the Chief of Police.



(Ord. G-64-165, passed 7-27-1964)



Statutory reference:



   State restriction on work week, see I.C. 36-8-4-8



§ 32.017  CHARGE FOR OUT-OF-STATE MOTOR VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER
INSPECTIONS.



   The Police Department shall charge a $3 fee for making out-of-state
inspection of the identification numbers, which must be inspected prior to
registration in the state.



(Ord. G-84-17, passed 6-4-1984)



§ 32.018  MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION FUND.



   There is established in the office of the City Controller a special
Motor Vehicle Inspection Fund, which shall be under the control of the Chief
of Police and subject to the following conditions.



   (A)   All monies received for motor vehicle inspections as set forth
in this code shall be deposited therein.



   (B)   The monies disbursed from this Fund shall be used to
supplement the cost of equipment and training for the city's Police
Department.



   (C)   All disbursements from the Fund shall be made on the order of
the Chief of Police and payable by the City Controller upon presentation of
the proper claims as approved by the Police Department.



(Ord. G-84-17, passed 6-4-1984; Ord. G-88-145, passed 11-7-1988)



§ 32.019  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   Prohibited.  No person, business, or private institution
shall report a false alarm to the New Albany Police Department.



   (B)   Definition.  FALSE ALARM.  In the case or a burglar alarm,
an alarm signal or recorded message indicating an attempted or unauthorized
intrusion into structure or the attempted or unauthorized intrusion into
structure or the attempted commission of a crime, when in fact no evidence
exists upon inspection of the premises upon response to such alarm.



   (C)   Fines.  Any person who reports false alarms to the Police
Department shall be fined as follows during any calendar year:



      (1)   Six false alarms in one calendar year shall be allowed
at no penalty to the property owner.



      (2)   The seventh false alarm shall result in a $75 fine.



      (3)   The eighth false alarm shall result in a $150 fine.



      (4)   The ninth and all subsequent false alarms shall result
in a fine of $300 each.



   (D)   Not responsible.  A company reporting an alarm as the agent
for an alarm holder is not responsible for the payment of fines as outlined
above, which are the sole responsibility of the property owner.



   (E)   Tracking alarms. 



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall designate an individual to be
in charge of tracking all reported false alarms reported to the New Albany
Police Department.



      (2)   That upon the report of a false alarm the designated
person above shall send notice to the offending property owner of the fine
owed by the property owner in accordance to the above schedule of fines.



   (F)   Failure to pay fines.  Failure to pay the assessed fine shall
result in the matter being filed in the Superior Court II of Floyd County. 
The property owner and/or alarm company shall then be subject to court costs
and attorney fees in addition to the appropriate fine above.



   (G)   Special Car Fund.  All fines collected in violation of this
section and in response to false alarm responded to by the Police Department
shall be paid directly to the Special Car Fund.



(Ord. G-10-10, passed 5-5-2010)



§ 32.020  FEES AND COSTS FOR REPORTS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The charge for a vehicle crash report from the Police
Department shall be $8 per report.



   (B)   The charge for incident reports from the Police Department
shall be $5 per report.



   (C)   The charge for local criminal record checks from the Police
Department shall be $5 per record check.



   (D)   The charge for compact disc of pictures shall be $25 per batch
of pictures.



   (E)   All fees collected from under this section shall be deposited
into a non-reverting fund for use by the police for training and equipment.



(Ord. G-09-17, passed 5-4-2009)



POLICE MERIT SYSTEM



§ 32.035  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD. The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.



   COMMISSION. The Civil Service Merit Commission created by this
subchapter.



   POLICE OFFICER. A sworn officer, functioning in a full-time capacity
with the Police Department and who is a member of a police pension fund.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.036  POLICE MERIT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Appointment.



      (1)   A Police Merit Commission shall be appointed in the city
to consist of five members as follows:



         (a)   Two persons elected by the active membership of
the Police Department;



         (b)   One person appointed by the Mayor;



         (c)   One person appointed by the Common Council of the
city; and



         (d)   One person appointed by the other four members of
the Commission.



      (2)   The members of the Commission must be legal residents of
the city for a period of three consecutive years immediately prior to their
appointment. They shall be persons of good moral character and shall receive
a per diem compensation for each day of actual service. The amount of per
diem shall be fixed by the Board of Public Works and Safety, but the total
yearly compensation received by a member of the Commission may not exceed
$800 per year. A member of the Commission shall be 21 years or older at the
time of this appointment.



      (3)   A member of the Commission may not be an active or past
member of any police agency. A person may not serve on the Commission if he
or she receives any remuneration as salary from a public fund.



      (4)   No more than three members of the Commission may be
affiliated with the same political party. For purposes of this division,
"political affiliation" shall be determined through the voters' registration
records of the three most recent primary elections.



      (5)   The members of the Commission shall take an oath of
office to conscientiously and faithfully discharge their duties as
Commissioners. A signed copy of the oath shall be filed with the Board.



      (6)   The Commission shall submit a budget annually to the
city and the city shall include in its budget an amount sufficient to provide
funds for the necessary expenses of the Commission.



   (B)   Selection.



      (1)   The members of the Commission shall be selected as
follows.



         (a)   The Police Department shall select first.



         (b)   The Mayor shall make his or her appointment second.



         (c)   The Common Council shall make its appointment
third.



         (d)   The member chosen by the Commission members shall
be chosen last.



      (2)   The nomination to be made by the police officers of the
Police Department shall be made at a meeting called specifically for that
purpose by the Board. The Board shall give at least ten-days' notice of the
meeting to all active members of the Police Department by posting the notice
of the meeting in at least three prominent locations in the police station.
The notice shall also be read during the shift roll call. The notice shall
designate the time, place and purpose of the meeting. No one shall be
entitled to be present at the meeting and exercise the right to vote unless
he or she is an active member of the Police Department. Active members who
are unable to attend the meeting may vote by written proxy. However, an
active member present at any meeting may not hold or vote the proxy of more
than one absent member. An active member of the Police Department shall be
selected to act as chairperson of the meeting. Voting shall be by secret
ballot. The two persons receiving the highest number of votes including all
proxy votes shall be named as the nominees of the Police Department. The
persons so nominated by the Police Department shall be appointed to the
Commission by the Mayor.



   (C)   Term. The term of Commission members shall be four years.



   (D)   Vacancies. A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled within
30 days by the appointing party. The appointment shall be for the remainder
of the unexpired term.



   (E)   Removal. The Board may remove any member of the Commission for
malfeasance, nonfeasance, change of residence that conflicts with division
(A)(2) above or inability to serve. Removal of a member of the Commission by
the Board shall be subject to the same rules and procedures which govern the
removal of a police officer.



   (F)   Meetings and rules. The Commission shall establish rules for
the governing of the Commission and included in those rules shall be the time
and place for the holding of regular monthly meetings and any special
meetings throughout the year as may be deemed necessary to transact the
business of the Commission. A lawful transaction of the business of the
Commission requires a majority vote of the Commission members. Each year the
Commission shall select from its members a President, Vice President and
Secretary. The Commission shall keep a permanent record of its proceedings.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



Statutory reference:



   Police and Fire Department Merit System, see I.C. 36-8-3.5



§ 32.037  RULES AND PROCEDURES ADOPTED BY COMMISSION.



   The Police Merit Commission shall adopt rules and procedures to do the
following:



   (A)   Govern the selection, appointment, reappointment and
reinstatement of persons to be employed as members of the Police Department;



   (B)   Govern promotions and demotions of members of the Police
Department; and



   (C)   Prescribe the manner of determining the rating of past
performance.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.038  QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   In order to be eligible for appointment to the Police
Department an applicant must be a citizen of the United States, a resident of
Floyd County and must reside within 15 miles of the corporate boundaries of
the city, a high school graduate or equivalent and 21 years of age, but not
over 35 years of age.  Subject to I.C. 36-8-4.7, a person may not be
appointed as a member of the Police Department after the person has reached
36 years of age.  A person may be reappointed as a member of the Department
only if the person is a former member or a retired member not yet receiving
retirement benefits of the 1925, 1937, 1953 or 1977 fund and can complete 20
years of service before reaching 60 years of age.



(I.C. 36-8-4-2; I.C. 36-8-4-7)



   (B)   All applications for appointment or reappointment to the
Department are required to be filed with the Police Merit Commission and
accompanying the applications shall be a duly authenticated birth certificate
of the applicant or the applicant shall produce satisfactory proof of the
date and place of his or her birth. The applicant is required to file with
his or her application a certificate from a physician appointed by the Board
of Trustees of the Police Department Pension Fund for the city, certifying
that the applicant is eligible for joining the Pension Fund. Any charge made
by the physician for the examination of the applicant shall be paid by the
applicant. All applications shall be filed with the Commission.



   (C)   All applicants for appointment or reappointment to the Police
Department shall be required to pass a preliminary examination for the
purpose of determining their physical condition and general aptitude for
service as a police officer. This preliminary examination shall be conducted
in the manner and form as may be provided in the rules and procedures adopted
by the Commission. Upon the conclusion of the preliminary examination, the
results thereof shall be reduced in writing and filed of record with the
Commission. If the Commission finds from the preliminary examination that the
applicant does not possess the qualifications which, in the opinion of the
Commission, fit the applicant for appointment or reappointment, the applicant
shall be rejected by the Commission.



   (D)   An applicant for appointment, reappointment or reinstatement
shall be ineligible if that person has been found guilty of a felony without
the same having been reversed by a court of appeals.



   (E)   An applicant who personally or through any other person
solicits any member of the Commission to favor his or her appointment or
reappointment to the force shall be thereby rendered ineligible for all time
for an appointment to the Police Department.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.039  ELIGIBILITY LIST.



   (A)   The Police Merit Commission shall prepare an examination
procedure including a written examination which shall allow the Commission to
rate the candidate as to his or her mental ability, physical condition,
character, habits, reputation, aptitude and general fitness. The Commission
shall establish and enforce rules and procedures with regard to the manner of
conducting the examination and grading the candidate for appointment or
reappointment, and the Commission shall set up a passing grade which if made
by the applicant for appointment or reappointment will entitle the
applicant's name to be placed on an eligible list, which list shall be
certified by the Commission to the Board of Public Works and Safety. The
eligible list shall be made up in the order of the grades received by the
applicants. All persons on the eligible list shall continue on that list for
two years, after which time they may reapply as an applicant. However, those
not having served on a department before must be within the eligible age
limits.



   (B)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the Police Department, the
Commission upon a written request of the Chief of the Department shall
appoint the person having the highest grade on the eligibility list of that
Department to fill the vacancy; the person appointed shall be enrolled as a
member of the Police Department if that person can pass a physical
examination as may be required by law or pension provisions and he or she
must still be of good character.



   (C)   In the event no person is qualified for promotion by reason of
the examinations and rulings provided for herein, then the Commission shall
have the authority to make a temporary appointment to fill the vacancy until
the next examination is held.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.040  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.



   Every person who is appointed to the Police Department shall become a
resident of the county within which the Department is located and must reside
within 15 miles of the city's corporate boundaries, within 30 days of his or
her appointment.



(I.C. 36-8-4-2)  (Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.041  FACTORS CONSIDERED IN RATING FOR PROMOTIONS AND DEMOTIONS.



   (A)   Rules and procedures governing promotions and demotions shall
provide that the following four factors shall be the considerations of rating
a member of the Police Department for the purpose of promotions:



      (1)   The grade received by a member on a written competitive
examination;



      (2)   The grade received by a member on an oral competitive
examination;



      (3)   The past performance record of a member as a member of
the Police Department; and



      (4)   The member's length of service or tenure.



   (B)   The grade received on the written competitive examination
shall be considered as 50% of the rating; the oral competitive examination
shall be considered as 15% of the rating; the past performance record shall
be considered as 20% of the rating; the length of service or tenure shall be
based on the number of years of service as a member of the Police Department
at the rate of 1% for each year of service up to a maximum of 15% of the
rating.



   (C)   All written competitive examinations shall be treated and
filed confidential. The examination papers shall be made a part of the
permanent file of the individual taking the examination and they shall be
retained in the Chief's office or police headquarters and shall be maintained
under the supervision of the Chief of the Department. The individual officer
shall have access to this file at any time.



   (D)   The Commission or its appointed examiner shall notify each
member, in writing, of the grade which that member received on the
examination. The rules and regulations shall further provide that if any
member is aggrieved with the grade received on the written competitive
examination, he or she shall have the right to appeal to the Commission for
review of the grade within ten days after notice of the grade has been sent
to him or her. He or she shall further have the right to review the
examination questions incorrectly answered by him or her and challenge the
accuracy of the answer considered by the examiner as correct. The Commission,
after reviewing the grade and the examination papers, shall have the
authority to affirm the grade or to correct the grade according to the
findings of the review.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.042  PERFORMANCE RATINGS.



   (A)   The rules and procedures concerning the rating of past
performance shall require that a performance rating shall be made every six
months of each member of the Police Department. For one six-month period, the
officer shall be rated by his or her immediate superior officer; the
following six-month rating shall be by the Chief of the Department or a
superior designated by the Chief; and the third six-month performance rating
of an officer shall be made by a superior officer designated by the Police
Commission. In no instance shall the same officer rate anyone twice within an
18-month period. The rating officer shall discuss with the officer the rating
to be given to him or her and the reasons therefor.



   (B)   The ratings shall be submitted to the Chief of the Department
and kept on file in his or her office or in the police headquarters under the
Chief's supervision. The Chief of the Department shall notify each member in
writing of the rating which that member received. The rules and procedures
shall provide that if any member is aggrieved with the performance ratings
given to him or her, he or she shall have the right to appeal to the
Commission for a review of the rating within ten days after notice has been
sent to him or her; and the Commission shall have the authority to affirm or
correct the rating.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.043  SERVICE IN RANK REQUIRED FOR PROMOTION.



   All promotions to any rank shall be from the next immediate lower rank
if the person to be promoted shall be qualified in the time of service as
required by this chapter.



   (A)   A patrol officer must have been a member of the Police
Department for three years before he or she is eligible for the rank of
corporal (detective).



   (B)   A corporal or patrol officer must have been a member of the
Police Department for a period of five years before he or she is eligible for
the rank of sergeant.



   (C)   A sergeant must have been a member of the Police Department
for a period of seven years and must have held the rank of sergeant for at
least two years before he or she is eligible for the rank of captain.



   (D)   A captain must have been a member of the Police Department for
a period of ten years and must have held the rank of captain for at least two
years before he or she is eligible for the rank of major.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.044  FILLING VACANCIES; WRITTEN EXAM.



   (A)   Before holding a written competitive examination for the
purpose of filling an existing or potential vacancy in the ranks, the
officers eligible to take the examination shall be notified as to all written
materials from which the examination questions will be taken. The Police
Merit Commission may employ instructors and may purchase materials and
equipment and allow other necessary expenditures for the purpose of providing
information or for instructing applicants for promotion examinations and for
training other members of the Police Department.



   (B)   Only those members who are qualified in rank and length of
service shall be given a written competitive exam and placed on the
eligibility list. The eligibility list for any position shall be compiled
from those persons who are eligible and have taken the written competitive
exam and have been placed on that list in order of their cumulative score,
taking into consideration all factors set forth in §§ 32.041 and 32.042.
The eligibility list shall be maintained for a period of two years. At the
end of the two years, the list will be destroyed and before a vacancy in rank
may be filled a new eligibility list must be established in the manner set
forth by this subchapter.



   (C)   When a vacancy in rank occurs the Commission shall certify to
the Chief of the Department the person who has the highest grade on the
eligibility list and that person shall be appointed to fill the vacant
position subject to the probationary period set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.045  PENALTY FOR SOLICITATION TO FAVOR PROMOTION.



   A member of the Police Department who personally or through any other
person solicits any member of the Police Merit Commission or its
representative to favor his or her promotion may not be certified to the
eligibility list for his or her next available rank for a two-year period.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



Cross-reference:



   Ineligibility of original applicants for solicitation to favor
promotion, see § 32.038(E)



§ 32.046  PROMOTIONS PROBATIONARY FOR FIRST YEAR.



   All promotions shall be probationary for the first year. At the end of
that year, the immediate superior officer and the Chief of the Police
Department shall review the performance of the probationary officer and
recommend to the Police Merit Commission whether the promotion should be made
permanent, whether the probationary period should be extended for an
additional period not to exceed six months or whether the probation should be
revoked. The Commission shall prepare an appropriate rating chart for the
superior officer's and the Chief's use in making this report. The Commission
shall review the report and make its determination as to the disposition to
be made. The probationary officer may appear before the Commission and be
heard on any matter detrimental to him or her in the superior officer's
report or the Chief's report. The probationary officer has the right to be
represented by counsel. Any action by the Commission, other than making of
the promotion permanent, may be appealed to the Circuit or Superior Court of
the county. In the event the promotion is finally revoked, the officer may
not be returned to a rank lower than that he or she held prior to the time of
the probationary promotion. The Commission shall prepare and publish appeal
procedures to be followed for appeals to the Commission from the report of
the superior officer or Chief. An appeal to the Court shall be de novo and
the appellant may submit new and additional evidence. A police officer whose
probationary promotional rank is revoked may not return to the existing
eligibility list.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.047  POWERS TO APPOINT OR REMOVE MEMBERS; STAFF OF POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   The Police Merit Commission has the power to appoint or remove
any member of the Police Department. The Mayor shall have the sole power of
appointing and removing any member of the Police Department as Chief. The
Chief of Police shall have the power to appoint or remove any member of his
or her staff. The staff shall consist of one assistant chief and one
administrative assistant. In the event the Chief of Police desires that his
or her staff be increased numerically or that the staff members be designated
by other titles or rank, he or she shall submit, in writing, his or her
request to the Commission and Board of Public Works and Safety. Any increase
in staff positions shall be with the approval of the Commission and Board.
The removal of any member of the Police Department as Chief or Chief's staff
shall be deemed as removal from rank only and not from the Police Department.



   (B)   Upon expiration of the term of any Chief, or Chief's staff, of
the Police Department, the persons shall be appointed by the Commission to
the rank in the Police Department which they held at the time of their
appointment as Chief or staff. In the event the Chief, or Chief's staff
personnel, has qualified in accordance with the promotional procedure as
prescribed by the Commission in its rules and procedures for any rank which
is higher than the rank held at the time of his or her appointment, he or she
shall, upon expiration of his or her term as Chief, or Chief's staff, be
appointed by the Commission to the rank for which he or she has qualified
under the promotional procedures established.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.048  SALARY DIFFERENTIAL.



   The compensation of any member of the Police Department who holds the
rank of detective may not be less than 5% more than the compensation for a
first-class patrol officer. The compensation of any member of the Police
Department who holds the rank of sergeant may not be less than 5% more than
the compensation for a detective. The compensation of any member of the
Police Department who holds the rank of captain may not be less than 10% more
than the compensation received by a sergeant of the Department. The
compensation of any member of the Police Department who holds the rank of
major may not be less than 10% more than the compensation received by a
captain of the Department. The salaries of any and all upper level policy
making position of the Police/Fire Departments shall be determined by the
Mayor and Common Council.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. G-97-179, passed 5-16-1997)



§ 32.049  DISMISSAL, SUSPENSION AND PUNISHMENT.



   Dismissals, suspensions and punishments of members of the Police
Department shall be made by the Police Merit Commission and shall be for
cause under the rules and procedures, including the right of appeal, as
provided by law and as governed by this chapter.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.050  MANDATORY RETIREMENT AGE.



   It is mandatory for an officer of the Police Department to retire from
the Department upon reaching 65 years of age.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



§ 32.051  REDUCTION OF FORCE; LEAVE OF ABSENCE.



   If, for reasons of economy, it is deemed necessary by the Common
Council or the Board of Public Works and Safety, to reduce the number of
officers of the Police Department, then the reduction shall be made by
granting temporary leave of absence without pay or financial obligation to
the city, to the last persons, including probationers, who have been
appointed to the Department in numerical order, commencing with the last
person appointed and continuing in that order until the desired reduction is
effected. In the event that the Department shall again be increased in
number, the members of the Department who have been granted leave of absence
without pay, under the terms of this section, shall be reinstated before any
person on the eligible list is appointed to the Department. Reinstatement
shall commence with the last person granted a leave without pay. However, a
former member, who has been granted a leave of absence as provided in this
section, shall be reinstated upon passing only a physical examination
satisfactory to the Commission and the Trustees of the Pension Fund of the
Department, anything in this code to the contrary notwithstanding.



(Ord. G-82-925, passed 1-4-1982)



Statutory reference:



   Layoffs and reinstatement, see I.C. 36-8-4-11



FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS ARBITRATION ACT



§ 32.065  TITLE.



   This subchapter may be cited as the Firefighters and Police Officers
Arbitration Act.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972; Ord. G-75-579, passed 7-7-1975)



§ 32.066  SCOPE.



   The protection of the public health, safety and welfare demands that
the permanent uniformed members of the city's Fire Department and the city's
Police Department in the city not be accorded the right to strike or engage
in any work stoppage or slowdown. This necessary prohibition does not,
however, require the denial to such municipal employees of other well
recognized rights of labor, such as the right to organize, to be represented
by a labor organization of their choice, and the right to bargain
collectively concerning wages, rates of pay and other terms and conditions of
employment. Members of the city's Fire Department and the city's Police
Department may be represented by any labor organization of their choice. It
is to be the public policy of the city to accord to the permanent uniformed
members of the city's Fire Department and the city's Police Department in the
city all of the rights of labor other than the right to strike, or engage in
any work stoppage or slowdown. To provide for the exercise of these rights, a
method of arbitration of disputes is therefore established. 



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972; Ord. G-75-579, passed 7-7-1975)



§ 32.067  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The proper officials within the city whose duty
or duties it is to establish the wages, salaries, rates of pay, hours,
working conditions and other terms and conditions of employment of members of
the city's Fire Department, whether they be the Mayor, the Common Council, or
by whatever name the same might be designated, or any combination thereof.



   FIREFIGHTERS. The permanent uniformed members of the city's Fire
Department.



   POLICE OFFICERS. The full-time permanent members of the city's Police
Department.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972; Ord. G-75-579, passed 7-7-1975)



§ 32.068  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING; RIGHT OF DEPARTMENTS.



   The firefighters and the police officers of the city shall have the
right to bargain collectively with the city and to be represented by a labor
organization in such collective bargaining as to wages, rates of pay, hours,
working conditions and all other terms and conditions of employment.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972; Ord. G-75-579, passed 7-7-1975)



§ 32.069  ORGANIZATION SELECTED TO BE EXCLUSIVE BARGAINING AGENT.



   (A)   The labor organization selected by the majority of the
firefighters of the city shall be recognized by the city as the sole and
exclusive bargaining agent for all of the members of the city's Fire
Department, unless and until recognition of the labor organization is
withdrawn by a vote of a majority of the firefighters.



   (B)   The labor organization selected by the majority of the police
officers of the city shall be recognized by the city as the sole and
exclusive bargaining agent for all of the members of the city's Police
Department, unless and until recognition of the labor organization is
withdrawn by vote of a majority of the police officers.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972; Ord. G-75-579, passed 7-7-1975)



§ 32.070  CITY TO ACT IN GOOD FAITH; WRITTEN AGREEMENT.



   It shall be the obligation of the city, acting through its corporate
authorities, to meet and bargain in good faith with the representative or
representatives of the bargaining agent within ten days after receipt of
written notice from the bargaining agent of the request for a meeting for
collective bargaining purposes. This obligation shall include the duty to
cause any agreement resulting from negotiations to be reduced to a written
contract; provided that, no such contract shall exceed the term of three
years.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972)



§ 32.071  REQUIREMENT OF ARBITRATION.



   In the event that the bargaining agent and the corporate authorities
are unable, within 30 days from and including the date of their first
meeting, to reach an agreement on a contract, any and all unresolved issues
shall be submitted to arbitration.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972)



§ 32.072  SELECTION OF ARBITRATORS; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Within five days from the expiration of the 30-day period
referred to in § 32.071, the bargaining agent and the corporate authorities
shall each select and name one arbitrator and shall immediately thereafter
notify each other in writing of the name and address of the person so
selected. The two arbitrators so selected and named shall, within ten days
from and after the expiration of the five-day period hereinbefore mentioned,
agree upon and select and name a third arbitrator. If, on the expiration of
the period allowed therefor, the arbitrators are unable to agree upon the
selection of a third arbitrator, the Judge of the Federal District Court,
Southern District of Indiana, shall select him or her upon request in writing
from either the bargaining agent or the corporate authorities. The
arbitrator, whether selected as a result of agreement between the two
arbitrators previously selected or selected by the Federal Judge shall act as
Chairperson of the Arbitration Board.



   (B)   Fees and necessary expenses of arbitration shall be borne
equally by the bargaining agent and the corporate authorities.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972)



§ 32.073  ARBITRATION.



   (A)   Rules and procedures.



      (1)   The Arbitration Board shall, acting through its
Chairperson, call a hearing to be held within ten days after the date of the
appointment of the Chairperson, and shall, acting through its Chairperson,
give at least seven days' notice in writing to each of the other two
arbitrators, the bargaining agent and the corporate authorities of the time
and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be informal and the rules of
evidence prevailing in judicial proceedings shall not be binding. Any and all
documentary evidence and other data deemed relevant by the arbitrators may be
received in evidence. The arbitrators shall have the power to administer
oaths and to require by subpoena the attendance and testimony of witnesses,
the production of books, records and other evidence relative or pertinent to
the issues presented to them for determination.



      (2)   The hearing conducted by the arbitrators shall be
concluded within 20 days of the time of commencement and, within ten days
after the conclusion of the hearings, the arbitrators shall make written
findings and a written opinion upon the issues presented, a copy of which
shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the bargaining agent or its
attorney or other designated representative and the corporate authorities. A
majority decision of the arbitrators shall be binding upon both the
bargaining agent and the corporate authorities.



   (B)   Factors to be considered. The arbitrators shall conduct the
hearings and render their decision upon the basis of a prompt, peaceful and
just settlement of wages or hour disputes between the members of the
firefighters or the members of the police officers and the city. The factors,
among others, to be given weight by the arbitrators in arriving at a decision
shall include:



      (1)   Comparison of wage rates or hourly conditions of
employment of the Fire Department or the Police Department in question with
wage rates or hourly conditions of employment in the local metropolitan
operating area;



      (2)   Comparison of wages or hourly conditions of employment
of the Fire Department or the Police Department in question with wage rates
or hourly conditions of employment maintained for the same or similar work of
employees exhibiting like or similar skills under the same or similar working
conditions in the local operating area involved, or in other second class
cities of comparable size in the state;



      (3)   Interest and welfare of the public; and



      (4)   Comparison of peculiarities of employment in regard to
other trades or professions, specifically:



         (a)   Hazards of employment;



         (b)   Physical qualifications;



         (c)   Educational qualifications;



         (d)   Mental qualifications; and



         (e)   Job training and skills.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972; Ord. G-75-579, passed 7-7-1975)



§ 32.074  EFFECTIVE TIME PERIOD.



   Any agreements actually negotiated between the bargaining agent and the
corporate authorities either before, or within 30 days after arbitration,
shall constitute the collective bargaining contract governing members of the
firefighters or police officers of the city for the period stated therein;
provided that, the period shall not exceed three years.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972; Ord. G-75-579, passed 7-7-1975)



§ 32.075  FISCAL MATTERS; NOTICE TO CITY REQUIRED.



   Whenever wages, rates of pay or any other matters requiring the
appropriation of money by the city are included as matters of collective
bargaining conducted under the provisions of this subchapter, it is the
obligation of the bargaining agent to serve written notice of request for
collective bargaining on the corporate authorities at least 120 days before
the last day on which money can be appropriated, the same being July 30 of
each year hereafter, by the city to cover the contract period which is the
subject of the collective bargaining procedure.



(Ord. A-72-473, passed 2-22-1972)



NEW ALBANY FIRE DEPARTMENT CANDIDATE SELECTION PROCESS ACT



§ 32.080  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the "New Albany Fire Department
Candidate Selection Process Act".



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.081  AGILITY TEST.



   A candidate must pass the agility test given by the New Albany Fire
Department to continue the selection process. The agility test shall be on a
pass/fail basis.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.082  WRITTEN TEST.



   Those candidates that past the agility test are eligible to take the
written test. A written test will be given by the Institute of Public Safety
and Personnel, Inc. A candidate must pass the written test to be eligible for
the top 25 scores. To be considered for local police check (§32.083) of the
process, a candidate must be within the top 25 scores on the written exam.
Those candidates within the top 25 scores on the written exam shall be
credited with the score and it shall be 65% of the final combined score.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.083  LOCAL POLICE CHECK.



   (A)   For the candidates with the top 25 scores on the written exam,
those candidates must be submitted for a local police check. The results of
such a check will be evaluated. If the check reveals negative entries, the
candidate will be removed from the selection process.



   (B)   The New Albany Fire Department will notify any candidate by
certified letter of the negative entries in the local police check. If a
candidate believes the candidate's negative entries are incorrect, the
candidate must appeal, in writing, to the City Attorney within two weeks of
notification of the negative entries. The City Attorney will verify the
information as the local police check revealed and any information supplied
in the written appeal of the candidate. The City Attorney will determine if
the candidate should be allowed to continue on to the interview element (§
32.084) of the selection process.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.084  INTERVIEW.



   All candidates who successfully complete the requirements of agility
test, written exam and local police check will be invited to sit for an
interview with the New Albany Fire Department Interview Panel. The interview
will be scored. The Panel will credit each candidate with the interview score
and it shall be 35% of the final combined score.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.085  COMBINED FINAL RANK.



   (A)   The scores of the written test and the interview will be
combined, giving equal weight to each, to provide each candidate with a
combined score. Based on the combined score, the top ten combined scores will
be the basis for the selection list forwarded to the Mayor to make the offers
of employment based on the personnel needs of the Fire Department.



   (B)   If two or more candidates have the same combined score and the
score is within the top ten combined scores, the two or more candidates will
be included in the Mayor's selection list.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.086  OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Based on the personnel needs of the Fire Department and
selection by the Mayor, candidate(s) will be given an offer of employment.



   (B)   If a valid offer of employment is made to a candidate and the
candidate declines the offer of employment, the candidate will be removed
from the selection list.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.087  NOTIFICATION OF CANDIDATES.



   (A)   Candidates who are on the selection list will be notified by
standard mail that their names are on the selection list.



   (B)   Candidates who are not on the selection list will be notified
by standard mail that their names are not on the selection list.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 32.088  SCORES AND APPEAL.



   (A)   The final combined scores will be available for inspection at
the Fire Chief's Office of the New Albany Fire Department.



   (B)   There shall be no appeal process contesting the final combined
scores.



(Ord. A-03-40, passed 6-19-2003)



CHAPTER 33:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section




Department of Parks and Recreation




   33.001   Establishment



   33.002   Fee schedule




Department of Redevelopment




   33.015   Establishment



   33.016   Creation of Redevelopment Commission for the Department




Redevelopment Authority




   33.020   Creation




Department of Economic Development




   33.030   Establishment



   33.031   Five-member Commission



   33.032   Commission to serve without salary



   33.033   Powers of the Commission



   33.034   Staff to the Commission




City Tree Board




   33.040   Creation and establishment



   33.041   Terms of office; compensation



   33.042   Duties and responsibilities




Historic Preservation Commission




   33.050   Creation




Plan Commission




   33.055   Re-establishment of Commission




Human Rights Commission




   33.070   Establishment; appointment of director



   33.071   Public policy and purpose



   33.072   Definitions



   33.073   Appointments; qualifications



   33.074   Rules and regulations



   33.075   Powers and duties



   33.076   Educational program



   33.077   Relationship with Civil Rights Commission



   33.078   (Reserved)



   33.079   (Reserved)



   33.080   Approval by City Attorney



   33.081   Hate crime statistics



   33.082   Fair housing




Animal Control Advisory Commission




   33.085   Establishment; authority and responsibility



   33.086   Membership



   33.087   Terms; removal of members



   33.088   Meetings




Building Commission




   33.090   Creation




Claims Review Committee




   33.095   Creation




Purchasing Agency




   33.100   Establishment



   33.101   Powers and duties



   33.102   Designated purchasing agents




Stormwater Board




   33.110   Establishment



   33.111   Ratification



   33.112   Jurisdiction



   33.113   Membership



   33.114   Terms



   33.115   Compensation



   33.116   Secretary; Treasurer



   33.117   Budget



   33.118   Bond requirements



   33.119   Rules and bylaws



   33.120   Common Council responsibilities




Ethics Commission




   33.135   Establishment and purpose



   33.136   Appointees



   33.137   Officers; quorum; meetings



   33.138   Jurisdiction



   33.139   Powers



   33.140   Economic statement of interest review



   33.141   Complaint process, filing and review by secretary



   33.142   Complaints referred to the Ethics Commission



   33.143   Decision of the Ethics Commission



   33.144   Agreed settlements



   33.145   Report of action taken by chief administrative officer of
an agency



   33.146   Unlawful interference with Ethics Commission activities



   33.147   Disclosure requirements, public records



   33.148   Public meetings



   33.149   Standard of conduct (Reserved)



   33.150   Penalties and sanctions (Reserved)



   33.151   Conflict of laws




Bi-Centennial Commission




   33.165   Creation



Port Authority



   33.175   Definitions



   33.176   Creation and powers



   33.177   Expansion



   33.178   Dissolution



   33.179   Board of Directors



   33.180   Employees



   33.181   Jurisdiction; powers and duties



   33.182   Development plan



   33.183   Modification of plan



   33.184   Conclusiveness of plan



   33.185   Private enterprise



   33.186   Miscellaneous provisions



   33.187   Bidding



   33.188   Budget



   33.189   Channel maintenance fund



   33.190   Deposits and disbursements



   33.191   Additional provision



Editor’s note:



   During the 2008 recodification, the sections of this chapter were
changed from two digit (that is, 33.01) to three digit (that is, 33.001) for
ease of expansion and for consistency.



DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION



§ 33.001  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Parks and Recreation Department is hereby established pursuant to
I.C. 36-10-4 and grants all rights, ability, and authority necessary to
ensure the proper functioning of that Department as outlined in the state
code, as may be amended by the state legislature, with operations to begin
January 1, 2013.



(Ord. G-60-80, passed 4-4-1960; Ord. G-94-185, passed 2-17-1994; Ord.
G-01-37, passed 10-18-2001; Ord. G-12-32, passed 11-15-2012)



Cross-reference:



   Parks and Recreation, see Ch. 98



§ 33.002  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The schedule of fees for the Park and Recreation Department shall be
set from time to time by the Common Council.



(Ord. G-05-55, passed 11-17-2005; Ord. G-12-32, passed 11-15-2012)



DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT



§ 33.015  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A new department to be known and designated as the Department of
Redevelopment is created and established with full power and authority to act
as provided by law.



(Ord. G-61-115, passed 7-10-1961; Ord. G-76-600, passed 3-15-1976)



Statutory reference:



   Organization, powers of Redevelopment Commission, see I.C. 36-7-14.5



§ 33.016  CREATION OF REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION FOR THE DEPARTMENT.



   The  Department of Redevelopment shall  be controlled by a board to
be known as the “New Albany Redevelopment Commission”. The Board of
Redevelopment Commissioners shall be appointed in accordance with applicable
state law, as amended from time to time.



(Ord. G-88-106, passed 3-17-1988)



REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



§ 33.020  CREATION.



   (A)   The city hereby creates a redevelopment authority under the
Act to be known as the New Albany Redevelopment Authority (“Authority”)
as a separate body corporate and politic and as an instrumentality of the
city.



   (B)   The Authority is organized for the following purposes:



      (1)   Financing, constructing and leasing local public
improvements to the Commission;



      (2)   Financing and constructing additional improvements to
local public improvements owned by the Authority and leasing them to the
Commission;



      (3)   Acquiring all or a portion of one or more local public
improvements from the Commission by purchase or lease and leasing these local
public improvements back to the Commission, with any additional improvements
that may be made to them;



      (4)   Acquiring all or a portion of one or more local public
improvements from the Commission by purchase or lease to find or refund
indebtedness incurred on account of those local public improvements to enable
the Commission to make a savings in debt service obligations or lease rental
obligations or to obtain relief from covenants that the Commission considers
to be unduly burdensome; and



      (5)   Any other purposes permitted by the Act, including the
issuance of bonds to finance local public improvements.



   (C)   The Board of Directors of the Authority shall be composed of
three members who are residents of the city and shall be appointed by the
Mayor for three-year terms.



(Ord. G-96-132, passed 8-15-1996)



DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



§ 33.030  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-7-12, there is created a
department of economic development which shall be known as the “New Albany
Economic Development Commission”.



(Ord. G-65-208, passed 7-12-1965)



§ 33.031  FIVE-MEMBER COMMISSION.



   (A)   The New Albany Economic Development Commission shall be a
five-member Commission.



   (B)   It shall be appointed in accordance with I.C. 36-7-12-5.



(Ord. G-03-46, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 33.032  COMMISSION TO SERVE WITHOUT SALARY.



   The members of the New Albany Economic Development Commission shall
serve without salary, but may be entitled to certain reimbursements in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-12-15.



(Ord. G-03-46, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 33.033  POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.



   The New Albany Economic Development Commission shall have the powers as
outlined in I.C. 36-7-12-18 and 36-7-12-18.5.



(Ord. G-03-46, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 33.034  STAFF TO THE COMMISSION.



   The Department of Redevelopment is hereby designated as the staff for
the New Albany Economic Development Commission.



(Ord. G-03-46, passed 6-19-2003)



CITY TREE BOARD



§ 33.040  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   A City Tree Board is hereby created to operate in conjunction
with the Board of Public Works and Safety for the city and will operate in an
advisory capacity to the Board of Public Works and Safety in any manner
relating to trees, shrubs and other plants which are presently within the
purview of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   There is hereby created and established a city Tree Board
which shall consist of not less than five nor more than seven members,
citizens and residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Common Council. The members shall include a
representative from the following city agencies and groups: (1) Common
Council, (1) Redevelopment Commission, (1) Plan Commission, (1) Utilities and
(1-3) citizen members.



(Ord. G-92-106, passed 3-2-1992)



§ 33.041  TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The term of the five to seven persons to be appointed by the
Mayor shall be three years except that the term of two of the members
appointed to the first Commission shall be for only one year and the term of
two members of the first Commission shall be for two years. In the event that
a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor
shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.



   (B)   The Tree Board members whose terms will continue into the next
year or years shall recommend to the Mayor new members. The Mayor must
appoint annually at least one person recommended by the Board. In the event
that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed by the original appointing body for the
unexpired portion of the term.



   (C)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. G-92-106, passed 3-2-1992)



§ 33.042  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The city’s Tree Board shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:



   (A)   Advise the Board of Public Works and Safety in all matters
relating to the selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees,
shrubs, hedges and other woody vegetation along public ways and on public
grounds under its control;



   (B)   Study and survey the conditions of trees, shrubs, hedges and
other woody vegetation along the public ways and on public grounds under the
control of the Board of Public Works and Safety;



   (C)   Review, develop and recommend policies concerning the
selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs, hedges and all
other woody vegetation;



   (D)   Coordinate its effects with other city and public agencies
including the Park Board, Plan Commission, Redevelopment Commission and
Indiana Department of Transportation;



   (E)   Coordinate its efforts with local utilities;



   (F)   Review and make recommendations concerning construction
projects which may endanger trees, shrubs, hedges and other woody vegetation
along the public ways and on public grounds as requested by the Board of
Public Works and Safety;



   (G)   At the direction of the Board of Public Works and Safety,
prepare applications for grants from public or private agencies which will
further its duties and responsibilities under the chapter; and



   (H)   Undertake educational campaigns as necessary and work with
private and public agencies to establish programs which will further its
duties and responsibilities under this chapter.



(Ord. G-92-106, passed 3-2-1992)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 33.050  CREATION.



   For provisions concerning the Historic Preservation Commission, see
§§ 151.01 through 151.15.



PLAN COMMISSION



§ 33.055  RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   The city’s Plan Commission is re-established with all the powers and
duties as provided by law.



(Ord. G-66-250, passed 5-2-1966)



Statutory reference:



   Local planning and zoning; Plan Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4



HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



§ 33.070  ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Human Rights Commission which shall
be responsible for all legal matters pertaining to discrimination.



   (B)   There is hereby created a Human Rights Commission, with the
president being elected by a majority of the members of this Commission.



(Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012)



§ 33.071  PUBLIC POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city that it does not discriminate in
the provision or implementation of its programs and services on the basis of
race, religion, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, veteran or military status, or disability.  It is the
public policy of the city to provide all citizens equal opportunity for
education, employment, access to public accommodations and acquisition
through purchase or rental of real property, including, but not limited to
housing, and to eliminate segregation or separation based on race, religion,
color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity,
veteran or military status, or disability, since an equal access to and use
of public accommodations and equal opportunity for acquisition of real
property are hereby declared to be civil rights.



   (B)   The practice of denying these rights to persons because of
race, religion, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, veteran or military status, or disability is contrary to the
principles of freedom and equality of opportunity and is a burden to the
objectives of the public policy of the city, and shall be considered as
discriminatory practices.  The promotion of equal opportunity without regard
to race, religion, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, veteran or military status, or disability is consistent with
the principles of freedom and equality of opportunity.  The promotion of
equal opportunity without regard to race, religion, color, sex, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran or military
status, or disability is the purpose of this subchapter.



   (C)   It is also the public policy of the city to protect employers,
labor organizations, employment agencies, property owners, real estate
brokers, builders, and lending institutions from unfounded charges of
discrimination.



   (D)   It is hereby declared to be contrary to the public policy of
the city and an unlawful practice to induce or attempt to induce any person
to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, religion, color,
sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran
or military status, or disability.



(Ord. G-74-524, passed 1-7-1974; Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012; Ord.
G-13-12, passed 5-16-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Authority for Local Civil Rights Commission, see I.C. 22-9-1-12.1



§ 33.072  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.  The sale, rental, lease, sublease,
construction or financing, including negotiations and other activities or
procedures incident thereto, of:



      (1)   Any building, structure, apartment, single room or suite
of rooms or other portion of a building, occupied as or designed or intended
for occupancy as living quarters;



      (2)   Any building, structure, or portion thereof, or any
improved or unimproved land utilized, or designed or intended for
utilization, for business, commercial, or industrial or agricultural
purposes; or



      (3)   Any vacant or unimproved land offered for sale or lease
for any purpose whatsoever.



   AFFIRMATIVE ACTION. Those acts which the Commission deems necessary to
assure compliance with the city human rights subchapter.



   ANCESTRY.  Refers to both the country from which a person’s
ancestors came and the citizenship of a person’s ancestors.



   COMMISSION. The city’s Human Rights Commission hereinafter created.



   COMMISSION ATTORNEY.The City Attorney or such assistants of the City
Attorney as may be assigned to the Commission, or such other attorney as may
be engaged by the Commission or voluntarily lend his or her services to the
Commission.



   COMPENSATION or COMPENSATORY DAMAGES.  Actual damages, except that
damages to be paid as a result of discriminatory practices relating to
employment shall be limited to lost wages, salaries, commissions or fringe
benefits.



   COMPLAINANT. Any individual charging on his or her own behalf to have
been personally aggrieved by a discriminatory practice, or the Commission
Attorney or a Commissioner to the Human Rights Commission charging that a
discriminatory practice was committed against a person other than himself or
herself, or a class of people, in order to vindicate the public policy of the
state as defined in I.C. 22-9-1-2, and the public policy of the city in §
33.071 of this chapter.



   COMPLAINT. Any written grievance filed by a complainant with the Legal
Department. The original shall be signed and verified before a notary public
or another person duly authorized by law to administer oaths and take
acknowledgments. Notarial service shall be furnished by the Legal Department
without charge.



   CONSENT AGREEMENT. A formal agreement entered into in lieu of
adjudication.



   DISABLED.



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of the person's major life activities;



         (b)   A record of having an impairment described in
division (a) above; or



         (c)   Being regarded as having an impairment described
in division (a) above.



      (2)   The term also means people (or persons) who have been
diagnosed with cancer, multiple sclerosis, heart disease, hypertension,
diabetes, as HIV positive or with other chronic diseases, provided, however
that the disability does not impair a person's ability to perform his or her
job.



      (3)   The term does not include the following: current illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in § 102 of the
Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 802)),  pedophilia, exhibitionism,
voyeurism, compulsive gambling, kleptomania, pyromania or psychoactive
substance use disorders resulting from current illegal use of drugs.



   DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE. The exclusion of a person by another person
from equal opportunities because of race, religion, color, sex, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran or military
status, or disability; or a system which excludes persons from equal
opportunities because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran or military status, or
disability or the promotion or assistance of segregation or separation in any
manner on the basis of the above categories, provided, it shall not be a
discriminatory practice for an employment agency to refer for employment any
individual, or for a joint labor-management committee controlling
apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit or employ
any individual in such program on the basis of his or her religion, sex or
national origin in those particular instances where religion, sex or national
origin is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the
normal operation of that particular business or enterprise, further,
provided, that it shall not be discriminatory practice for a person to refuse
to rent for occupancy as living quarters any space in owner-occupied
multiple-dwelling structure on the basis of sex; provided, further, it shall
not be a discriminatory practice for an employer to fail to employ or retain
as an employee any person who because of a disability is physically or
otherwise unable to efficiently and safely perform, at the standards set by
the employer, the duties required by that job; provided, further, it shall
not be a discriminatory practice to fail to promote or transfer a person with
a disability to another job or occupation after he or she is employed unless,
prior to the transfer, the person with a disability by training or experience
is qualified for the job or occupation, provided, further, it shall not be a
discriminatory practice for an employer to fail to modify physical
accommodations or administrative procedures to accommodate a person with a
disability.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  All public and private schools and training
centers, except that the term does not include any state agency as defined in
this section.



   EMPLOYEE.  Includes any person employed by another for wages or
salary, provided, that it shall not include any individual employed by his or
her parents, spouse or child.



   EMPLOYER. Includes any person employing six or more employees within
the city, except that the term does not include not-for-profit corporation or
association organized exclusively for fraternal or religious purposes, nor
any school, educational or charitable religious institution owned or
conducted by, or affiliated with, a church or religious institution, nor any
exclusively social club, corporation or association that is not organized for
profit, nor the city or any department thereof, nor any state agency as
defined in this section.



   EMPLOYMENT AGENCY. Any person undertaking with or without compensation
to procure, recruit, refer or place employees.



   GENDER IDENTITY.  A person’s actual or perceived gender-related
attributes, self-image, appearance, expression or behavior, whether or not
the characteristics differ from those traditionally associated with the
person’s assigned sex at birth.



   LABOR ORGANIZATION. Any organization which exists for the purpose, in
whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers
concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or for mutual aid
or protection in relation to employment.



   LEGAL DEPARTMENT.  The City Attorney or the assistants of the City
Attorney as may be assigned to the Commission by the City Attorney or such
other attorney who voluntarily lends his or her services at the request of
the Commission.



   LENDING INSTITUTION.  Any bank, building and loan association,
insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise
whose business consists in whole or part in making or guaranteeing loans
secured by real estate or an interest therein.



   NATIONAL ORIGIN.  Refers to both the country from which a person came
and the citizenship of the person.



   OWNER-OCCUPIED MULTIPLE-DWELLING STRUCTURE.  Includes only structures
in which the owner of the premises actually resides, containing not more than
three separate dwelling units, apartments, rooms or portions of the building
designed or intended for occupancy as living quarters.



   PERSON. One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, labor organizations, corporations, cooperatives, legal
representatives, trustees in bankruptcy, trustees, receivers, any
subdivisions of the state, and other organized groups of persons.



   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. Any establishment which offers its services,
facilities, or goods to the general public.



   RESPONDENT.  One or more persons against whom a complaint is filed
under this chapter, and who the complainant alleges has committed or is
committing a discriminatory practice.



   SEX. As it applies to segregation or separation in this subchapter
shall apply to all types of employment, education, public accommodations and
housing, provided, that it shall not be discriminatory practice to maintain
separate restrooms or dressing rooms, and it shall not be unlawful employment
practice for an employer to hire and employ employees, for an employment
agency to classify, or refer for employment any individual, for a labor
organization to classify its members or to classify or refer for employment
any individual, or for an employer, labor organization or joint
labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or
retraining programs, to admit or employ any other individual in any such
program on the basis of sex in those certain instances where sex is a bona
fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation
of that particular business or enterprise and it shall not be discriminatory
practice for a private or religious educational institution to continue to
maintain and enforce a policy of admitting students of one sex only.



   SEXUAL ORIENTATION.  An individual's identity or practice as a lesbian
woman, gay male, bisexual person or heterosexual person, whether actual or
perceived.



   STATE AGENCY.  Every office, officer, board, commission, council,
department, division, bureau, committee, fund, agency, and without limitation
by reason of any enumeration herein, every other instrumentality of the
state, every hospital, every penal institution and every other institutional
enterprise and activity of the state, wherever located, the universities
supported in whole or in part by state funds, and the judicial department of
the state.  State agency does not mean counties, county departments of
public welfare, cities, towns, townships, school cities, school towns, school
townships, school districts or other municipal corporations, political
subdivisions, or units of local government.



   VETERAN OR MILITARY STATUS.  An honorably discharged veteran of
military service, an active or reserve member in any branch of the armed
forces of the United States, including the national guard, coast guard, and
armed forces reserves.



(Ord. G-74-524, passed 1-7-1974; Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012)



§ 33.073  APPOINTMENTS; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The five members of the Human Rights Commission shall be
appointed two by the Mayor, two by the Common Council, then the members so
appointed will elected a fifth member.  Each appointment shall be for a term
of three years.  The president shall be elected by a majority of the
Commission.



   (B)   Members of the Human Rights Commission shall be representative
of the community and shall be city residents.



(Ord. G-74-524, passed 1-7-1974; Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-9-2012)



§ 33.074  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Commission shall meet quarterly (every three months) at a regularly
published time and shall hold special meetings as the president deems
necessary or at the request of a majority of its members.  The Commission
may adopt rules and regulations, both procedural and substantive, to
effectuate the purpose of this subchapter and to make more specific the
procedures deemed necessary for orderly and equitable compliance with this
section.  All rules and procedures adopted by the Commission and any
subsequent changes in rules and procedures, must be approved by the Common
Council.  The rules, regulations, and guidelines of the Commission shall be
available to the public at the office of the Legal Department.



(Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-9-2012Ord. G-13-12, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 33.075  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Human Rights Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To create subcommittees and advisory committees as in its
judgment will aid in effectuating the purpose of this subchapter.



   (B)   To issue publications and results of investigation and
research as in its judgment will tend to minimize or eliminate discrimination
because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran or military status, or disability.



      (1)   To determine jointly with the Legal Department whether
probable cause exists to believe that discrimination has occurred.  A
probable cause Commissioner shall be assigned to each complaint filed on the
date it is filed and shall participate jointly with the Legal Department and
assists in the investigation of the complaint.  The Legal Department shall
make a written recommendation of cause or no cause setting forth relevant
facts and applicable legal authority and submit it to the designated probable
cause Commissioner.



      (2)   The Commissioner shall review the Legal Department’s
recommended finding, and shall make a written determination of cause or no
cause setting forth the relevant facts and applicable law.  The probable
cause Commissioner shall follow applicable legal standards as set forth by
the Legal Department in making the determination.



   (C)   To schedule complaints for public hearings upon a
determination of probable cause.



      (1)   When the recommendation after the investigation is no
probable cause, the complainant shall be furnished a copy of the findings of
fact and recommendations and shall be given ten days to make a written
request, with the reasons therefore, to the chairperson of the Commission for
review of the finding.  Upon the receipt of the request for review, the
chairperson or their designee shall review the request and the decision of
the reviewing Commissioner regarding probable cause shall be final. 
Whenever a Commissioner reviews a decision at the request of a complainant,
the Commissioner shall be disqualified from any further participation in that
case, except as a witness at a public hearing on the complaint.



      (2)   Complaints of discrimination shall be received and
investigated by the Legal Department.  To be acceptable to the Legal
Department, a complaint shall be sufficiently complete so as to reflect
properly the name and address of the complainant, the name and address of
respondent against whom the complaint is made, the alleged discriminatory
practice and a statement of particulars thereof, the date or dates and places
of the alleged discriminatory practice, if it is of a continuing nature, the
dates between which the continuing acts of discrimination are alleged to have
occurred, and a statement as to any other action, civil or criminal,
instituted in any other form based upon the same grievance as is alleged in
the complaint, together with a statement as to the status or disposition of
the other action.  No complaint shall be valid unless filed within 180 days
from the occurrence of the alleged discriminatory practice, or from the date
of the termination of a published and meaningful grievance procedure provided
by a respondent employer or labor union, provided, that complaints filed only
with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission shall be deemed to have been
filed simultaneously with the Legal Department for purposes of measuring the
180 day limitation, as long as the complaint is otherwise within the Legal
Department's jurisdiction, provided, further, that any person who files a
complaint with the Indiana Civil Rights Commission shall have no recourse to
the city Legal Department concerning any of the matters alleged in the
complaint, provided, further, that any person who files a complaint with the
Indiana Civil Rights Commission shall have no recourse to the city Legal
Department concerning any of the matters alleged in the complaint, provided;
further, that the Legal Department shall have no jurisdiction over the state
or any of its agencies.  After a complaint is scheduled for a public
hearing, the Legal Department shall make reasonable efforts to conciliate all
issues raised during investigation of the case.



   (D)   To prevent any person from discharging, expelling, or
otherwise discriminating against any other person because he or she filed a
complaint or testified in any hearing before the Commission or in any way
assisted in any matter under investigation.



   (E)   To issue a temporary emergency order against any person
requiring the person to do an act preserving the possibility of a remedy for
a complaint or to refrain from doing an act damaging the possibility of a
remedy during the investigation of the complaint; provided, however:



      (1)   No temporary emergency order shall be issued unless a
time and place for hearing on the temporary emergency order is designated in
the order;



      (2)   The hearing on the temporary emergency order shall be
held within ten days following the issuance of the temporary order, unless
continued by the Commission at the request of the respondent. At the hearing,
the complainant shall show that a failure to continue the temporary order
would damage his or her remedy. The Commission shall, thereupon, weigh the
comparative hardship to complainant and respondent and issue a decision
continuing or terminating the temporary emergency order, pending final
disposition of the complaint. The respondent may waive the hearing without
prejudice to his or her defense of the matters charged in the complaint, in
which case the temporary order shall remain in effect pending final
disposition of the complaint; and



      (3)   The Commission may by rule provide for issuance of its
temporary order by a majority of the Commission, and it may compel compliance
with any such temporary order by bringing in any circuit or superior court
for prohibitory or mandatory injunction upon showing that the person is
subject to the court’s jurisdiction, resides or transacts business within
the county in which the proceeding is brought, and that the injunction is
necessary to protect the complainant’s rights under this chapter until his
or her complaint is resolved through conciliation or public hearing.



   (F)   To reduce the terms of conciliation agreed to by the parties
in writing, to be called a consent agreement, which the parties and a
majority of the Commissioners shall sign.  When so signed, the consent
agreement shall have the same effect as a cease and desist order pursuant to
division (H) of this section.  If the Commission determines that a party to
the consent agreement is not complying with it, the Commission may obtain
enforcement of the consent agreement in a circuit or superior court upon
showing that the party is not complying with the consent agreement, and the
party is subject to the Commission's jurisdiction, and resides or transacts
business within the county in which the petition for enforcement is brought.



   (G)   To hold hearings, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance,
administer oaths, take testimony of any matter under investigation or in
question before the Commission.  The Commission may make rules governing the
issuance of subpoenas by individual Commissioners.  Contumacy or refusal to
obey a subpoena or temporary emergency order issued pursuant to this section
shall be a breach of this subchapter and the person shall be liable to a
penalty therefore, if adjudged by the circuit or superior court, of the
payment of a penalty not to exceed $300.  Each penalty shall be deposited in
the General Fund of the city, provided, however, that the payment of the
penalty by a party shall not impair the Commission's ability to grant
affirmative relief and compensatory damages to the complainant, should
justice so require.



   (H)   To state its findings of fact after hearing which statement
shall be made in a written opinion containing both the findings of fact and
the principles of law applied.  All written opinions shall be compiled and
maintained as public record and, in making decisions, the Commission shall
give due consideration to its prior decisions which may be applicable.  If a
majority of the Commissioners who hear the case finds that a person has
engaged in unlawful discriminatory practice, the Commission shall cause to be
served on the person and order requiring the person to cease and desist from
the unlawful discriminatory practice and requiring the person to take further
affirmative action necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.



      (1)   If unlawful discrimination is found in the area of
employment, an order shall be issued requiring the respondent to take such
affirmative action including but not limited to hiring, reinstatement, and
upgrading of employers or people deprived of employment, with or without
compensatory damages to which the complainants would have been entitled had
they not been deprived of equal opportunity, provided, that this division
shall not be construed to require any employer to modify physical
accommodations or administrative procedures to accommodate a person with a
disability.



      (2)   If unlawful discrimination is found in the area of
housing or acquisition of real property, an order may be issued requiring a
respondent to take affirmative action, including but not limited to renting,
selling, or leasing to a person deprived of equal opportunity. Compensation
for the denial of equal opportunity shall be allowed within the discretion of
the Commission.



      (3)   If unlawful discrimination is found in the area of
public accommodation, an order shall be issued requiring a respondent to take
affirmative action, including but not limited to providing services, goods,
or access to property, instatement to membership, reinstatement to
membership, posting of notice that a facility is a public accommodation, with
or without compensatory damages for a complainant's being denied equal
opportunity.



      (4)   If unlawful discrimination is found in the area of
education, an order may issued requiring a respondent to take affirmative
action, including, but not limited to, a review and revision of school
boundaries, revision of teaching aids, and materials, human relations
training for personnel recruitment of minority people for professional staff,
with or without compensatory damages to which the complainant would have been
entitled except for the denial of equal opportunity.



      (5)   If upon all the evidence, the Commission finds that a
person has not engaged in any unlawful practice or violation of this section,
the Commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to
be served on the complainant an order dismissing the complaint as to the
person.



      (6)   Judicial review of the cease and desist order, or other
final order, or other affirmative action or damages as referred to in this
subchapter may be obtained by filing in the county circuit or superior
courts.  The scope of review shall be in accordance with the provisions set
out in I.C. 4-21.5-1 et seq.  If no proceeding to obtain judicial review is
instituted within 30 days from the receipt of notice by a person that the
order has been made by the Commission, the Commission, if it determines that
the person upon whom the cease and desist order has been served is not
complying or is making no effort to comply, may obtain a decree of a court
for the enforcement of the order in circuit or superior court upon showing
that the person is subject to the Commissions jurisdiction and resides or
transacts business within the county in which petition for enforcement is
brought, or may request the City Attorney, Commission attorney, or attorney
representing the complainant to seek enforcement.



      (7)   Affirmative action by city contractors.  All
contractors doing business with the city, except those specifically exempted
by regulations promulgated by the Human Rights Commission and approved by the
Common Council shall take affirmative action to insure that applicants are
employed and that employees are treated during employment in a manner which
provides equal employment opportunity and tends to eliminate inequality based
upon religion, race, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran or military status, or disability. 
Affirmative action shall include but not be limited to the issuance of a
statement of policy regarding equal employment and its communication to all
personnel involved in recruitment, hiring, training, assignment, and
promotion, notification of all employment sources of company policy and
active efforts to review the qualifications of all applicants regardless of
race, religion, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, veteran or military status, or disability, recruiting in the
minority group community for employees; and establishing an internal system
of reporting concerning equal employment, recruiting, hiring, training,
upgrading and the like.



         (a)   Each contractor shall submit to the Human Rights
Commission a written proposal concerning the affirmative action it proposes
to take, which proposal must be approved prior to its entering a contract
with the city.  The proposal shall be limited to measures similar to those
which the city is required to take in its affirmative action with regard to
its own employees, as established by the Mayor's office and as specified by
resolution of the Common Council.



         (b)   All contracting agencies of the city or any
department thereof shall include in all contracts hereafter negotiated or
renegotiated by them a provision obligating the contractor to take
affirmative action to insure that the applicants are employed and that
employees are treated during employment in a manner which provide equal
employment opportunity and tends to eliminate inequality based upon race,
religion, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, veteran or military status, or disability.



         (c)   The contracts shall provide further that breach of
the obligation to take affirmative action shall be a material breach of the
contract for which the city shall be entitled at its option:



            1.   To cancel, terminate, or suspend the contract
in whole or in part;



            2.   To declare the contractor or vendor
ineligible for further city contracts;



            3.   To recover liquidated damages of a specified
sum.



(Ord. G-74-524, passed 1-7-1974; Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012)



§ 33.076  EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM.



   In order to eliminate prejudice among the various groups in the city
and to further goodwill among these groups, the Commission may prepare
educational programs designed to emphasize and remedy the denial of equal
opportunity because of a person's race, religion, color, sex, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran or military
status, or disability, its harmful effects, and its incompatibility with the
principles of equality.



(Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012)



§ 33.077  RELATIONSHIP WITH CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION.



   The Legal Department may enter into a working relationship with the
Indiana Civil Rights Commission to perpetuate the mutual objectives set forth
in this subchapter and the Indiana Civil Rights Law.



(Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012)



§ 33.078  (RESERVED).



§ 33.079  (RESERVED).



§ 33.080  APPROVAL BY CITY ATTORNEY.



   Any claim settlement or suggested settlement pursuant to this
subchapter shall first be approved and agreed upon by the City Attorney.



(Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012)



§ 33.081  HATE CRIME STATISTICS.



   The Human Rights Commission may collect data and issue reports on the
evidence of hate crimes in the city. Hate crimes include verbal or physical
abuse directed at individuals or groups because of their race, religion,
national origin, sexual orientation or disability.



(Ord. G-12-15, passed 7-19-2012)



§ 33.082  FAIR HOUSING.



   (A)   Policy statement.  It shall be the policy of the City of New
Albany to provide, within constitutional limitation, for fair housing
throughout its corporate limits as provided for under the federal Civil
Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the federal Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.



   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:



         (a)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice; or



         (b)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)



      COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant
to I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)



      COMPLAINANT.   A person, including the Commission, who files a
complaint under I.C. 22-9.5-6.  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)



      DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE.   An act that is unlawful under
divisions (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H) below or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



      DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for
sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or
part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended
for occupancy as a residence by one or more families.  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)



      FAMILIAL STATUS.



         (a)   One or more individuals who have not attained the
age of 18 years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal
custody of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other
person.



         (b)   The protections afforded against discrimination on
the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is
in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not
attained the age of 18 years.



      FAMILY .  Includes a single individual, with the status of such
family being further defined under FAMILIAL STATUS .  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)



      HANDICAP.  



         (a)   With respect to a person:



            1.   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;



            2.   A record of having such an impairment; or



            3.   Being regarded as having such an impairment;



            4.   An impairment described or defined pursuant
to the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990;



            5.   Any other impairment defined in 910 IAC 2-3.



         (b)   HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of
or addictions to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21
of the United States Code 910 IAC 2-3-2(14); nor does the term HANDICAP
include an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite 910
IAC 2-3-2(14).



      PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated
organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United
States Code, receivers, and fiduciaries.  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)



      TO RENT.   Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise
to grant for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the
occupant.  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)



   (C)   Unlawful practice.  Subject to the provisions of divisions
(C)(2) and (I) below and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against
discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1
and in division (D) below shall apply to:



      (1)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (C)(2)
below and I.C. 22-9.5-3.



      (2)   Other than the provisions of division (C)(3) below,
nothing in division (D) below shall apply to:



         (a)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner
where the private individual owner does not own more than three such
single-family houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such
single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house
at the time of sale or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any
24-month period. The private individual owner may not own any interest in,
nor have owned or reserved on his behalf, title to or any right to all or a
portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such
single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such
single-family house shall be exempted from application of this section only
if such house is sold or rented:



            1.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman,
or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any
employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and



            2.   Without the publication, posting or mailing,
after notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of division
(D)(3) below, but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or



         (b)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families
living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.



      (3)   For the purposes of division (C)(2) above, a person
shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



         (a)   They have, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or



         (b)   They have, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence,
in providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or



         (c)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed
or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



   (D)   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.  As made
applicable by division (C) above and except as exempted by division (C)(2)
above and division (I) below, it shall be unlawful:



      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona
fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision
of services of facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



      (3)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made,
printed, or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to
the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation,
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation or discrimination.



      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling
is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact
so available.



      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
perspective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.



      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
handicap of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That person; or



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (8)   For purposes of this division (D), DISCRIMINATION
includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of
a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13,1998, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in such a manner that:



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               a.   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling;



               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (9)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for
Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an usability for physically
handicapped people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1) suffices to satisfy the
requirements of division (D)(8)(c)3.c above.



      (10)   Nothing in this division requires that a dwelling be
made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct
threat to the health of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.



   (E)   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity
whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related
transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a
transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.



      (2)   As used in this division, the RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



         (a)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing
other financial assistance:



            1.   For purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or



            2.   Secured by residential real estate.



         (b)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of
residential real property.



      (3)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in
the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into
consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
handicap, or familial status.



   (F)   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.  It
shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation
in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other
service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions
of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (G)   Interference, coercion, or intimidation.  It shall be
unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed,
or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by divisions (C),
(D), (E) or (F) of this section.



   (H)   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases.  Whoever,
whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of force
willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:



      (1)   Any person because of his race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin and because he is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or



      (2)   Any person because he is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (H)(1) above; or



         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons
opportunity or protection so to participate; or



      (3)   Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations orfacilities described in
division (H)(1) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful
assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined
according to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall
be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or
both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of
years or for life.



   (I)   Equal access to housing in HUD programs.  Pursuant to 24 CFR
Part 5.403 and 24 CFR Part 574.3 the definition of FAMILY is revised to
include families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity, or marital status of its members.



   (J)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et
seq. shall be exempt from the provisions of this section to include those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (J)(2) and (3) below.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this section
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.



      (3)   Nothing in this section regarding familial status shall
apply with respect to housing for older persons. As used in this division,
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:



         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that
the Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the state Civil Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal
program) or;



         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62
years of age or older; or



         (C)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least
one person 55 years of age or older per unit.



   (K)   Administrative enforcement of section.



      (1)   The authority and responsibility for properly
administering this section and referral of complaints hereunder to the
Commissioner as set forth in division (K)(2) below shall be vested in the
Chief Elected Official of the City of New Albany, Indiana.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the
City of New Albany, Indiana, because of lack of financial and other resources
necessary to fully administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil
actions under the section, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of
violation of the provisions of this section by complainants to the Indiana
Civil Rights Commission for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to
I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the Chief Elected Official of the City of New Albany,
Indiana, shall refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided for
under division (K)(1) above to said Commission for purposes of investigation,
resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



      (3)   All executive departments and agencies of the City of
New Albany, Indiana shall administer their departments, programs and
activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this section and shall cooperate
with the Chief Elected Official and the Commission to further such purposes.



      (4)   The Chief Elected Official of the City of New Albany,
Indiana, or the Chief Elected Official's designee, shall provide information
on remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant requesting such
information.



(Ord. G-14-15, passed 7-17-2014)



ANIMAL CONTROL ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 33.085  ESTABLISHMENT; AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.



   There is created and established an Animal Control Advisory Commission
of the city which Commission shall have the authority and responsibility for
the following:



   (A)   Making recommendations to the Mayor pertaining to shelter
policies, procedures and standards and to  advise and report to the Mayor
and Common Council when necessary;



   (B)   Advise the city’s Animal Warden in matters relating to the
efficient and humane operation of the animal shelter;



   (C)   Suggest business hours of the animal shelter;



   (D)   Review and make recommendations for the animal shelter budget,
including, but not limited to, recommendations for improvements to and
maintenance of the shelter facility and equipment;



   (E)   Prepare an annual report for the Mayor and Common Council each
January, beginning in 1991, for the previous year on the operations of the
shelter, to include, but not be limited to, data supplied by the city’s
Animal Warden including the number of animals housed, disposition of animals,
adoption rates, number of animals quarantined and the like;



   (F)   Make recommendations to the Common Council as to necessary
ordinances concerning the care, treatment and control of animals; and



   (G)   Review with the Mayor the decisions and/or actions of the
animal control and shelter personnel in any matter related to the enforcement
of the city ordinances, if a written request for a hearing is received from
the complaining animal owner within ten days after that action is taken.



(Ord. G-89-185, passed 9-21-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish animal shelter, see I.C. 36-8-2-6



§ 33.086  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Animal Control Advisory Commission shall be composed of five voting
members whose selection should be based on interest and knowledge of animal
control and welfare. All members shall serve without compensation and no
limit shall be set on the number of terms a Commissioner can serve. Members
shall be chosen as follows:



   (A)   One representative each from the Floyd County Animal Rescue
League and the Floyd County Humane Society, chosen by their respective Boards
of Directors;



   (B)   One representative shall be chosen from the general public by
the Common Council;



   (C)   Two representatives chosen by the Mayor, one of whom shall be
a licensed veterinarian;



   (D)   The city’s Animal Warden shall ex officio and be a nonvoting
member of the Commission; and



   (E)   The county’s Animal Warden may ex officio and be a nonvoting
member of the Commission.



(Ord. G-89-185, passed 9-21-89)



§ 33.087  TERMS; REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   Appointment other than the initial appointments shall be made
on or before July 15 of each appropriate year. If a member dies or leaves the
Commission for any other reason, a successor shall be appointed by the
appropriate official or body to serve for the unexpired term for which the
member had been appointed.



   (B)   Initial appointments shall be made by January 15, 1990, as
follows: The Floyd County Animal Rescue League representative shall serve
until July 15, 1992. The Floyd County Humane Society representative shall
serve until July 15, 1991. The representative appointed by the Common Council
shall serve until July 15, 1992. The licensed veterinarian shall serve until
July 15, 1992. The remaining appointee shall serve until July 15, 1991.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be for two-year terms.



   (C)   Commission members may be removed for cause. CAUSE shall
include, but not be limited to, failure to attend three consecutive regularly
scheduled meetings of the Commission in any 12-month period; provided that,
any Commission member may submit in writing any extenuating circumstances to
the body which appointed him or her. The written submission must be made
before the formal decision to remove is reached. Acceptance of extenuating
factors by the appointing body puts the Commission member on notice that
further excessive absenteeism will result in removal.



(Ord. G-89-185, passed 9-21-1989)



§ 33.088  MEETINGS.



   The Animal Control Advisory Commission shall hold a meeting during the
month of July of each year and at the meeting shall elect a Chairperson and
Secretary of the Commission who shall hold the offices until the next annual
meeting in July of the subsequent year. Meetings of the Animal Control
Advisory Commission shall be held every other month as called by the
Chairperson and any special meeting may be called by the Mayor, the Common
Council, the Chairperson or by any three members of the Commission requesting
such a meeting in writing to the Chairperson. Upon receipt of such a request,
the Chairperson shall thereafter call such a meeting to be held within 20
days.



(Ord. G-89-185, passed 9-21-1989)



BUILDING COMMISSION



§ 33.090  CREATION.



   For provisions concerning the Building Commission, see §§ 150.020et
seq.



CLAIMS REVIEW COMMITTEE



§ 33.095  CREATION.



   For provisions concerning the Claims Review Committee, see § 31.16.



PURCHASING AGENCY



§ 33.100  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety is established as the purchasing
agency for the city.



§ 33.101  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and duties
authorized under I.C. 5-22-1 as may be supplemented from time to time by
ordinances adopted by the Council and policies adopted by the purchasing
agency.



   (B)   The purchasing agency shall act as the purchasing agency for
every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department
or other establishment in the city unless otherwise having been designated as
purchasing agents.



§ 33.102  DESIGNATED PURCHASING AGENTS.



   The following are hereby designated to serve as purchasing agents for
the city:



   (A)   Each department head as may be designated in writing from time
to time by the purchasing agency;



   (B)   The Sewer Board; and



   (C)   Such other city employees as may be designated from time to
time in writing by the purchasing agency.



(Ord. G-98-260, passed 9-17-1998)



Cross-reference:



   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States, see § 35.40



STORMWATER BOARD



§ 33.110  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Pursuant to authority granted by I.C. 36-9-23-4, the Stormwater Board
shall henceforth be established as a sanitary board in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 36-9-23-4. The board established by this subchapter may
hereinafter be referred to as either the “New Albany Stormwater Board” or
the “New Albany Drainage Board”.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.111  RATIFICATION.



   All of the actions and determinations previously taken or made by the
Board of Public Works, the Sewer Board, or any other board or political
subdivision of the city in administering the stormwater and/or drainage
facilities and systems are hereby ratified.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.112  JURISDICTION.



   The Stormwater Board shall henceforth have exclusive jurisdiction over
the construction, acquisition, improvement, operation, and maintenance of
“sewage works” related to stormwater and drainage within the city.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.113  MEMBERSHIP.



   The membership of the Stormwater Board shall hereinafter consist of the
following:



   (A)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, who shall serve as
Chairperson at all times during his or her tenure in the office;



   (B)   One member appointed by majority vote of the members of the
Common Council, provided that the member shall be a registered professional
engineer, and further provided that the member shall not otherwise be a paid
or unpaid official or employee of the city. The member shall serve an initial
term of two years; and



   (C)   One member appointed by majority vote of the members of the
Common Council, provided that the member shall not otherwise be a paid or
unpaid official or employee of the city. The member shall serve an initial
term of three years.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.114 TERMS.



   Following the expiration of the initial terms of the members appointed
by the Common Council, each member shall thereafter be appointed to a term of
three years. Following expiration of any term, the previously appointed and
serving members shall continue to serve until the Common Council designates
their replacement in accordance with the terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.115  COMPENSATION.



   The Sanitary Board shall select a Vice-Chairperson from the members
appointed by the Common Council. The members of the Stormwater Board shall be
entitled to compensation as is fixed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Common Council. Compensation for members shall be subject to change
pursuant to the provisions of a subsequent ordinance adopted by the Common
Council. Each of the members of the Stormwater Board shall further be
entitled to the payment for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance
of his or her duties.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.116 SECRETARY; TREASURER.



   The Stormwater Board shall select a Secretary and a Treasurer, who need
not be members of the Board. However, the Board may combine the offices of
the Secretary and Treasurer into a single office of Secretary-Treasurer. The
Secretary, Treasurer, or Secretary-Treasurer of the Stormwater Board shall be
entitled to compensation as fixed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Common Council. The compensation shall be subject to change pursuant to
the provisions of a subsequent ordinance adopted by the Common Council.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.117  BUDGET.



   The Stormwater Board shall present by June 15 of each year to the
Common Council a budget for review and approval.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.118  BOND REQUIREMENTS.



   The Common Council hereby determines that no bond shall be required of
the Mayor as Chairperson of the Stormwater Board. The Common Council further
hereby fixes the bond required of the members of the Stormwater Board in the
amount of $5,000 each. The Common Council further hereby fixes the bond
required of the Treasurer of the Stormwater Board in the amount of $20,000,
provided that the requirement of the bond shall be waived if the Treasurer
appointed by the Stormwater Board is the City Controller. The City Clerk
shall file all bonds with the Floyd County Recorder as provided by I.C.
5-4-1-5.1.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.119  RULES AND BYLAWS.



   The Stormwater Board may establish rules and bylaws for its own
governance. The Stormwater Board shall hold regular meetings at least once
monthly pursuant to a schedule adopted by the Stormwater Board.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 33.120  COMMON COUNCIL RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Common Council shall remain responsible for any modification or
changes to the interim or permanent stormwater fees to be charged to property
owners within the city, and/or the issuance of any debt for or on behalf of
the city’s stormwater and/or drainage utility, which modifications,
changes, or debt issuances shall be made only upon ordinance by the Common
Council upon recommendation by the Stormwater Board.



(Ord. G-06-20, passed 6-5-2006)



ETHICS COMMISSION



§ 33.135  ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.



   There hereby is established the City Ethics Commission (hereinafter
“Ethics Commission”).  The purpose of the Ethics Commission is promptly
to resolve matters within its jurisdiction and to provide certainty in the
event of perceived ambiguity of this subchapter.  The Ethics Commission
shall, at all times, approach matters before it with judicial temperament and
it shall always act in accordance with the purposes and guidelines set forth
herein.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.136  APPOINTEES.



   The Ethics Commission has jurisdiction over current or former public
officials, current or former employees, and current or former appointed
persons for acts or omissions during their employment, elected term, or
appointment.  The Ethics Commission shall consist of five residents of the
city.  Appointments to the Ethics Commission shall be made as follows:



   (A)   The Executive Director of Rauch Industries, Inc. shall appoint
one member for an initial term of one year;



   (B)   The Postmaster of the city Post Office shall appoint one
member for an initial term of two years;



   (C)   The President of the Floyd County Bar Association shall
appoint one member for an initial term of two years;



   (D)   The Executive Director of Hope Southern Indiana (formerly
known as Interfaith) shall appoint one member for an initial term of one year;



   (E)   The President of the New Albany chapter of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) shall appoint one
member who shall serve an initial term of one year;



   (F)   Thereafter, all appointing bodies shall make appointments for
a period of two years with the understanding that no individual shall serve
for a period of more than three consecutive two year terms.



   (G)   No person appointed to the Ethics Commission shall be a public
official;



   (H)   Should a vacancy arise on the Ethics Commission, the current
holder of the position that originally made the appointment will name a
successor to fill the vacancy.  When a vacancy occurs, the presiding officer
of the Ethics Commission shall give notice of the vacancy in writing to the
City Clerk who will then notify the Common Council of the vacancy;



   (I)   An appointee to the Ethics Commission must reside within the
corporate boundaries of the city or any area covered by the City Plan
Commission.  If anyone who is appointed moves outside the jurisdiction
described herein, he or she shall be replaced with an appointee which meets
the requirements described herein;



   (J)   If any person making an appointment under divisions (A)
through (D) of this section shall be determined unable or unwilling to serve
upon sufficient notice, the Council shall act with deliberate speed to
replace the appointing position with a suitable replacement.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.137  OFFICERS; QUORUM; MEETINGS.



   (A)   The members of the Commission shall designate one member of
the Ethics Commission as chairperson. The member selected as chairperson
serves in that position for one year, and no member shall serve as
chairperson in consecutive years;



   (B)   A quorum for the conduct of official action by the Ethics
Commission shall be three members;



   (C)   The Ethics Commission shall meet at the call of the
chairperson or of three members of the Ethics Commission.  Meetings of the
Ethics Commission shall be held in accordance with I.C. 5-14-1.5 and as
further provided in this chapter;



   (D)   The Commission shall retain an attorney who shall also act as
the secretary of the Ethics Commission, but shall not be a voting member;



   (E)   The Commission shall conduct initial meetings necessary to
draft and pass the standards of conduct for the Commission to apply (§
33.149) and the penalties and sanctions (§ 33.150) for enforcement.  These
standards of conduct shall be effective upon ratification by the Common
Council and the Mayor.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.138  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission has jurisdiction over officials,
appointees, employees, persons with a business relationship with any agency,
and individuals filing complaints before the Ethics Commission with respect
to suspected violations of the standards of conduct of this chapter.



   (B)   The Ethics Commission does not have jurisdiction over the
following:



      (1)   Complaints filed more than two years after the date of
the suspected violation;



      (2)   Suspected violations of agency policies promulgated
under federal or state regulation.



   (C)   Any complaint filed alleging a violation by a Council member
shall be referred by the secretary to the Ethics Committee established by §
33.141.



   (D)   A complaint or investigation before the Ethics Commission may
be stayed if the matter is subject to pending litigation or notice by law
enforcement that a criminal investigation is underway.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.139  POWERS.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission may:



      (1)   Consider, subject to §§ 33.140, 33.141, and 33.142,
complaints filed with the Ethics Commission;



      (2)   Consider an appeal of an advisory opinion;



      (3)   Subpoena witnesses and documents, or empower counsel to
subpoena witnesses and documents, during the complaint process established in
§§ 33.141 and 33.142.



      (4)   Review, and provide future direction on, any gift
waiver, post-employment waiver, or advisory opinion, and



      (5)   Review any economic statement of interest filed by
officials, appointees, employees, and former employees.



   (B)   The Common Council shall provide the means for legal counsel,
staff, and other resources to the Ethics Commission as appropriate.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.140  ECONOMIC STATEMENT OF INTEREST REVIEW.



   (A)   Whenever a person required to file an economic statement of
interest has not done so after notice by the Commission, the Ethics
Commission shall initiate an investigation and conduct its proceedings in
compliance with § 33.142(B).



   (B)   If, at the conclusion of its investigation, the Ethics
Commission determines that probable cause exists to believe that a violation
has occurred, the respondent shall be notified that, subject to the approval
of the Ethics Commission, he or she may consent to an entry of a finding that
he or she has committed a violation as alleged, and the respondent may be
subject to the penalties and sanctions under § 33.150 of this subchapter. 
The consent shall be filed on a form provided by the Ethics Commission and
shall contain a waiver of the respondent’s right to appear at a public
hearing.  If the respondent consents and the Ethics Commission, by majority
vote, accepts the consent entry, then the Ethics Commission shall issue a
report as provided in § 33.143.



   (C)   In the event the respondent does not consent to a finding of a
violation, the Ethics Commission shall convene a public hearing under §
33.142, and the respondent may be subject to the penalties and sanctions as
provided under § 33.150.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.141  COMPLAINT PROCESS, FILING AND REVIEW BY SECRETARY.



   (A)   Any individual may file a complaint.  The complaint shall be
affirmed in writing and signed by the complainant.  The complaint shall
state the nature of the alleged violation, the date, time and place of each
occurrence, and name of the individual charged with the violation, referred
to as the respondent.



   (B)   Complaints shall be filed with the secretary, who shall
promptly provide a copy to any persons against whom a violation is alleged.



   (C)   Within 30 days after receipt of a complaint, the secretary
shall conduct a preliminary investigation.  The secretary may request that
the Ethics Commission extend the time for the completion of the preliminary
investigation.  If the Ethics Commission determines that extension is
necessary or desirable and would not be prejudicial to the person against
whom a violation is alleged, the Ethics Commission shall grant the extension.
If the Ethics Commission determines that the preliminary investigation must
be completed in less than 30 days in order to avoid prejudice or irreparable
harm to the person against whom a violation is alleged, the Ethics Commission
shall order the secretary to complete the preliminary investigation in a
shorter period of time, and the secretary shall comply.



   (D)   If the secretary determines that the complaint alleges
violations of criminal acts, the secretary shall promptly refer the complaint
to an appropriate law enforcement agency and the matter may be stayed pending
direction from the law enforcement agency.



   (E)   If the secretary determines, after preliminary investigation,
that there are no reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, the secretary shall dismiss the complaint.  If the secretary
dismisses the complaint, he or she shall do so in writing, setting forth the
facts and the provisions of law upon which the dismissal is based, and
provide copies of the written dismissal to the complainant, to the individual
charged with the violation, and to the members of the Ethics Commission. 
The complainant shall have the right to appeal the decision of the secretary.



   (F)   The secretary shall refer the complaint to the Ethics
Commission if, after a preliminary investigation, the secretary does not:



      (1)   Ask for additional time to conduct a more extensive
investigation pursuant to division (C);



      (2)   Refer the matter to law enforcement pursuant to division
(D); or



      (3)   Dismiss the complaint pursuant to division (E).



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.142  COMPLAINTS REFERRED TO THE ETHICS COMMISSION.



   (A)   When a complaint is referred by the secretary, the Ethics
Commission may, by majority vote:



      (1)   Reject, without further proceedings, a complaint that
the Ethics Commission considers frivolous or inconsequential;



      (2)   Reject, without further proceedings, a complaint that
the Ethics Commission is satisfied has been dealt with appropriately by an
official or an agency;



      (3)   Determine that the complaint does not allege facts
sufficient to constitute a violation of this chapter and dismiss the
complaint; or



      (4)   Forward a copy of the complaint to an appropriate
official or the chief administrative officer of an agency for action and
either stay the Ethics Commission's proceedings pending the other action or
dismiss the action without prejudice.



   (B)   If a complaint is not disposed of under division (A):



      (1)   The Ethics Commission may refer the alleged violation
for additional investigation by the secretary; or



      (2)   If the Ethics Commission finds by a majority vote that
probable cause exists to support an alleged violation, it shall set a public
hearing on the matter.  The respondent shall be notified within 30 days of
the Ethics Commission's determination.



   (C)   The Ethics Commission may, by majority vote, decide to
acknowledge the existence and scope of an investigation before the finding of
probable cause or that the Ethics Commission did not find probable cause to
support an alleged violation.



   (D)   If a hearing is to be held, the respondent may examine and
make copies of all evidence in the Ethics Commission's possession relating to
the charges.  At the hearing, the respondent shall be afforded appropriate
due process protection, including the rights to be represented by counsel, to
discovery, to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to
cross-examine opposing witnesses.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.143  DECISION OF THE ETHICS COMMISSION.



   (A)   After the hearing, if the Ethics Commission finds the
respondent has not violated this chapter, it shall dismiss the charges
through a report.



   (B)   If the Ethics Commission, based on a preponderance of the
evidence, finds by a majority vote that the respondent has violated this
chapter, the Ethics Commission shall issue a report of its findings of fact
and conclusions of law, as well as any recommendations for sanctions to be
imposed on the respondent.



   (C)   The Ethics Commission shall take into account as it determines
the appropriate remedy, and specifically address in its report or the agreed
settlement, any voluntary remedial action by the respondent.



   (D)   The report shall be in writing, supported and signed by a
majority of the Ethics Commission members, and made public.  The report
shall be presented to the respondent and the Mayor.  The report may be
presented to the county prosecutor, city prosecutor, or any other appropriate
person.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.144  AGREED SETTLEMENTS.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission may resolve complaints or investigations
through agreed settlements with respondents.



   (B)   In negotiations to settle under this section, the chairperson
or his or her designee will negotiate on behalf of the Ethics Commission. 
At an informal conference to negotiate, no record shall be made, and no
statement made by any person at the conference shall be used as evidence in
any subsequent public hearing or proceeding.



   (C)   If the respondent and the chairperson or his or her designee
concur that an agreement would be appropriate, they may submit a proposal to
the Ethics Commission for its approval or disapproval by majority vote.  The
proposal shall be in writing, and may include a recommendation of any
sanctions that the respondent has agreed to accept.  If the proposal is
submitted prior to a vote of the Ethics Commission that probable cause exists
to support an alleged violation, the Ethics Commission vote on approval or
disapproval of the agreement shall be in executive session unless the
respondent has waived confidentiality.  If the proposal is submitted after
the Ethics Commission has voted that probable cause exists to support an
alleged violation, the vote on approval or disapproval of the agreement shall
be taken at an open meeting.



   (D)   If the Ethics Commission disapproves the proposal, the Ethics
Commission shall proceed as provided in § 33.142.  If the Ethics Commission
approves the proposal, the agreement shall be signed by the respondent and by
a majority of the Ethics Commission members, shall be open to public
inspection as a public record, and shall be presented to those persons as
provided in § 33.143(D).



   (E)   In order to be a valid and binding agreement, an agreed
settlement shall be approved by the agency head of the agency that employs
the respondent if any of the terms of the settlement agreement would limit
the agency's legal authority or legal discretion to implement disciplinary
action against the respondent.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.145  REPORT OF ACTION TAKEN BY CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER OF AN
AGENCY.



   Whenever a chief administrative officer of an agency or official
receives a report under § 33.143, the chief administrative officer of an
agency or official shall, at the request of the Ethics Commission, report to
the Ethics Commission the action taken in response to the report.  The
Ethics Commission may require in the report that the chief administrative
officer of an agency or official submit the response required by this section
in a reasonable, specified amount of time.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.146  UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH ETHICS COMMISSION ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to do any of the following:



      (1)   Knowingly or intentionally induce or attempt to induce,
by threat, coercion, suggestion, or false statement, a witness or informant
in an Ethics Commission proceeding or investigation to do any of the
following:



         (a)   Withhold or unreasonably delay the production of
any testimony, information, document, or thing;



         (b)   Avoid legal process summoning the person to
testify or supply evidence;



         (c)   Fail to appear at a proceeding or investigation to
which the person has been summoned; or



         (d)   Make, present, or use a false record, document, or
thing with the intent that the record, document, or thing appear in an Ethics
Commission proceeding or investigation to mislead a member or employee of the
Ethics Commission;



      (2)   Alter, damage, or remove a record, document, or thing
except as permitted or required by law, with the intent to prevent the
record, document, or thing from being produced or used in an Ethics
Commission proceeding or investigation conducted pursuant to this subchapter;
or



      (3)   Make, present, or use a false record, document, or thing
with the intent that the record, document, or thing appear in an Ethics
Commission proceeding or investigation to mislead a member of the Ethics
Commission or its agent(s).



   (B)   A person who violates this section is subject to the general
penalties provided by § 33.150 of this subchapter.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.147  DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS, PUBLIC RECORDS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise required by state or federal law, the
following provisions for disclosure shall apply.



      (1)   Advisory opinions.  Except as required by federal or
state regulations, advisory opinions shall be withheld from disclosure by the
Ethics Commission, as authorized by I.C. 5-14-3-4(b).



      (2)   Investigative records.  Records pertaining to an
investigation by the Ethics Commission that are not used as evidence against
the respondent may be kept confidential pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-4(b).



      (3)   Complaints.  A complaint that is filed with the Ethics
Commission, prior to the Ethics Commission finding probable cause, shall be
withheld from disclosure by the Ethics Commission, as authorized by I.C.
5-14-3-4(b).  A complaint filed with the Ethics Commission, after the Ethics
Commission finds probable cause exists, shall be open for public inspection.



      (4)   Evidence.  Evidence received at an Ethics Commission
hearing, after the Ethics Commission finds that probable cause exists, shall
be open for public inspection.



      (5)   Decision.  Decisions under § 33.143 shall be open for
public inspection.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A), records may, as otherwise
permitted by law, be open for public inspection if the respondent elects to
have information disclosed or the Ethics Commission determines it is in the
public interest to do so.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.148  PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   Proceedings of the Ethics Commission shall be held in accordance with
I.C. 5-14-1.5, however, prior to the Ethics Commission finding probable
cause, a proceeding shall be held in executive session, pursuant to I.C.
5-14-1.5-6.1, unless the individual who filed the complaint or a person who
is directly affected by the complaint requests a public hearing at least ten
days in advance.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



§ 33.149  STANDARD OF CONDUCT.  (RESERVED)



§ 33.150  PENALTIES AND SANCTIONS.  (RESERVED)



§ 33.151  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   Nothing under this chapter shall be construed to abridge or override
any state or federal laws or regulations and if any conflict arises between
this chapter and such laws or regulations, the conflict shall be resolved in
favor of satisfying state or federal requirements.  If a board or commission
has previously been established to address certain city employees (e.g.
Police Merit Commission) then this Commission shall not be construed override
that authority.



(Ord. G-12-17, passed 8-16-2012)



BI-CENTENNIAL COMMISSION



§ 33.165  CREATION.



   (A)   There is hereby created the New Albany Bi-Centennial
Commission.



   (B)   The membership of the Bi-Centennial Commission shall be
composed of nine citizen members, five appointed by the Mayor and four
appointed by the Common Council.  The terms of office of the membership
shall be for the period of time commencing with appointment and concluding at
midnight on December 31, 2013.  The Mayor and Common Council may remove and
appoint its members at will.



   (C)   The mission of the Bi-Centennial Commission shall be to plan,
coordinate and implement projects and events to celebrate the city’s
bi-centennial.  The Bi-Centennial Commission shall work with local citizens,
businesses, organizations and institutions to accomplish its mission.



   (D)   The Bi-Centennial Commission shall adopt by-laws.  These
by-laws shall address such issues as meeting times and places, rules for the
conduct of meetings, and other rules for the efficient operation of an
advisory commission.



   (E)   The Bi-Centennial Commission shall appoint members to an
advisory committee that it will work with to engage local citizens,
businesses, organizations and institutions to accomplish its mission.



(Ord. G-09-06, passed 3-19-2009; Ord. G-12-01, passed 2-6-2012)



PORT AUTHORITY



§ 33.175  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   BOARD .  The Board of Directors of the Port Authority created §
33.179 of this subchapter.



   DIRECTOR .  A member of the Board of Directors appointed under §
33.179 of this subchapter.



   EXECUTIVE .  The Mayor of the city.



   GOVERNING BODY .  The Common Council of the city.



   HARBOR .  Any area used for servicing, storing, protecting, mooring,
loading or unloading, or repairing any watercraft, on or adjacent to any body
of water which may be wholly or partially within or wholly or partially
adjacent to the state.



   PORT .  A harbor or marina; however, the term also includes railroad
facilities and other transportation facilities.



   PORT AUTHORITY OF NEW ALBANY or PANA .  The port authority created
under § 33.176 of this subchapter.



   PORT AUTHORITY STATUTE .  I.C. 8-10-5, as amended.



   PUBLICATION .  Publication once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city.



   WATERCRAFT .  Any vessel, barge, boat, ship, tug, sailing craft,
skiff, raft, inboard or outboard propelled boat, or any contrivance invented,
used, or designed for navigation of or use upon water, including a vessel
permanently anchored in a harbor.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.176  CREATION AND POWERS.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 8-10-5-2, the city hereby creates a port
authority to be known as the Port Authority of New Albany (PANA).  PANA
shall be a body corporate and politic which may sue and be sued, may plead
and be impleaded.  PANA shall have all the powers and jurisdiction as
enumerated in the port authority statute and as outlined in I.C. 8-10-5 et
seq. (as may be amended).



   (B)   In the exercise of the powers and authorities granted in the
port authority statute, PANA shall have power to make and enter into any and
all contracts that may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
subchapter.  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subchapter or
the port authority statute, a contract made by PANA is not subject to
ratification by any other board, body, or officer.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.177  EXPANSION.



   Pursuant to I.C. 8-10-5-5.5, the city may expand the jurisdiction of
PANA to include any other unit that desires to join the expanded authority.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.178  DISSOLUTION.



   Pursuant to I.C. 8-10-5-4, the city may expend funds not otherwise
appropriated to defray the expense of surveys and examinations incidental to
the purposes of PANA.  Subject to making due provisions for payment and
performance of its obligations, PANA may be dissolved by the city, and in
such event the properties of PANA shall be transferred to the city.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.179  BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   (A)   PANA shall be governed by a Board of Directors which shall be
composed of five members appointed by the executive with the advice and
consent by a majority vote of the governing body.



   (B)   The executive may at any time remove a director for
misfeasance, nonfeasance, or malfeasance in office.



   (C)   At the time of appointment and at all times thereafter, a
director must be a resident of the city.



   (D)   The directors first appointed shall serve staggered terms as
follows: one director shall serve for a term of one year; one Director shall
serve for a term of two years; two Directors shall serve for terms of three
years; and one Director shall serve for a term of four years.  The executive
shall designate the length of term of each initial director.  Thereafter
each successor shall serve for a term of four years, except that any person
appointed to fill a vacancy shall be appointed only to the unexpired term,
and any director shall be eligible for reappointment.



   (E)   The directors shall elect one of their membership as
chairperson, and another as vice chairperson, shall designate their terms of
office, and shall appoint a secretary who need not be a director. A majority
of the Board shall constitute a quorum, the affirmative vote of which shall
be necessary for any official action to be taken by the Board.  No vacancy
in the membership of the Board shall impair the rights of a quorum to
exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the Board.



   (F)   Each director shall be entitled to receive from PANA such sum
of money as the Board may determine as compensation for the director's
service as director and reimbursement for reasonable expenses in the
performance of the director's duties.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.180  EMPLOYEES.



   The Board shall employ and fix the qualifications, duties, and
compensation of such employees and professional help as it may require to
conduct the business of PANA and may appoint an advisory board which shall
serve without compensation.  Any employee may be suspended or dismissed, and
the services of professional help may be terminated at any time by the Board.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.181  JURISDICTION; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The area of jurisdiction of PANA shall include:



      (1)   All of the territory within the corporate boundaries of
the city; and



      (2)   Any facility that is owned or operated by PANA, whether
or not the facility is within the corporate boundaries of the city.



   (B)   PANA is an instrumentality of the state and shall have full
power and authority independent of any political subdivision to exercise the
powers and perform the all duties as set forth in I.C. 8-10-5, including the
following:



      (1)   Purchase, construct, sell, lease, and operate
transportation facilities within its jurisdiction, consistent with the
purposes of this subchapter, and make charges for the use thereof.



      (2)   Straighten, deepen, and improve any canal, channel,
river, stream, or other watercourse or way which may be necessary or proper
in the development of its facilities.



      (3)   Establish dock lines, piers, and other facilities
necessary to the conduct of pleasure boating within its jurisdiction.



      (4)   Regulate and enforce the regulation of all uses and
activities related to its facilities within its jurisdiction and determine
the use of land adjacent to waters under its jurisdiction within a reasonable
distance from the shore lines of such waters. However, this subdivision does
not:



         (a)   Affect the requirement that special standards for
the safe operation of watercraft on public waters must be adopted by rule of
the state Department of Natural Resources; or



         (b)   Authorize the assessment of a charge or fee for
the passage of a watercraft through the navigable waters of the state.



      (5)   Acquire, own, hold, sell, lease, or operate real or
personal property for its authorized purposes.



      (6)   Apply to the proper authorities of the United States
pursuant to appropriate law for the right to establish, operate, and maintain
foreign trade zones within its jurisdiction and establish, operate, and
maintain such foreign trade zones.



      (7)   Exercise the right of eminent domain to appropriate any
land, rights, rights-of-way, franchises, easements, or other property
necessary or proper for the construction or the efficient operation of any of
its facilities, award damages to landowners for real estate and property
rights appropriated and taken or injuriously affected, and in case the Board
cannot agree with the owners, lessees, or occupants of any real estate
selected by them for the purposes herein set forth, proceed to procure the
condemnation of the same as hereinafter provided, and in addition thereto,
when not in conflict or inconsistent with the express provisions of the port
authority statute, proceed under the general laws of the state governing the
condemnation of lands and the rights-of-way for other public purposes which
may be in force at the time, so far as the same are not in conflict or
inconsistent with the terms of the port authority statute.  In any such
proceeding prosecuted by the Board to condemn or appropriate any land or the
use thereof or any right therein for purposes permitted by the port authority
statute, the Board and all owners and holders of property or rights therein
sought to be taken shall be governed by and have the same rights as to
procedure, notices, hearings, assessments of benefits and awards, and
payments thereof as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by law for the
appropriation and condemnation of real estate, and such property owners shall
have like powers and rights as to remonstrance and of appeals to the circuit
or superior courts in the county in which such property sought to be
appropriated is located. However, the payment of all damages awarded for all
lands and property or interests or rights therein appropriated under the
provisions of the port authority statute shall be paid entirely out of funds
under the control of the Board.  The provisions of this subdivision (B)(7)
are subject to the following:



         (a)   Upon written application of any property owner
affected, the city, as to areas within the corporate boundaries of the city
(or, as to any areas that may lie outside the boundaries of the city, the
county) after ten days written notice to the Board and public hearing had
thereon, may revoke the right of eminent domain to be exercised by the Board
as to any parcel or parcels of land inside its boundaries within 60 days
after the Board has by resolution announced the lands, rights, rights-of-way,
franchises, easements, or other property to be taken.



         (b)   Nothing herein contained shall authorize the Board
to take or disturb property or facilities belonging to any public
corporation, public utility, or common carrier, which property or facilities
are necessary and convenient in the operation of such public corporation,
public utility, or common carrier, unless provision is made for the
restoration, relocating, or duplication of such property or facilities, or
upon the election of such public corporation, public utility, or common
carrier, for the payment of compensation, if any at the sole cost of the
Board, subject to the following:



            1.   If any restoration or duplication proposed to
be made hereunder shall involve a relocation of such property or facilities,
the new facilities and location shall be of at least comparable utilitarian
value and effectiveness, and such relocation shall not impair the ability of
the public corporation, public utility, or common carrier to compete in its
original area of operation.



            2.   Provisions for restoration or duplication
shall be described in detail in the resolution for appropriation passed by
the Board.



      (8)   Accept, receive, and receipt for federal moneys, and
other moneys, either public or private, for the acquisition, construction,
enlargement, improvement, maintenance, equipment, or operation of a port or
harbor or other navigation facilities, and sites therefor, and comply with
the provisions of the laws of the United States and any rules and regulations
made thereunder for the expenditure of federal moneys upon such ports and
other navigation facilities.



      (9)   Maintain such funds as it deems necessary.



      (10)   Direct its agents or employees, when properly
identified in writing, and after at least five days written notice, to enter
upon lands within its jurisdiction in order to make surveys and examinations
preliminary to location and construction of works for the purposes of this
subchapter, without liability of the Board or its agents or employees except
for actual damage done.



      (11)   Sell or lease real and personal property not needed for
its operations and grant easements or rights-of-way over its property.



      (12)   Promote, advertise, and publicize PANA and its
facilities, provide traffic information and rate information to shippers and
shipping interests, and appear before rate making authorities to represent
and promote its interests.



      (13)   Borrow money and secure the borrowing by a pledge of
the following:



         (a)   Accounts receivable.



         (b)   A security interest in capital equipment for which
the proceeds of the loan are used.



         (c)   Other security, including the excess of
unobligated revenues over operating expenses.



   (C)   (1)   The term of a loan authorized by subdivision (B)(13)
may not exceed 25 years.



      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 8-10-5-8.1, PANA may also contract for,
accept, or otherwise acquire and maintain railroad property and
rights-of-way. PANA may accept and expend funding from any source and may
issue revenue bonds for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
property and rights-of-way and the lease or purchase of all necessary
equipment and appurtenances to successfully operate a railroad over the
rights-of-way. The powers granted, and procedures provided for, by I.C.
8-10-5-8.1 shall extend to PANA even though the railroad facilities may not
otherwise serve a port or harbor.



      (3)   If PANA operates a railroad, it may establish a
retirement plan, pursuant to I.C. 8-10-5-6.5 for the benefit of PANA's
railroad employees and past railroad employees who are not members of the
public employees' retirement fund.



      (4)   Pursuant to I.C. 8-10-5-20, the Board may also enter
into such contracts or other arrangements with the United States government,
or any department thereof, with persons, railroads, or other corporations,
with public corporations, and with the government of the state or other
states, with counties, municipalities, townships, or other governmental
agencies created by or under the authority of the laws of the state,
including sewerage, drainage, conservation, conservancy, or other improvement
districts in this state or other states, as may be necessary or convenient
for the exercise of powers granted by the provisions of this subchapter,
including the making of surveys, investigations, or reports thereon, provided
that such contracts or arrangements shall not be in violation of the state
constitution.  The Board may purchase, lease, or acquire land or other
property in any county of the state and in adjoining states for the
accomplishment of an authorized purpose of this subchapter, or for the
improvement of the facilities over which PANA may have jurisdiction, and may
let contracts or spend money for making such improvements or development of
facilities in adjoining states.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.182  DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The Board shall prepare or cause to be prepared a plan for the future
development, construction, and improvement of its facilities, including such
maps, profiles, and other data and descriptions as may be necessary to set
forth the location and character of the work to be undertaken by PANA.  Upon
the completion of the plan, the Board shall cause notice by publication,
pursuant to I.C. 8-10-5-9, and shall likewise cause notice to be served upon
the owners of the uplands contiguous to any submerged lands affected by the
plan in the manner provided by law for service of notice in the levy of
special assessments by the city, and shall permit the inspection thereof at
the Board's office by all persons interested.  The notice shall fix the time
and place for the hearing of all objections to the plan, which time shall be
not less than ten nor more than 30 days from the date of last publication. 
Any interested person may file written objections to the plan, provided that
the objections are filed with the secretary of the Board at the secretary's
office not less than five days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. 
After the hearing, the Board may adopt the plan with any modifications or
amendments thereto as the official plan of PANA.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.183  MODIFICATION OF PLAN.



   The Board shall, from time to time after the adoption of the official
plan, have the power to modify, amend, or extend the plan, provided that upon
the making of any such modification, amendment, or extension thereof, the
Board shall cause notice to be given and shall conduct a hearing, all as
provided in § 33.182 of this subchapter, and shall not adopt any
modification, amendment, or extension until the notice has been given and the
hearing held as provided in the port authority statute.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.184  CONCLUSIVENESS OF PLAN.



   The plan and any modification, amendment, or extension thereof, when
adopted by the Board after notice and hearing, shall be final and conclusive,
and its validity shall be conclusively presumed.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.185  PRIVATE ENTERPRISE.



   PANA shall foster and encourage the participation of private enterprise
in the development of its facilities to the fullest extent it deems
practicable in the interest of limiting the necessity of construction and
operation of the facilities by PANA.  In this respect, the Board may upon
its own motion or upon the written request of any other party advertise and
solicit for the construction, operation, and/or maintenance of any facility
included in the development plan in accordance with plans, specifications,
and regulations therefor prepared by the Board.  If the Board deems it
advisable and practicable, the Board may cause certain facilities included in
the development plan to be installed by private enterprise and leased back to
PANA on an installment contract or option to purchase.  The exercise of any
power granted to PANA under this section shall be consummated and regulated
in accordance with detailed provisions set forth in and adopted as an
ordinance by the governing body.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.186  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall:



   (A)   Impair the provisions of laws or ordinances directing the
payment of revenues derived from public property into sinking funds or
dedicating such revenues to specific purposes;



   (B)   Impair the powers of any county, township, or municipal
corporation to develop or improve port and terminal facilities; or



   (C)   Impair or interfere with the exercise of any permit for the
removal of sand or gravel, or other similar permits issued by the state or
the United States.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.187  BIDDING.



   Contracts for the creation, construction, alteration, or repair of any
building, structure, or other improvement undertaken by PANA shall be let in
accordance with I.C. 36-1-12.  No lease or sale of any lands or property
shall be made by PANA unless notice calling for bids for the same shall have
been given by publication.  No such lease or sale shall be made, except to
the highest and best bidder.  In the case of any lease or sale of land by
PANA, specifications for the bids for such lease or sale shall be in such
form and detail as shall be determined by the Board.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.188  BUDGET.



   The Board shall annually prepare a budget for PANA.  Rents and charges
received by PANA shall be used for the general expenses of PANA and to pay
interest, amortization, and retirement charges on money borrowed.  If there
remains, at the end of any calendar year, any surplus of such funds after
providing for the above uses, the Board may pay such surplus into the general
fund of the city.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.189  CHANNEL MAINTENANCE FUND.



   (A)   The Board may, by resolution, recommend to the city that a
cumulative channel maintenance fund be established under I.C. 6-1.1-41 to
provide funds for the:



      (1)   Dredging of channels;



      (2)   Cleaning of channels and shores of debris and any other
pollutants;



      (3)   Purchase, renovation, construction, or repair of
bulkheads, pilings, docks, and wharves;



      (4)   Purchase and development of land adjoining channels
within the jurisdiction of PANA, and which land is necessary to the
fulfillment of the plan adopted by the Board for the future development,
construction, and improvement of its facilities; the purchased and developed
land shall be available to the residents of the taxing district without
further charge; or



      (5)   regulation and enforcement of regulation of all uses and
activities related to waters that are under the jurisdiction of PANA.



   (B)   To provide for the cumulative channel maintenance fund, the
city may levy a tax in compliance with I.C. 6-1.1-41 not to exceed $0.0333 on
each $100 on all taxable property within the city.



   (C)   The revenue from a tax collected under division (B) shall be
held in the cumulative channel maintenance fund established under division
(A).



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.190  DEPOSITS AND DISBURSEMENTS.



   Before receiving any moneys, the secretary of the Board shall furnish
bond in such amount as shall be determined by the Board, with sureties
satisfactory to it, and all funds coming into the hands of the secretary
shall be deposited to the account of PANA in one or more depositories as
shall be qualified to receive deposits of funds, in the same manner as is
done by the city, which deposits shalt be secured in the same manner as city
funds are required to be secured.  No disbursements shall be made from such
funds except in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Board.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 33.191  ADDITIONAL PROVISION.



   PANA is hereby given any and all powers permitted by I.C. Chapter
8-10-5 not explicitly enumerated in this subchapter.



(Ord. G-14-02, passed 1-6-2014)



CHAPTER 34:  EMPLOYMENT POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   Mileage and travel allowance; reimbursement



   34.02   Signing payroll for checks or warrants



Bargaining and Nonbargaining Unit Employees



   34.15   Establishment of personnel policies; effective date



   34.16   Collective bargaining unit employees covered by agreement



   34.17   Nonbargaining unit employees



Deferred Compensation Plan



   34.30   Establishment



   34.31   City Controller to administer



   34.32   Contributions by city



City Employees Called to Active Military Duty



   34.50   Non-continuous active military duty



   34.51   Continuous active military duty



   34.52   Continuation of insurance



   34.53   Credit of vacation and sick time accrual



   34.54   Controller to prescribe such forms to implement



   34.55   Other subjects to follow state and federal law



Cross-reference:



   Nepotism and contracting with a unit by a relative, see § 31.04



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  MILEAGE AND TRAVEL ALLOWANCE; REIMBURSEMENT.



   (A)   (1)   City officials and employees shall be paid $.44 per
mile for actual miles traveled in their own motor vehicles on official city
business for the city, when authorized by their governing body with budgeted
funds.  This city shall adjust its mileage reimbursement rate on an annual
basis on January 1 of each year to match the rate for the State of Indiana
for its officials and employees if any such change to the rate has occurred.



      (2)   This rate will become effective January 1, 2015.



      (3)   Reimbursed mileage will not include travel to and from
officials’ or employees’ homes and governmental offices in which they
work. If two or more persons ride in the same motor vehicle, only one mileage
reimbursement is allowed.



   (B)   (1)   When traveling outside the city overnight on official
business, employees may be reimbursed for meals, lodging and necessary
traveling expenses.



      (2)   All claims for reimbursement must be completely itemized
and supported by receipts.



(Ord. G-85-109, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. G-90-219, passed 6-21-1990; Ord.
G-97-173, passed 3-21-1997; Ord. G-00-22, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. G-04-27,
passed 6-1-2004; Ord. G-08-11, passed 4-4-2008; Ord. G-14-12, passed 7-7-2014)



§ 34.02  SIGNING PAYROLL FOR CHECKS OR WARRANTS.



   It shall be the duty of the City Controller's office before the
delivery of any checks or warrants for salary or wages of the employees of
the Street Department, Fire and Police Departments, to first have such
employees sign the payroll for the checks or warrants.



(Ord. 4104, passed 11-16-1937)



BARGAINING AND NONBARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES



§ 34.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF PERSONNEL POLICIES; EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   The personnel policies may be established from time to time
through executive order by the Mayor's office for all employees, except as
otherwise stated in this subchapter or under a collective bargaining
agreement.



   (B)   The personnel policies for the employees of the city shall be
as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. G-85-108, passed 11-4-1985)



§ 34.16  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES COVERED BY AGREEMENT.



   Benefits concerning vacations, holidays, personal days, clothing
allowances, longevity pay and medical and health insurance for collective
bargaining unit employees shall be established pursuant to the collective
bargaining agreements covering these employees.



(Ord. G-85-108, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. A-03-34, passed 5-15-2003)



§ 34.17  NONBARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Vacations.



 

Years of Employment
 
Weeks of Vacation


1 through 9
 
2


10 through 19
 
3


20 years
 
4



 



   (B)   Holidays.



      (1)   New Year's Day;



      (2)   Martin Luther King's Birthday;



      (3)   President's Day (third Monday in February);



      (4)   Good Friday;



      (5)   Memorial Day;



      (6)   Independence Day;



      (7)   Labor Day;



      (8)   Veterans' Day;



      (9)   Thanksgiving Day;



      (10)   Friday following Thanksgiving;



      (11)   Christmas Day;



      (12)   Primary election day; and



      (13)   General election day.



   (C)   Personal days. Four personal days shall be allowed.



   (D)   Hospitalization insurance. The city shall provide health
insurance to employee, spouse and dependents as adopted by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.



   (E)   Sick leave. Effective with this section, sick leave with pay
shall accrue to full-time employees at the rate of eight working hours for
every two full months of employment to a maximum of 480 hours. Sick leave
taken shall be charged as to working hours off, but not less than a minimum
of a half of a working day shall be charged for any one shift affected.



   (F)   Special sick leave.



      (1)   Employees who have a minimum of two years of continuous
full-time employment and who have exhausted their accumulated vacation leave,
sick leave and overtime credits, may apply to the Mayor for special sick
leave with pay, if further leave is necessary because of their existing
illness or disability. Upon verification that special sick leave for any
employee is justifiable and necessary because of illness or disability,
together with a full statement of their reasons, this leave may be approved
at the discretion of the Mayor and the department head. The Mayor shall
notify the applying employee and the department head in writing as to the
decision of the request.



      (2)   A medical certificate from a designated physician must
be submitted with each request and must include the employee's probable date
of return to work. The department head or Mayor may, at any time, require of
employees a medical certificate documenting the nature and extent of the
disability. However, a medical release from a designated physician must be
submitted before the employee can return to work.



      (3)   Special sick leave with pay shall not be in excess of 48
hours of working time for each complete year of continuous full-time
employment with the city, subject to days being deducted that have already
been taken off for sick days in prior years.



(Ord. G-85-108, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. G-86-123, passed 2-3-1986; Ord.
G-86-132, passed 4-8-1986; Ord. G-86-175, passed 12-1-1986; Ord. A-03-33,
passed 5-15-2003; Ord. A-03-34, passed 5-15-2003)



DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN



§ 34.30  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The city, by its Common Council, hereby establishes the city's
Deferred Compensation Plan for the voluntary participation of all eligible
city employees and elected officials.



   (B)   The city will utilize the State of Indiana's Plan Document and
its investment operations and the city will contract with Indiana Deferred
Compensation Plan, Inc., to be the exclusive servicing manager and enroller
pursuant to the terms and conditions contained in the contract.



(Ord. G-88-114, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 34.31  CITY CONTROLLER TO ADMINISTER.



   The city appoints the Controller of the city as Administrator of the
plan, and authorizes him or her to make deductions from the pay of the
employees, the amount of the deductions to be determined by the employees
every six months on July 1 and January 1, for those employees voluntarily
participating and to make such other arrangements as are necessary to
implement the plan.



(Ord. G-88-114, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 34.32  CONTRIBUTIONS BY CITY.



   There shall be no cost or contribution by the city to this plan other
than the incidental expenses of collecting the employees' deferrals and any
minor administrative matters.



(Ord. G-88-1 14, passed 5-2-1988)



CITY EMPLOYEES CALLED TO ACTIVE MILITARY DUTY



§ 34.50  NON-CONTINUOUS ACTIVE MILITARY DUTY.



   The city shall pay to an employee during a calendar year up to 15
working days for training or other non-continuous (less than 30 days) active
duty for individuals within the following categories:



   (A)   Army;



   (B)   Air Force;



   (C)   Marines;



   (D)   Navy;



   (E)   Coast Guard;



   (F)   Army National Guard; and



   (G)   Air Force National Guard.



(Ord. G-03-17, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 34.51  CONTINUOUS ACTIVE MILITARY DUTY.



   The city shall pay during the time of continuous (over 30 days) active
duty the difference between the gross salary and/or normal bi-weekly pay and
the gross pay from the military of active duty individuals for the following
categories:



   (A)   Army;



   (B)   Air Force;



   (C)   Marines;



   (D)   Navy;



   (E)   Coast Guard;



   (F)   Army National Guard; and



   (G)   Air Force National Guard.



(Ord. G-03-17, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 34.52  CONTINUATION OF INSURANCE.



   The city shall continue to make available such insurances as may be in
force for the active duty individual. The contributions and/or premium paid
by the city and the employee shall remain the same as if the individual was
not on active duty.



(Ord. G-03-17, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 34.53  CREDIT OF VACATION AND SICK TIME ACCRUAL.



   The city shall continue to accrue vacation and sick time to active duty
individuals as if the individual was not on active duty.



(Ord. G-03-17, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 34.54  CONTROLLER TO PRESCRIBE SUCH FORMS TO IMPLEMENT.



   The City Controller may prescribe such documentation as necessary to
implement §§ 34.50 through 34.53.



(Ord. G-03-17, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 34.55  OTHER SUBJECTS TO FOLLOW STATE AND FEDERAL LAW.



   The city shall follow such other state and/or federal laws for subjects
concerning active military duty not covered by §§ 34.50 through 34.53.



(Ord. G-03-17, passed 4-7-2003)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION; PURCHASING



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   Preliminary annual budget; submission to Common Council



   35.02   City Clerk to collect certain fees



   35.03   Allowance of city claims; authority



   35.04   Expenditures for promotion of economical development and
tourism



   35.05   Rates and charges of Floyd County Health Department



   35.06   Acceptable methods for payment



   35.07   Fees and costs for violations of city ordinances; returned
checks



City Funds



   35.19   Accountability for funds



   35.20   Ambulance Runs Fund; fees for service



   35.21   Special nonreverting fund for New Albany-Floyd County
Community Park; gifts



   35.22   Firearms Training Fund



   35.23   Expenditure approval and periodic reports for nonreverting
funds



   35.24   Nonreverting operating fund for shelter rentals



   35.25   Police Drug Buy Fund



   35.26   Rainy Day Fund



   35.27   Stormwater Construction Site Plan Review and Inspection Fee
Fund



   35.28   Separate funds; Sanitation Department and Sewer Utility



   35.29   Animal Control Runs Fund



   35.30   Nonreverting fund for economic development organizations



Occupational Income Tax



   35.35   Levying of annual tax



Purchasing



   35.40   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States



   35.41   Use of credit cards and purchasing cards



Tax Abatement Procedure



   35.50   Redevelopment Commission lead on tax abatement



   35.51   Establish Redevelopment Fees Fund and fees



   35.52   Common Council adopts tax abatement procedure



   35.53   Common Council adopts tax abatement schedules



Cross-reference:



   Nepotism and contracting with a unit by a relative, see § 31.04



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  PRELIMINARY ANNUAL BUDGET; SUBMISSION TO COMMON COUNCIL.



   (A)   The department heads and/or persons responsible for submitting
the annual budgets of any of the several departments, divisions, sections,
commissions, boards and/or funds of the city shall take notice that a
preliminary copy of each annual budget must be submitted to each Common
Council member prior to May 1 of each year for the subsequent year's budget.



   (B)   Departments, divisions, sections, commissions, boards and/or
funds identified for the purpose of this section include:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   The City Controller;



      (3)   The City Clerk;



      (4)   The City Court;



      (5)   The City Attorney;



      (6)   The City Engineer;



      (7)   Planning Commission;



      (8)   Board of Public Works and Safety;



      (9)   Fire Department;



      (10)   Police Department;



      (11)   Health Department;



      (12)   Department of Weights and Measures;



      (13)   Sanitation Department;



      (14)   Street Department;



      (15)   Traffic Department;



      (16)   Parking Meter Division;



      (17)   Milk Inspection Division;



      (18)   Park Board;



      (19)   Sewage Works and Collection;



      (20)   Firefighter's Pension;



      (21)   Police Officer's Pension;



      (22)   Corporation Bond Fund;



      (23)   Floodwall Commission; and



      (24)   Any other department, division, section, commission,
board or fund legally a part of the city whose budget must be approved by the
Common Council.



(Ord. A-62-128, passed 5-14-1962)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor's authority, see I.C. 36-4-7-10



§ 35.02  CITY CLERK TO COLLECT CERTAIN FEES.



   (A)   The Common Council hereby authorizes the Office of the City
Clerk to collect certain fees as fixed by ordinance to assist the Office of
the City Controller.



   (B)   The fees the Office of the City Clerk may collect are
designated below.



   (C)   The monies collected and receipted by the Office of the City
Clerk shall be remitted and deposited into the approved and established funds
for such by the Office of the Controller.



   (D)   These fees are as follows:



 

Code Section
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date




§ 72.55, Issuance of Special Parking Permit
 
G-79-775
 
11-12-1979


§ 72.56, Proof of Disability
 
G-79-775; G-80-787
 
11-12-1979; 3-3-1980


§ 73.21, Application for License
 
O-64-180
 
11-9-1964


§ 73.22, Controller to Make Record of Certain Data
 
G-64-180
 
11-9-1964


§ 73.23, Issuance of a Bicycle License
 
O-64-180
 
11-9-1964


§ 110.02, Applications
 
G-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 110.03, Form
 
O-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 110.04, Signatures Required
 
O-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 110.05, Investigations
 
O-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 110.06, Fees
 
O-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 110.08, Termination of Licenses
 
O-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 110.11(C), Inspections
 
O-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 110.12, Change of Location
 
O-79-736
 
3-5-1979


§ 114.04(A), Public Hearing
 
O-87-194
 
8-3-1987


§ 118.02, License
 
O-81-893
 
5-4-1981


§ 119.05, Taxicab Licenses
 
O-58-51, § 11
 
12-9-1958


§ 119.26, Issuance of License, Appeal From, Refusal Fee
 
O-58-51, § 4
 
12-9-1958


§ 119.28, Driver's License Conditioned Upon Continued Employment
 
O-63-139, § 2
 
2-18-1963




 



(Res. R-88-32, passed 10-20-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Clerk and Controller, see I.C. 36-4-10



§ 35.03  ALLOWANCE OF CITY CLAIMS; AUTHORITY.



   The statutory authority for allowing and approving of claims and the
payment of various obligations of the city as set forth below is hereby
delegated to the Board of Public Works and Safety:



   (A)   Bonds and coupons;



   (B)   Public employees retirement fund checks;



   (C)   FICA checks;



   (D)   Insurance checks;



   (E)   Investment checks;



   (F)   Contract renewal checks;



   (G)   Checks for the payment of federal withholding taxes and state
withholding taxes;



   (H)   Checks for the payment of the fuel use tax;



   (I)   Ambulance payments;



   (J)   Payroll reimbursements;



   (K)   Claims reimbursements;



   (L)   Federal gas tax payments; and



   (M)   Occasional checks which are deemed necessary by the Mayor of
the city and/or the Controller of the city.



(Ord. A-83-967, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. G-88-110, passed 3-17-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Procedure for approving claims, see I.C. 36-4-8



§ 35.04  EXPENDITURES FOR PROMOTION OF ECONOMICAL DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM.



   The Common Council of the city is authorized to budget and appropriate
funds from the General Fund of the city to pay the expenses of or to
reimburse municipal officials as the case may be, for expenses incurred in
promoting the best interests of the city. The expenses may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the rental of meeting places; meals; decorations;
memorabilia; awards; expenses incurred in interviewing job applicants;
expenses incurred in promoting industrial, commercial and residential
development; expenses incurred in developing relations with other units of
government; and any other expenses of a civic or a governmental nature
determined by the Mayor or Common Council to be in the interest of the city.



(Ord. G-89-184, passed 9-21-1989)



§ 35.05  RATES AND CHARGES OF FLOYD COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT.



   The fees and charges set forth on the Fee Schedule, incorporated by
reference, are adopted and established as the fees and charges to be levied
and imposed for the various services to be rendered and performed by the
Floyd County Health Department, with the fees and charges, upon collection
and receipt, to be deposited by the Department as required by law.



(Ord. G-97-209, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 35.06  ACCEPTABLE METHODS FOR PAYMENT.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8-11, the city, including the Sewage Works
Office, is hereby authorized to accept the following types of financial
instruments for payment:



   (A)   Cash;



   (B)   Check;



   (C)   Bank draft;



   (D)   Money order;



   (E)   Bank card or credit card; and



   (F)   Electronic funds transfer.



(Ord. G-06-17, passed 5-18-2006)



§ 35.07  FEES AND COSTS FOR VIOLATIONS OF CITY ORDINANCES; RETURNED CHECKS.



   The city through its various departments shall charge a fee of $20 plus
the actual amount charged by the depository institution for each returned or
dishonored check to the account or individual that the original payment was
made.



(Ord. G-08-10, passed 3-20-2008)



CITY FUNDS



§ 35.19  ACCOUNTABILITY FOR FUNDS.



   (A)   All departments, boards and commissions of the city, which
have established, or which may establish non-reverting funds in the future,
must account for the funds.



   (B)   A monthly and annual year-end report listing income and
expenditures must be presented to the members of the Common Council, by each
board for every non-reverting fund under its control.



   (C)   The reports shall be delivered to the Clerk of the city, who
shall make all necessary copies for distribution to members of the Common
Council.



   (D)   Expenditures totaling more than $500 per year shall require
approval of the Common Council.



   (E)   The following accounts shall be exempt from the above in
division (D):



      (1)   The following expenses in the Ambulance Run
non-reverting account #36:



         (a)   The salary of the ambulance billing secretary;



         (b)   Vacation, sick leave and over-time of the
emergency medical technicians;



         (c)   Monthly ambulance lease/purchase payments, if
applicable; and



         (d)   Any capital expenditure that will benefit the New
Albany Fire Department as long as such proposed purchase is presented in
advance to the Council for approval either during the annual budgeting
process or through the additional appropriation procedure.



      (2)   The city's Reserve Liability Fund, Account #47; and



      (3)   The Parks Non-Reverting Fund, Account #29.



(Ord. G-96-156, passed 11-22-1996)



§ 35.20  AMBULANCE RUNS FUND; FEES FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   Creation of Fund; money deposited into Fund.



      (1)   There is created in the General Fund a special fund and
account to be known as the Special Ambulance Runs Fund.



      (2)   Any donations in the form of free will contributions
through the Fire and Police Departments and revenues derived from Medicare,
Medicaid and other insurance companies for their insurees be deposited into
such fund, out of which fund the city will pay for new ambulance equipment,
maintenance or other costs in connection with the operation of city
ambulances.



   (B)   Fees imposed for ambulance service effective May 3, 2004.



      (1)   For current fees imposed upon the users of the city
ambulance, see § 158.03, Ambulance Fees.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the City Controller to collect,
account for and pay into the Ambulance Runs Fund of the city all fees
collected pursuant to this division.



      (3)   Medicare participation by accepting patient assignment
takes precedence over all billing procedures.



      (4)   The licensing fee herein established must be reviewed
yearly by the Common Council.



      (5)   The City Controller shall yearly present to the Common
Council, income and expenditure statistics for Common Council review.



      (6)   Moreover, the City Controller will make the Common
Council aware of changes in Medicare and Medicaid policies as they occur
during the year.



(Ord. G-68-317, passed 2-5-1968; Ord. G-84-26, passed 8-6-1984; Ord.
G-90-246, passed 11-15-1990; Ord. G-91-287, passed 9-9-1991; Ord. G-96-155,
passed 11-21-1996; Ord. A-00-51, passed 9-21-2000; Ord. G-02-07, passed
2-21-2002; Ord. G-04-21, passed 5-5-2004)



§ 35.21  SPECIAL NONREVERTING FUND FOR NEW ALBANY-FLOYD COUNTY COMMUNITY
PARK; GIFTS.



   (A)   Any gift, grant of money, donations or subsidies made to the
city's Park and Recreation Board for the New Albany-Floyd County Community
Park shall be deposited in a special nonreverting fund which is established,
to be available for expenditure by the Board for purposes specified by the
grantor of the gift, grant of money, donation or subsidy.



   (B)   The disbursing officer of the city or county shall draw
warrants against the special nonreverting fund only upon vouchers signed by
the President and Secretary of the Board.



(Ord. G-65-193, passed 2-1-1965)



§ 35.22  FIREARMS TRAINING FUND.



   Pursuant to I.C. 35-47-2-3, there is now established in the office of
the City Controller a nonreverting fund to be known as the Firearms Training
Fund, which Fund will be under the control of the Chief of Police, and
subject to the following conditions.



   (A)   All monies received from applicants for handgun licenses shall
be deposited therein.



   (B)   All disbursements from said fund shall be for the purpose
hereinabove stated and made on the order of the Chief of Police and payable
by the City Controller upon presentation of proper claims, approved and as
other claims of the Police Department are approved.



(Ord. A-89-200, passed 11-16-1989)



§ 35.23  EXPENDITURE APPROVAL AND PERIODIC REPORTS FOR NONREVERTING FUNDS.



   (A)   Any departments, boards and commissions of the city which have
established or which may in the future establish nonreverting funds must
account for those funds.



      (1)   A monthly and annual year-end report listing income and
expenditures must be presented to the members of the Common Council of the
city, by each board for every nonreverting fund under its control.



      (2)   The reports shall be delivered to the City Clerk, who
shall make all necessary copies for distribution to members of the Common
Council.



   (B)   Expenditures totaling more than $500 per year shall require
approval of the Common Council.



   (C)   The following accounts shall be exempt from division (B) above:



      (1)   The following expenses in the Ambulance Run Nonreverting
Account #36:



         (a)   The salary of the ambulance billing secretary;



         (b)   Vacation, sick leave and overtime of the emergency
medical technicians; and



         (c)   Existing monthly ambulance lease/purchase payment.



      (2)   The city's Reserve Liability Fund, Account #47; and



      (3)   The Parks Nonreverting Fund, Account #29.



(Ord. G-87-180, passed 2-2-1987)



§ 35.24  NONREVERTING OPERATING FUND FOR SHELTER RENTALS.



   (A)   A special nonreverting operating fund for shelter rentals is
hereby created and established, into which all fees derived from shelter
rentals shall be deposited.



   (B)   Expenditures may be made from the fund by appropriation of the
Board of Parks and Recreation in accordance with the purposes hereinafter set
forth.



   (C)   The special nonreverting operating fund for shelter rentals is
established, and expenditures may be made therefrom, for the following
purposes: To provide for the proper management and operation of any and all
picnic shelters within the Board's control, and to allow for the payment of
managerial expenses, salaries, maintenance expenses, reimbursements,
noncapital improvements and any and all other ordinary and necessary expenses
related thereto.



   (D)   This section shall contain a $5,000 cap on operating funds
deposited into this account. This fund may not be used to supplement salaries
or wages of existing or future employees.



(Ord. G-91-259, passed 11-19-1990)



§ 35.25  POLICE DRUG BUY FUND.



   (A)   (1)   It is the intention of the Common Council to
establish a Police Drug Buy Fund within the City Controller's office. The
fund will comply with Home Rule Statute I.C. 36-1-3 and Guidelines for
Withdrawal of Money and Reporting Procedures of Enforcement Aid Fund Monies,
Indiana State Police Department.



      (2)   Likewise, compliance with those Guidelines for
Confidential Expenditures, Appendix J, Indiana Criminal Justice Planning
Agency Financial Guide are to be upheld. All revenues and expenditures of
funds will be monitored by the Chief of Police and the City Controller who
must sign all requests for expenditures of funds.



   (B)   A Drug Buy Fund is hereby established at $10,000 as authorized
by I.C. 36-1-8-3 and with the review and reimbursement claim signed by the
Chief of Police and the City Controller. A properly approved claim must be
signed and coded per the nature of reimbursement of petty cash. (Emergency
beyond $10,000.)



   (C)   All investment/money market type expenditures will be
generated from the City Controller's office with advice from the Chief of
Police. Accrued interest from this instrument will be deposited separately
into Fund 370. Likewise, monthly or quarterly accrued interest from any other
type of financial institution will be deposited into Fund 370 in the same
manner.



(Ord. G-91-299, passed 10-17-1991)



§ 35.26  RAINY DAY FUND.



   (A)   The City of New Albany establishes the Rainy Day Fund.



   (B)   The Rainy Day Fund may be used for operating expenses in the
following departments:  Plan Commission, Building Commission, Fairview and
West Haven Cemeteries, Common Council, City Clerk, City Attorney, City
Controller and Animal Control.



   (C)   The transfer of money from another fund may be received into
this Fund each year to facilitate the operating expense for the above
mentioned departments.



   (D)   If there is a balance in the Rainy Day Fund on December 31 of
any year, this section will be amended in the following year, and
appropriations made in that following year for the lawful purposes of the
city.



(Ord. G-05-19, passed 5-19-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish Rainy Day Fund, see I.C. 36-1-8-5.1



§ 35.27  STORMWATER CONSTRUCTION SITE PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEE FUND.



   (A)   The Stormwater Construction Site Plan Review and Inspection
Fee Fund is hereby established.



   (B)   All monies received for construction site plan review and
permit issuance shall be deposited in the Fund.



   (C)   Fund monies shall only be used to pay for the costs of any
such construction site plan review and inspections in reference to water
quality.



   (D)   Fund monies shall be paid for plan construction site plan
review and inspections in the usual course of business.



(Ord. G-07-11, passed 3-22-2007)



§ 35.28  SEPARATE FUNDS; SANITATION DEPARTMENT AND SEWER UTILITY.



   (A)   The City Controller shall as soon as practicable after
adoption of this section take all steps deemed reasonably necessary to
separate the accounts of the Sanitation Department and the Sewer Utility into
separate funds under the control of the City Controller. The entire deficit
balance of the Sanitation Department shall be carried forward into, and/or
maintained in, the fund established for the Sanitation Department, and no
portion of the deficit balance shall be carried forward into, and/or
maintained in, the fund established for the Sewer Utility.



   (B)   (1)   On August 26, 2006, the Council adopted Ord. G-06-29,
which ordinance in part pledged certain Economic Development Income Tax
(EDIT) funds for the benefit of the Sewer Utility on an ongoing basis as part
of a restructuring of the schedule of rates and charges of the Sewer Utility
(the "EDIT Pledge"). Provided that, the EDIT Pledge remains in effect and is
not in any manner diminished or impaired:



         (a)   To any extent from the pledge effected by Ord.
G-06-29; or



         (b)   During the period that any existing bond
indebtedness of the Sewer Utility remains outstanding, then the payment
and/or pledge of the EDIT funds shall to, or for the benefit of, the Sewer
Utility constitute the full, complete and final repayment of the deficit
balance of the Sanitation Department that is presently owed to the Sewer
Utility.



      (2)   In the event that the EDIT Pledge is in any manner
subsequently impaired or diminished, by action of the Council or otherwise,
in a manner that is violative of the provisions of this section, the current
deficit balance of the Sanitation Department, less any EDIT funds hereinafter
actually paid to, or for the benefit of, the Sewer Utility pursuant to the
EDIT Pledge prior to such impairment or diminution, shall be fully due and
payable to the Sewer Utility within 12 months after the action or condition
that results in an objectionable impairment or diminution of the EDIT Pledge
pursuant to the provisions of this section first occurs.



   (C)   The City Controller shall make a written report to the Council
upon completion of the steps necessary to separate the accounts of the
Sanitation Department and the Sewer Utility into separate funds as required
by this section.



   (D)   The Council acknowledges that the City Controller presently
receives a single monthly distribution of sanitary sewer funds, stormwater
funds and sanitation funds from the city's contract billing agent,
Indiana-American Water Company, and that the funds are then separated by the
City Controller and applied to the appropriate funds and/or accounts of
respective departments. So long as such billing contract remains in effect,
the receipt and separation of funds by the City Controller in such manner
shall be deemed to be consistent with the requirements of this section.



(Ord. G-07-36, passed 8-6-2007)



§ 35.29  ANIMAL CONTROL RUNS FUND.



   The Animal Control Department shall deposit all monies collected for
the contractual services, fines and licenses with the Controller of the City
of New Albany and, thereafter, shall process all claims on the maintenance of
vehicles, office supplies, printing and refunds used to perform animal
control services.



(Ord. G-07-20, passed 5-18-2007)



§ 35.30  NONREVERTING FUND FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Common Council does establish, with an initial
commitment of $75,000, a non-reverting fund which will be made available to
organizations that pursue economic development goals, plans, strategies and
the like, to strengthen the economic foundation of our community.



      (2)   Disbursements from the non-reverting fund hereby
established, shall be made on a case-by-case basis, upon the favorable
determination by the Common Council that specific written proposals submitted
by the economic development organization, to the Common Council, would be of
general benefit and enhancement of the economic foundation and prospects of
the entire community. Proposals for specific uses of funds shall be made in
reasonable time to allow Common Council members to review and reflect upon
the proposed use of such funding requests.



   (B)   The Common Council may upon review:



      (1)   Order the fiscal officer of New Albany to release the
requested funds,



      (2)   Seek additional information from the applicant,



      (3)   Order the fiscal officer of New Albany to release a
smaller amount of funds than the applicant requested,



      (4)   Reject the application.



   (C)   Or the Common Council, upon review of the applications, may
place conditions or restrictions upon the use of whatever amount of funds it
determines is reasonable to grant.



   (D)   The money disbursed from this fund is intended to benefit the
entire community and to build a strong economic foundation for now and the
future; therefore, use of funds which benefits, or tends to benefit, one
political party or group at the expense of another political party or group
shall not be permitted.



   (E)   The economic development organization proposing to use money
from this fund shall, in its proposal, outline the general intent of the use
of funds including a reasonable assessment of the impact this grant will make
on the general economic welfare of the community, or the specific benefit the
funding will provide if the project does not affect the entire community. If
the project does not benefit the entire community, the proposal shall address
why funding should be granted.



   (F)   When a proposal is approved, the organization winning
approval, shall submit to the Common Council, a report of the benefits the
organization and the community realized from the funding. Failure to submit
such a report shall eliminate the group from future consideration of funding
requests until a report of prior use has been completed.



(Ord. G-08-45, passed 12-18-2008)



OCCUPATIONAL INCOME TAX



§ 35.35  LEVYING OF ANNUAL TAX.



   Pursuant to state law, an annual tax on occupation income received by
an employee who is principally employed in the city is adopted and imposed,
for and on behalf of the city at the rate of 1.5%, the same applying to
occupation income received after December 31, 1975.



(Ord. G-75-581, passed 7-7-1975)



PURCHASING



§ 35.40  PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.



   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all
city purchases and shall be purchased unless the city determines that:



   (A)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;



   (B)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured outside the United States;



   (C)   The quality of the supplies is substantially less than the
quality  of comparably priced available supplies manufactured outside the
United States; and



   (D)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public interest.



(Ord. G-98-261, passed 9-17-1998)



Cross-reference:



   Purchasing agency, see §§ 33.100 through 33.102



§ 35.41  USE OF CREDIT CARDS AND PURCHASING CARDS.



   (A)   This section is adopted in compliance with the state's Board
of Accounts Accounting and Uniform Compliance Guidelines Manual for Cities
and Towns, Chapter 7, authorizing a city to use credit cards for purchases.



   (B)   City employees and officials may use city credit cards and
purchasing cards for purchases related to the performance of city duties when
such use is in the best interest of the city.



   (C)   The department head or his or her designee shall be
responsible for safekeeping of the credit cards and purchasing cards.



   (D)   City credit cards and purchasing cards shall be used only with
the approval of the department head or his or her designee. The department
head shall maintain a usage log for each card identified by card account
number, with entries certified by signature of the department head or his or
her designee. The log shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name and position of the individual using the city's
card;



      (2)   Upon issuance, the date the card is issued to the
individual, the estimated amounts to be charged, the type of expenses (such
as airline tickets or office supplies) and the appropriation account numbers
to be expended; and



      (3)   Upon return, the date the card is returned and the
amount charged to the card.



   (E)   City credit cards and purchasing cards shall be used for
purchases relating to the performance of city business only. No personal use
of a city credit card or purchasing card is allowed, even if an employee
offers to reimburse the city of the employee's personal use of a city credit
card or purchasing card.



   (F)   Payment of credit cards and purchasing card bills shall be
subject to the audit requirements of accounts payable vouchers in conformity
with I.C. 5-11-10-2 and I.C. 36-4-8 and the regulations of the state's Board
of Accounts. Itemized receipts are required for all credit card and
purchasing card purchases, including restaurant charges. Payment will not be
made on the basis of a credit card or purchasing card statement. Signed
charge slips showing a total charge only, with no itemization of items
purchased, are not acceptable. It is the responsibility of the employee
authorizing the charge to obtain proper itemized receipts.



   (G)   Credit card and purchasing card charges that do not meet audit
requirements including charges that include the imposition of sales taxes for
which the city is otherwise exempt, are the responsibility of the employee
authorizing the charge. The city will take all necessary steps to obtain
reimbursement for charges which do not meet audit requirements from the
employee authorizing the charge, including, but not limited to, the
garnishment of the charging employee's city wages.



   (H)   Any interest or penalty incurred due to the late filing with
the City Controller of an accounts payable voucher for payment of a credit
card or purchasing card bill, or incurred due to the delay in furnishing of
documentation required for audit by an officer or employee, shall be the
responsibility of that officer or employee.



   (I)   The City Controller shall be notified immediately if a credit
card or purchasing card is lost or stolen. If a credit card or purchasing
card is lost due to the negligence on the part of a city employee, the
employee shall be responsible for any and all expenses incurred on the lost
card or purchasing card.



   (J)   The City Controller is authorized to revoke credit cards or
purchasing cards that have been used in violation of city policy.



(Ord. G-06-14, passed 5-1-2006)



TAX ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



§35.50  REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION LEAD ON TAX ABATEMENT.



   The Department of Redevelopment is hereby designated as the lead agency
for tax abatements.



(Ord. G-03-59, passed 9-18-2003)



§35.51  ESTABLISH REDEVELOPMENT FEES FUND AND FEES.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a special revenue fund
to be known as the Redevelopment Fees Fund.



   (B)   For current redevelopment fees, see § 158.04, Redevelopment
Permits and Fees.



      (1)   All redevelopment fees shall be deposited in the
Redevelopment Fees Fund.



      (2)   For each property tax abatement application for CF-1
Form approved, each property tax statement recipient shall pay a
participation fee in the amount of 10% of its annual property tax savings
attributed to the property tax abatement deduction.



   (C)   Expenditures may be made from the Redevelopment Fees Fund by
appropriation of the Redevelopment Commission.



(Ord. G-03-59, passed 9-18-2003; Ord. G-08-16, passed 5-15-2008)



§ 35.52  COMMON COUNCIL ADOPTS TAX ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   The Common Council hereby endorses and adopts the City of New Albany
Tax Abatement Policy Handbook, dated March 18, 2003. The Redevelopment
Commission shall establish update procedures for the tax abatement process as
necessary. The Commission shall ensure the proper processing of CF-1 Forms.



(Ord. G-03-59, passed 9-18-2003)



§ 35.53  COMMON COUNCIL ADOPTS TAX ABATEMENT SCHEDULES.



   (A)   I.C. 6-l.l-12.1-17(b) directs that the designating body (City
Council) shall establish an abatement schedule for each deduction allowed,
and shall specify the percentage amount of the deduction for each year of the
deduction.



   (B)   The Common Council approves and establishes the following
schedules for all future actions regarding tax abatement.



 


(1)

 
REAL-PROPERTY ABATEMENT CALCULATION


 
 

Year No.

 

3 Year Abatement

 

6 Year Abatement

 

10 Year Abatement





 
 

1

 

100%

 

100%

 

100%



 
 

2

 

66%

 

65%

 

95%



 
 

3

 

33%

 

66%

 

80%



 
 

4

 


 

50%

 

65%



 
 

5

 


 

34%

 

50%



 
 

6

 


 

17%

 

40%



 
 

7

 


 


 

30%



 
 

8

 


 


 

20%



 
 

9

 


 


 

10%



 
 

10

 


 


 

5%





 



 


(2)

 
PERSONAL-PROPERTY ABATEMENT CALCULATION


 
 

Year No.

 

5 Year Abatement

 

10 Year Abatement





 
 

1

 

100%

 

100%



 
 

2

 

80%

 

90%



 
 

3

 

60%

 

80%



 
 

4

 

40%

 

70%



 
 

5

 

20%

 

60%



 
 

6

 


 

50%



 
 

7

 


 

40%



 
 

8

 


 

30%



 
 

9

 


 

20%



 
 

10

 


 

10%





 



(Res. R-16-09, passed 7-22-2016)



CHAPTER 36:  PUBLIC RECORDS



Section



   36.01   Certain public records exempted from disclosure by statute



   36.02   Certain public records declared exempt from disclosure by
the city



   36.03   Records access officers; guidelines



   36.04   Copying of documents; fee



   36.05   Procedure upon denial of access to documents



   36.06   Inspection of public records



   36.07   Lists of names and addresses not to be provided



Statutory reference:



   Access to public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1et seq.



   Commission on Public Records, see I.C. 5-15-5.1-1et seq.



   Fair information practices, see I.C. 4-1-6-1et seq.



§ 36.01  CERTAIN PUBLIC RECORDS EXEMPTED FROM DISCLOSURE BY STATUTE.



   As required by statute, the following public records are exempted from
public disclosure unless access to the records is specifically required by a
state or federal statute or is ordered by a court under the rules of
discovery:



   (A)   Those declared confidential by state statute;



   (B)   Those declared confidential by rule adopted by a public agency
under specific authority to classify public records as confidential granted
to the public agency by statute;



   (C)   Those records required to be kept confidential by federal law;



   (D)   Records containing trade secrets;



   (E)   Confidential financial information obtained, upon request,
from a person. However, this does not include information that is filed with
or received by a public agency pursuant to state statute;



   (F)   Information concerning research (including actual research
documents) conducted under the auspices of an institution of higher education
including information:



      (1)   Concerning any negotiations made with respect to the
research; and



      (2)   Received from another party involved in the research.



   (G)   Grade transcripts and license examination scores obtained as
part of a licensure process;



   (H)   Those declared confidential by or under rules adopted by the
Supreme Court of Indiana;



   (I)   Patient medical records and charts created by a provider,
unless the patient gives written consent under I.C. 16-39;



   (J)   Application information declared confidential by the
Twenty-First Century Research and Technology Fund Board under I.C. 5-14-3; and



   (K)   A photograph, a video recording or an audio recording of an
autopsy, except as provided in I.C. 36-2-14-10.



(Res. R-84-10, passed 4-2-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Certain records exempt from disclosure requirements, see I.C.
5-14-3-4(a)



§ 36.02  CERTAIN PUBLIC RECORDS DECLARED EXEMPT FROM DISCLOSURE BY THE CITY.



   In addition to those records listed in § 36.01 which may not be
disclosed, the city hereby declares the following discretionary areas of
public records which shall also be exempt from public disclosure:



   (A)   Investigatory records of a law enforcement agency, except
those law enforcement records which must be made available for inspection and
copying as provided in I.C. 5-14-3-5;



   (B)   The work product of an attorney representing the city or any
of its departments or agencies or any individual;



   (C)   Test questions, scoring keys and other examination data used
in administering a licensing examination, examination for employment or
academic examination before the examination is given or if it is to be given
again;



   (D)   Scores of tests or license examinations if the person is
identified by name and has not consented to the release of his or her scores;



   (E)   Records relating to negotiations between the Department of
Commerce, the Employment Development Commission, the Corporation for Science
and Technology or Economic Development Commission with industrial research or
commercial prospects while negotiations are in progress;



   (F)   Records that contain intra-agency or inter-agency advisory or
a deliberative material that are expressions of opinion or are of a
speculative nature and that are communicated for the purpose of
decision-making;



   (G)   Diaries, journals or other personal notes serving as a
functional equivalent of a diary or journal;



   (H)   Personnel files of public employees except for:



      (1)   The name, compensation, application for employment or
appointment, job title, business address, business telephone number, job
description, education and training background, previous work experience or
dates of first and last employment of present or former officers or employees
of the agency;



      (2)   Information relating to the status of any formal charges
against the employee;



      (3)   Information concerning disciplinary actions in which
final action has been taken and that resulted in the employee being
disciplined or discharged; and



      (4)   All personnel file information shall be made available
to the affected employee or his or her representative.



   (I)   Patient medical records and charts created by a provider if
the patient gives his or her written consent, and minutes or records of
hospital staff meetings;



   (J)   Administrative or technical information that would jeopardize
a record-keeping or security system;



   (K)   Computer programs, computer codes, computer filing systems and
other software that are owned by the public agency or entrusted to it;



   (L)   Records specifically prepared for discussion or develop during
discussion in an executive session under I.C. 5-14-1.5-6.1;



   (M)   The identity of a donor of a gift made to a public agency if
the donor requires nondisclosure of his or her identity as a condition of
making the gift;



   (N)   Library or archival records which can be used to identify any
library patron or deposited with or acquired by a library upon a condition
that the records be disclosed only to qualified researchers; after the
passing of a period of years that is specified in the documents under which
the deposit or acquisition is made; or after the death of person specified at
the time of the acquisition or deposit. However, nothing in this division (N)
shall limit or affect contracts entered into by the Indiana State Library
pursuant to I.C. 4-1-6-8;



   (O)   The identity of any person who contacts the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles concerning the ability of a driver to operate a motor vehicle safely
and the medical records and evaluations made by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
staff or members of the Driver License Advisory Committee. However, upon
written request to the Commissioner of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, the
driver must be given copies of the driver's medical records and evaluations
that concern the driver; and



   (P)   School safety and security measures, plans and systems,
including emergency preparedness plans developed under 511 I.A.C. 6.1-2-2.5.



(Res. R-84-10, passed 4-2-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Certain records exempt from disclosure requirements, see I.C.
5-14-3-4(b)



§ 36.03  RECORDS ACCESS OFFICERS; GUIDELINES.



   (A)   In order to implement the Access to Public Records Act (I.C.
5-14-3-1 et seq.), the City Clerk is hereby designated as the person
responsible for public records release decisions, and will be referred to as
the Records Access Officer and in the absence of the Clerk the City
Controller is hereby designated as the Records Access Officer. A Deputy
Records Access Officer is to be designated by the Chief of Police to be the
person responsible for public records release decisions concerning Police
Department records.



   (B)   The Records Access Officer shall be guided by the Access to
Public Records Act (I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.) and any amendments thereto, and
shall also be guided by any state and federal laws regarding privacy,
confidentiality and disclosure requirements of certain records.



(Res. R-84-10, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 36.04  COPYING OF DOCUMENTS; FEE.



   (A)   A fee for copying of documents shall be determined by the City
Clerk and Controller based on the actual cost of copying the document or $.10
per page, whichever is greater.



   (B)   Nothing contained herein shall require the city to take
unusual or unreasonable steps to acquire a machine capable of mechanically
reproducing the document if in fact no such access can be reasonably had; and
in that event the person making the request for a record is only entitled to
inspect and manually transcribe the record.



   (C)   It is furthermore provided that all fees are payable in
advance before any record is duplicated.



(Res. R-84-10, passed 4-2-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Copying fee, see I.C. 5-14-3-8



§ 36.05  PROCEDURE UPON DENIAL OF ACCESS TO DOCUMENTS.



   If a citizen is denied access to a document, he or she shall inform the
Public Records Access Officer. A form shall be made available to state the
nature of the document, the reason for denial, and the time and date. After a
24-hour wait for the decision to be reversed, a citizen may ask a circuit or
superior court to order a document disclosed. If the request is received on a
Friday or on a date preceding a nonbusiness day, the Records Access Officer
shall have until the same hour on the next business day in which to reverse
the decision. A copy of the form shall be maintained at all times in the
office of the Clerk.



(Res. R-84-10, passed 4-2-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Denial of disclosure, see I.C. 5-14-3-9



§ 36.06  INSPECTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS.



   (A)   All records shall be inspected only at the office or location
where they are regularly maintained.



   (B)   Any request by mail for copies of records may be addressed to
the Records Access Officer, and will be honored upon payment of the regular
fee; provided, the requested record is sufficiently identified to make
compliance practicable.



(Res. R-84-10, passed 4-2-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Right of inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-3



§ 36.07  LISTS OF NAMES AND ADDRESSES NOT TO BE PROVIDED.



   The city, at the current time, is not required to create or provide
copies of lists of names and addresses and, therefore, will not make any such
lists available to anyone requesting them.



(Res. R-84-10, passed 4-2-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Copies of lists of names and addresses, see I.C. 5-14-3-4(c)



CHAPTER 37:  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU



Section



   37.01   Establishment



   37.02   Schedule of ordinances subject to admission of violation



§ 37.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created an Ordinance Violations Bureau for the city and
the City Clerk shall serve as the Violations Clerk of the Bureau.



(Ord. G-88-132, passed 8-25-1988; Ord. G-88-136, passed 9-15-1988)



§ 37.02  SCHEDULE OF ORDINANCES SUBJECT TO ADMISSION OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall accept written appearances, waivers of
trial, admissions of violations and payment of civil penalties of not more
than $7,500 in ordinance violations cases.



   (B)   The following schedule of ordinances of the Civil Code of the
city shall be subject to admission of violation before the City Clerk:



      (1)   Chapter 50, Garbage and Refuse.



 

Violations




§ 50.04(A)
 
Garbage to be deposited in containers; nuisance


§ 50.04(B)
 
Placing refuse in the street


§ 50.04(B)
 
Picking through garbage


§ 50.04(C)
 
Throwing refuse in any stream or body of water


§ 50.05
 
Certain materials prohibited in containers


§ 50.06
 
Improper placement of refuse containers


Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$25, nor more than $100.




 



      (2)   Chapter 72, Parking Regulations.



 


§ 72.73 Parking Violations

 

Fines





Parked overtime in one-hour zone
 

$10



Parked overtime in two-hour zone
 

$10



Parking on yellow curb
 

$10



Blocking street sweeper (first time)
 

$20



Blocking street sweeper (second time)
 

$50



Parking in restricted zone
 

$10



Backed into parking space
 

$10



Blocking driveway
 

$10



Parking on sidewalk
 

$10



Others
 

$10



Occupying more than one designated/marked parking space (§ 72.01)
 

$20



Amount of fine if not paid after 30 days
 

$100



Disabled
 

$25



Leased space
 

$20



Manner of parking (§ 72.02)
 

$10



Owner’s responsibility for illegal parking (§ 72.01)
 

$100



Parking in fire lane
 

$25



Parking within an intersection (§ 72.03)
 

$100



Parking on a crosswalk (§ 72.04)
 

$20



Parking from curblines and property lines (§ 72.06)
 

$10



Parking in front of fire hydrant (§ 72.06)
 

$100



Parking when prohibited for temporary reasons (§ 72.07)
 

$20



Parking at bus or taxicab stop (§ 72.08)
 

$100



Parking in railway (§ 72.09)
 

$20



Parking display cars on street prohibited (§ 72.10)
 

$100



Parking to display merchandise; selling from vehicles (§ 72.12)
 

$100



Parking to wash, grease, or repair vehicles (§ 72.13)
 

$150



Parking of vehicles that are not self-propelled (§ 72.14)
 

$50



Overnight parking (§ 72.15)
 

$100



Parking when loading materials (§ 72.16)
 

$100



Parking in alleys (§ 72.17)
 

$100



Parking allowances (§ 72.56)
 

$20



Parking prohibited (§ 72.57)
 

$20



Unauthorized use of special parking permit (§ 72.58)
 

$20



Unauthorized use of disabled person’s parking spaces in parking facilities
(§ 72.60)
 

$25



The owner of a vehicle for which a violation has been issued shall be subject
to a penalty of up to a maximum of $50 per offense if not paid within 30 days
from the date of the violation.




 



      (3)   Chapter 91, Animals.



 

Violations




§ 91.002
 
Permitting animals to run at large


§ 91.005
 
Keeping live swine or goats in city


§ 91.006
 
Permitting cattle, sheep, goats and the like to run at large


§ 91.007
 
Exhibitions or parades of animals


§ 91.008
 
Animals as prizes or inducements


§ 91.009
 
Animal which is a public nuisance


§ 91.010
 
Cruel treatment of animals prohibited


§ 91.017
 
Keeping animals' places of habitation clean


§ 91.018
 
Animals afflicted with contagious disease


§ 91.019
 
Animal which bites a person


§ 91.020
 
Allowing animal to remain in parked vehicle


§ 91.035
 
Dogs and cats to be registered and licensed


§ 91.036
 
Dog and cats over three months to be inoculated


Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined $25.




 



      (4)   Chapter 94, Fire Prevention; Smoke Detectors.



 

Violations


§ 94.03
 
Districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited


§ 94.04
 
Districts in which storage of flammable liquid in outside aboveground tanks
is prohibited


Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$25, nor more than $100.



 



      (5)   Chapter 96, Noise Control.



 

Violations
 
Fines


First Offense
 
Second Offense
 
Subsequent Offense


§ 96.01
 
Regulating nuisances created by noise
 
$25
 
$50
 
$50


§ 96.03
 
Vehicles weighing less than 8,000 pounds
 
$25
 
$50
 
$50


§ 96.04
 
Animals
 
$25
 
$50
 
$50


§ 96.17
 
Causing excessive noise levels
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100



 



      (6)   Chapter 97, Nuisances.



 

Violations
 
Fines


First Offense
 
Second Offense
 
Subsequent Offense




§ 97.01
 
Maintaining conditions constituting a nuisance
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 97.02
 
Failure to keep trees trimmed
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 97.03
 
Casting offensive matter on land
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 97.04
 
Permitting offensive substance to remain in cellar
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 97.05
 
Discharging dense smoke
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 97.06
 
Changing watercourse without authority
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 97.07
 
Vehicle with offensive muffler
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 97.09
 
No indoor furniture or appliances kept outdoors
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100




 



      (7)   Chapter 98, Parks and Recreation.



 

Violations




§ 98.01
 
Use of grounds and facilities


§ 98.02
 
Certain acts prohibited


§ 98.03
 
Picnic areas and use


§ 98.04
 
Special activities


§ 98.05
 
Operation of motor vehicles and boats


§ 98.06
 
Animals within park area


§ 98.07
 
Peddling and soliciting


§ 98.08
 
Erection of signs prohibited


§ 98.09
 
Fishing


§ 98.10
 
Hours of closing


Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$10, nor more than $100.




 



      (8)   Chapter 99, Streets and Sidewalks.



 

Violation
 
Fine


§ 99.01
 
Street sweeping; schedules
 
$45



 



      (9)   Chapter 100, Trees, Shrubs and Groundcovers. Any person
who violates the provisions of this chapter is subject to a fine of $50 per
occurrence.



      (10)   Chapter 111, Alcoholic Beverages. An individual found
to be in violation of the provisions of § 111.01 as a first offense shall
pay a civil penalty of $25 to the City Clerk. For any subsequent violations
of the provisions of this chapter, the person shall be fined not less than
$26, nor more than $100.



      (11)   Chapter 115, Food Establishments.



 

Violations


§ 115.02
 
Certain acts prohibited on premises


§ 115.03
 
Driving through premises


§ 115.04
 
Parking prohibited by other than patrons


Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$1, nor more than $100.



 



      (12)   Chapter 117, Peddlers and Solicitors.



 

Violations
 
Fines


First Offense
 
Second Offense
 
Subsequent Offense




§ 117.01
 
License required
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 117.04
 
Location specified where direct selling prohibited
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 117.05
 
Misrepresentation of good or merchandise
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 117.36
 
Registration required; exemptions
 
Not less than $5 nor more than $100


§ 117.40
 
Conduct of registrants
 
Not less than $5 nor more than $100


§ 117.41
 
Disclosure requirements
 
Not less than $5 nor more than $100




 



      (13)   Chapter 130, Offenses Against Municipal Regulations.



 

Violations
 
Fines


First Offense
 
Second Offense
 
Subsequent Offense




§ 130.01
 
Posting signs, bills or advertising
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 130.02
 
Disobeying order or interfering with Fire Department
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 130.03
 
Loitering about school building
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 130.21
 
Selling toxic glue to minor prohibited; Exception
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 130.22
 
Sale of toxic glue restricted
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100


§ 130.23
 
Toxic glue to be kept where unavailable to customer
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100




 



(Ord. G-64-161, passed 6-1-1964; Ord. G-88-116, passed 6-6-1988; Ord.
G-88-132, passed 8-25-1988; Ord. G-88-136, passed 9-15-1988; Ord. G-97-174,
passed 3-20-1997; Ord. G-01-01, passed 1-4-2001; Ord. G-04-22, passed
5-5-2004; Ord. G-09-16, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. G-13-03, passed 2-21-2013; Ord.
G-17-11, passed 8-7-2017; Ord. G-17-16, passed 11-6-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 34-28-5



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE





         51.   SEWERS





         52.   WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT





         53.   WATER





         54.   DRAINAGE





         55.   CEMETERIES





         56.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT




CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



Garbage Collection



   50.01   Supervision of collection; Sanitation Department



   50.02   Authority to make regulations; right to appeal



   50.03   Containers



   50.04   Garbage to be deposited in containers; nuisance



   50.05   Certain materials prohibited in containers



   50.06   Placement of containers for collection



   50.07   Removal of certain debris by contractors



   50.08   Service charges; schedule



   50.09   Election to remove garbage by private hauler



 



   50.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to operate waste management system, see I.C. 36-9-2-16,
36-9-6-19



GARBAGE COLLECTION



§ 50.01  SUPERVISION OF COLLECTION; SANITATION DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of under the supervision of the Sanitary Superintendent.



   (B)   (1)   The Sanitation Department shall be under the
supervision of the Board of Public Works and Safety as defined in I.C.
36-9-30 and shall be funded by the Sanitation Non-reverting Fund.



      (2)   The New Albany Common Council, acting as the fiscal
body, shall review an annual budget for the Sanitation Department as prepared
by the City Controller under the Sanitation Non-reverting Fund. All revenue
received by the Sanitation Department shall be deposited in the Sanitation
Non-reverting Fund.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-1960; Ord. G-05-47, passed 9-22-2005)



§ 50.02  AUTHORITY TO MAKE REGULATIONS; RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   (A)   The Sanitation Superintendent shall have the authority to make
regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste
containers, and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance
and disposal thereof as he or she shall find necessary. He or she shall
change and modify the same after proper notice, provided that the regulations
are not contrary to the provisions hereof.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a regulation of the Sanitation
Superintendent shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Public Works
and Safety, who shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any
such regulations.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-1960)



§ 50.03  CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant,
lessee or occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be maintained in
good condition. Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter, or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defects liable
to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof, shall be
properly replaced upon notice. The Sanitation Superintendent shall have the
authority to refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith.



   (B)   (1)   Garbage containers shall be made of metal or any
other suitable material, equipped with handles and tight-fitting covers and
shall be watertight. The containers shall have a capacity of not more than 20
gallons, shall be of a type approved by the Board of Health and shall be kept
in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. Plastic bags may also
be used if they have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons, are made of not
less than .00125 gauge plastic material, and are fastened securely at the
top. No person, firm or corporation shall supply anyone else with any plastic
bags intended or advertised to be used for garbage bags unless the plastic is
at least .00125 gauge plastic material. Ash containers shall be made of metal
and have a capacity of not more than 20 gallons.



      (2)   Rubbish containers shall be of a kind suitable for
collection purposes and shall be of a such weight that they can be handled by
one man.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-1960; Ord. G-69-360, passed 5-5-1969; Ord.
G-70-433, passed 2-4-1971)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  GARBAGE TO BE DEPOSITED IN CONTAINERS; NUISANCE.



   (A)   No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other
public place, except it be in proper containers for collection under express
approval granted by the Sanitation Superintendent.



   (B)   No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within
the city any refuse, in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public
place, or into any occupied premises within the city. No person shall pick
through the garbage or refuse containers of another.



   (C)   No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or
other body of water. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises
is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.



   (D)   REFUSE is what is commonly known as trash, litter, and
unwanted material, and includes but is not limited to solid and semisolid
wastes, dead animals, animal waste, tires, appliances, electronics, handbill
advertisements, solicitation materials, and offal.



   (E)   Upon a conviction for violating divisions (A) through (C)
above, the fines for violating this section shall be determined as follows,
instead of following § 50.99:



      (1)   A fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 per
occurrence shall be imposed for each infraction committed under this section
that involves less than three cubic feet of litter or waste;



      (2)   A fine of not less than $200 and not more than $1,000
per occurrence shall be imposed for each Infraction committed under this
section that involves between three cubic feet and up to ten cubic feet of
litter or waste;



      (3)   A fine of not less than $300 and not more than $2,000
per occurrence shall be imposed for each infraction committed under this
section that involves in excess of ten cubic feet of litter or waste;



      (4)   Fines are doubled under any of the following
circumstances:



         (a)   When the refuse involved includes drugs or drug
paraphernalia (including but not limited to hypodermic needles and/or
syringes), lit cigarettes or other lighted/flaming material, and/or obscene
or pornographic material; or



         (b)   When the refuse involved is within 25 feet of a
running or permanent natural body of water or storm drains such that the
refuse will more likely than not enter said body of water or storm drain,
regardless of whether the refuse does actually do so; or



         (c)   The refuse includes any material which is
recognized as a toxin by the USDA and/or EPA; or



         (d)   The person cited for violation of this section has
previously been cited for violation of this section within the previous 12
months.



   (F)   The enforcement of this section shall not interfere with any
state code, administrative code, or regulation where oversight is provided by
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, or any other applicable governmental and regulatory body.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-1960; Ord. G-17-10, passed 8-7-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Littering, see I.C. 35-45-3-2



§ 50.05  CERTAIN MATERIALS PROHIBITED IN CONTAINERS.



   No rocks, bricks, dirt or ashes shall be placed in containers
containing other garbage or refuse. All garbage and refuse, before being
placed in cans for collection, shall have drained from it all free liquids
and may be wrapped in paper.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-1960)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION.



   Refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level on the
property, not within the right-of-way of a street or alley, and accessible to
the street or alley from which collection is made. No variation from this
section shall be permitted unless for good cause approved by the Sanitation
Superintendent.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-60)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  REMOVAL OF CERTAIN DEBRIS BY CONTRACTORS.



   All accumulations of debris and refuse of any kind caused by tree
trimmers, building wreckers or other contractors of any kind must be removed
by such contractors at their own expense.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-1960)



§ 50.08  SERVICE CHARGES; SCHEDULE.



   There is imposed on each owner, tenant or occupant of residential or
commercial property in the city to whom municipal refuse and garbage
collection is made available by the city, a service charge for the collection
and removal of refuse and garbage according to the following schedule.




   SERVICE CHARGE SCHEDULE




   (A)   For one regular pick-up per week:



      (1)   For a one-family dwelling:



         (a)   Effective September 2, 2010: $15.63 per month; and



         (b)   Effective September 2, 2010: A fuel surcharge
shall be applied and charge to each household in the next billing cycle when
the price of diesel exceeds $3.00 per gallon according to the last order
price of diesel fuel charged to contractor preceding the billing to the city
as per the “City of New Albany Fuel Surcharge Schedule in Resolution
R-10-21.”



      (2)   For a church:



         (a)   Effective September 2, 2010: $15.63 per month; and



         (b)   Effective September 2, 2010: A fuel surcharge
shall be applied and charge to each household in the next billing cycle when
the price of diesel exceeds $3.00 per gallon according to the last order
price of diesel fuel charged to contractor preceding the billing to the city
as per the “City of New Albany Fuel Surcharge Schedule in Resolution
R-10-21.”



      (3)   For a multi-family or apartment dwelling (monthly fee
shall apply for each individual unit, not as a whole structure/dwelling):



         (a)   Effective September 2, 2010: $15.63 per month; and



         (b)   Effective September 2, 2010: A fuel surcharge
shall be applied and charge to each household in the next billing cycle when
the price of diesel exceeds $3.00 per gallon according to the last order
price of diesel fuel charged to contractor preceding the billing to the city
as per the “City of New Albany Fuel Surcharge Schedule in Resolution
R-10-21.”



      (4)   For a mobile home or trailer court:



         (a)   Effective September 2, 2010: $15.63 per month; and



         (b)   Effective September 2, 2010: A fuel surcharge
shall be applied and charge to each household in the next billing cycle when
the price of diesel exceeds $3.00 per gallon according to the last order
price of diesel fuel charged to contractor preceding the billing to the city
as per the “City of New Albany Fuel Surcharge Schedule in Resolution
R-10-21.”



      (5)   (a)   For a business or commercial establishment with
five 20-gallon garbage cans or less per week, $18.50 per month. Business or
commercial establishment with six 20-gallon garbage cans or more, or a one
cubic yard dumpster per week, $26 per month. Each extra cubic yard per week
or part thereof shall be $16 additional per month. If there are eight or more
garbage cans (20-gallon) then a dumpster must be used instead of the cans.



         (b)   Effective January 1, 2010 and every January 1
thereafter:  The user fee shall be adjusted (upward or downward) according
to the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U): U.S. city
average, under the following expenditure and commodity service group:  water
and sewer and trash collection services.



      (6)   Any commercial establishment or apartment complex may
elect to have garbage removed by a private contractor, and if such an
election is made, then no service charge by the city will apply.



      (7)   Where an owner or operator of a business or commercial
establishment resides on the premises, then in that case only the business or
commercial establishment fee as set out in division (A)(5) above shall apply.



   (B)   For pick up of extraordinary items: A $5 service charge for
each pick up of large items, including but not limited to, refrigerators,
stoves, washers and dryers, air conditioners, dishwashers, large chairs and
sofas.



   (C)   Service charges as specified in division (A) above will be
combined, billed and collected with the sewage works charges. The
administration of this section shall be under the control of the Sewer Board.



   (D)   Revenue from service charge collections will be deposited in a
separate sanitation fund within the sewage utility and payments of cost
incident to the service of collection and disposition of refuse and garbage
will be made from this fund.



(Ord. G-81-910, passed 10-22-1981; Ord. G-83-1015, passed 12-19-1983; Ord.
G-84-5, passed 2-6-1984; Ord. G-85-75, passed 7-22-1985; Ord. G-90-208,
passed 2-5-1990; Ord. G-93-141, passed 1-21-1993; Ord. G-98-243, passed
5-4-1998; Ord. A-01-47, passed 12-20-2001; Ord. G-09-36, passed 9-17-2009;
Ord. G-10-26, passed 9-2-2010)



§ 50.09  ELECTION TO REMOVE GARBAGE BY PRIVATE HAULER.



   (A)   Any commercial establishment, industry, apartment building or
institutional use may elect to have garbage removed by a private contractor;
provided that:



      (1)   The private contractor shall be properly licensed to
perform such service in the State of Indiana; and/or



      (2)   If such election is made, the commercial establishment,
industry, apartment building or institutional use shall annually notify the
Sanitation Superintendent in writing, of this election including the name,
address and telephone number of the private contractor.



   (B)   When electing to have garbage removed by a private contractor,
the following performance requirement shall also be met.



      (1)   Dumpsters or other containers used to contain garbage
and other refuse shall not be placed on public sidewalks, streets or
rights-of-way or other public property.



      (2)   Dumpsters or other containers used to contain garbage
and other refuse shall be placed on private property and located, enclosed
and/or screened from public view in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 156, Zoning Code.



      (3)   Garbage collection by private contractors shall be
performed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday. Garbage collection from a commercial establishment, industry or
institutional use located beyond 300 feet of any residence, measured from the
dumpster site, is exempt from this requirement.



      (4)   These performance requirements shall be met by any
commercial establishment, industry, apartment building or institutional use
electing to remove garbage by a private contractor within six months of the
passage and publication of this section.



(Ord. G-97-213, passed 11-21-1997)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $25, nor more than $100, payable to the City Clerk as provided in
Chapter 37.



(Ord. G-60-84, passed 5-2-1960; Ord. G-97-213, passed 11-21-1997)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.001   Definitions



   51.002   Discharging objectionable wastes within city



   51.003   Owner responsible to install suitable toilet facilities



   51.004   Destroying or tampering with municipal sewage works



   51.005   Right of entry for purpose of inspection



   51.006   Notice of violation



   51.007   Jurisdiction to provide sewer service within regulated
territory



Private Sewage Disposal System



   51.020   Definitions



   51.021   Compliance with provisions required



   51.022   Permit required before construction commences



   51.023   Septic tanks and the like; specifications



   51.024   Connecting building sewer to private sewage disposal system



   51.025   When no public sewer system is available; specifications



   51.026   Approval needed for installation of other systems



   51.027   Correction of defects



   51.028   Maintenance of private sewage disposal facilities



   51.029   Connecting building sewer to public sewer



   51.030   Noninterference with additional requirements



   51.031   Written order to comply with regulations



   51.032   Right of entry for purpose of inspection



   51.033   Exceptions



   51.034   Notice of violation



Building Sewers and Connections



   51.045   Permit required



   51.046   Classes of permits; fees



   51.047   Costs to be borne by owner



   51.048   Separate building sewer required for every building;
exception



   51.049   Use of old building sewers with new buildings



   51.050   Connection of new buildings or subdivision to public
combined or sanitary sewer



   51.051   Pipe and joint specifications



   51.052   Size and slope



   51.053   Elevation of building sewer; alignment



   51.054   Gravity flow of building drain to public sewer



   51.055   Excavations; barricades and lights



   51.056   Location of connection



   51.057   Inspections; supervision of connections to public sewer



   51.058   Contiguous buildings to petition for annexation prior to
connection to city sewerage system



   51.059   Requirement to install cleanouts



Use of Public Sewers



   51.075   Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage



   51.076   Prohibited discharges



   51.077   Grease traps and grease interceptors



   51.078   Review and approval of certain wastes into public sewers;
preliminary treatment



   51.079   Pretreatment or control facilities



   51.080   Control manhole; measurements, tests and analyses



   51.081   Industrial wastes; special agreements



Rates and Charges



   51.100   Collection of rates and charges; Board to establish bylaws



   51.101   Establishment of rates



   51.102   Connection charges



   51.103   Annual review of rate provisions



   51.104   Penalty for late payment



Sewer Board



   51.115   Establishment



   51.116   Disputed customer accounts



   51.117   Operating reserve account



   51.118   Reporting requirements



Sanitary Sewer Connections



   51.125   Definitions



   51.126   Compliance



   51.127   Inspection



   51.128   Fine for non-compliance



   51.129   Assessment against property



   51.130   Non-Reverting Sewer Fund



   51.131   Liability of user



   51.132   Common Council powers



Residential and Commercial On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems



   51.145   Applicability and administration



   51.146   Definitions



   51.147   Health hazard declared



   51.148   Right on entry



   51.149   Prohibited acts



   51.150   Residential permits



   51.151   Commercial permits



   51.152   Permit denial



   51.153   Permit revocation or modification



   51.154   Licenses



   51.155   Orders of the Health Officer and Board



   51.156   Petition for review



   51.157   Enforcement



   51.158   Miscellaneous provisions



 



   51.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Wastewater pretreatment, see Chapter 52



Statutory reference:



   Authority to operate sewer system, see I.C. 36-9-2-17



   Control and supervision of sewage works, see I.C. 36-9-23



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   B.O.D. (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C., expressed in parts per million
by weight.



   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the innerface of the building wail.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinguished from sanitary sewage.



   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the city, through
the Board of Public Works and Safety, to inspect and approve the installation
of building sewers and their connection to the public sewer system.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to the degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
the ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Municipal Sewage Works of the
city or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)



§ 51.002  DISCHARGING OBJECTIONABLE WASTES WITHIN CITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private
property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary
sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958; Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



§ 51.003  OWNER RESPONSIBLE TO INSTALL SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES.



   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
city and abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or may in the future be located, a public sewer of the city, is
required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect the facilities directly with the public sanitary sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so; provided that, the public sewer is within 100 feet
of the property line.



   (B)   If it is discovered that the owner's sanitary sewer is
connected to the storm sewer as a result of the 1998-99 Storm Water Survey,
then any extension of the sewer line to the property line of the owner shall
be at the city's expense.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958; Ord. G-98-279, passed 11-19-1998)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



§ 51.004  DESTROYING OR TAMPERING WITH MUNICIPAL SEWAGE WORKS.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
charge of disorderly conduct.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.005  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF INSPECTION.



   The Superintendent, inspector and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)



§ 51.006  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, public
sewer system, except § 51.004, shall be served by the city with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)



§ 51.007  JURISDICTION TO PROVIDE SEWER SERVICE WITHIN REGULATED TERRITORY.



   The City of New Albany under I.C. 36-9-2 et seq. (as may be amended)
and specifically under I.C. 36-9-2-16, 36-9-2-17 and 36-9-2-18 (as may be
amended), establishes a regulated territory for exclusive sewer service and
jurisdiction over the area four miles outside the corporate boundaries,
except as outlined in the "Georgetown-New Albany Agreed Sewer Regulatory
Boundary Map" with the Town of Georgetown (attached to Ordinance G-14-06 and
incorporated by reference herein), moreover exempting those other facilities
that have a Certificate of Territorial Authority ("CTA") which have been duly
authorized by the State of Indiana and its agencies. When development occurs
within the City of New Albany's area of the "Georgetown-New Albany Agreed
Sewer Regulatory Boundary Map" and the developer or potential customer
provides financial documentation, which compares the cost of connecting to
the Town of Georgetown and the City of New Albany, the City of New Albany may
release and permit the connection to the Town of Georgetown when it is more
economically feasible to do so after examining the costs and options
available.



(Ord. G-14-06, passed 4-7-2014)



PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM



§ 51.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CLOSELY BUILT-UP AREAS. Any areas situated inside the corporate limits
of the city where are located either residential or business buildings.



   HEALTH OFFICER. The health authority having jurisdiction in the city or
its authorized representative.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation.



   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any sewage disposal system not
constructed, installed, maintained, operated and owned by the city and its
taxing district established for that purpose.



   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer constructed, installed, maintained, operated
and owned by the city or its taxing district established for that purpose. A
sewer installed for the purpose of carrying surface water runoff and sub-soil
drainage, shall not be considered a PUBLIC SEWER under this definition.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE. Any combination of human excreta and waste water from water
closets, laundries, sinks, bathing facilities and other objectionable waste
waters.



   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for receiving, treating and disposing of sewage.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)



§ 51.021  COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank cesspool or other facilities
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.022  PERMIT REQUIRED BEFORE CONSTRUCTION COMMENCES.



   (A)   Before commencement of construction of any building or private
residence where a private sewage disposal system is to be installed, or where
any alteration, repair or addition of an existing private sewage disposal
system is planned, the owner or agent of the owner shall first obtain a
written permit signed by the Health Officer having jurisdiction, or his or
her authorized representative. The application for such permit shall be made
on a form provided by the city, which application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the
Health Officer. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City
Controller’s office at the time the application is filed. For current
permit and inspection fees, see § 158.05, Sewer Permits, Fees and
Inspections.



   (B)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Health Officer or his or her authorized representative. He or she, or his or
her agent, shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction;
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Health
Officer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered.



   (C)   The application for a permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the building where the sewage disposal system is under
construction. The notice should be plainly visible from the public
thoroughfare serving this building.



   (D)   Before any permit shall be obtained, a percolation test must
be made in accordance with state's Board of Health Bulletin S.E. 8, and the
written results forwarded to the Health Officer having jurisdiction.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967; Ord. G-76-635, passed 12-6-1976)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



§ 51.023  SEPTIC TANKS AND THE LIKE; SPECIFICATIONS.



   Due to poor permeability of the soil in the jurisdiction of the health
authority, the minimum gallonage of septic tanks shall be 1,000 gallons, and
minimum footage of absorption beds shall be 300 feet. Distribution boxes will
be installed with each installation, the number being used to be determined
by the Health Officer or his or her authorized representative.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967; Ord. G-76-635, passed 12-6-1976)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



§ 51.024  CONNECTING BUILDING SEWER TO PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.



   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, all persons
owning or leasing property in closely built-up areas shall comply with the
following provisions of this subchapter for private sewage disposal systems.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.025  WHEN NO PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM IS AVAILABLE; SPECIFICATIONS.



   Where no public sewer system is available, there shall be established,
installed or constructed and maintained a private sewage disposal system
which shall comply with the standards of the state's Board of  Health or
in  Bulletin S.E. 8 of the state's Board of Health, or in such other manner
as approved by the Health Department having jurisdiction. Copies of the
Bulletin S.E. 8 are herewith incorporated by reference as part of this
section and two copies are filed in the office of the City Clerk and the
local Health Department for public inspection.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.026  APPROVAL NEEDED FOR INSTALLATION OF OTHER SYSTEMS.



   The installation of any other private residential sewage disposal
systems not described in state's Board of Health Bulletin S.E. 8, of
mechanical, chemical or other means may be approved by the Health Officer
after the person has filed the plans and specifications of the device or
system in the office of the Health Department.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.027  CORRECTION OF DEFECTS.



   Should any defect exist or occur in any private sewage disposal system
which would cause the sewage disposal system to fail to meet the requirements
of this subchapter, and cause an unsanitary condition, the defect shall be
corrected immediately by the owner or agent of the owner, occupant or agent
of the occupant. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this subchapter,
private sewer system, and the violator shall be subject to the penalties as
prescribed in § 51.999.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)



§ 51.028  MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.029  CONNECTING BUILDING SEWER TO PUBLIC SEWER.



   (A)   Wherever a public or sanitary sewer line becomes available and
is within 300 feet of the property line of the residential or business
property, a direct connection shall be made to such sewer and any septic
tanks, seepage pits and similar structures shall be abandoned and filled in,
in a safe and sanitary manner. Enforcement of this subchapter shall be in
accordance with I.C. 36-9-23-30.



   (B)   The New Albany Sewer Board is granted authority to hear,
determine and grant temporary waivers from the mandatory connection
requirement under this section, which waivers may only be granted under the
following circumstances and conditions:



      (1)   In the event that the boundary of an occupied property
is located within 300 feet of an available city sanitary sewer line, the
owner of such property shall connect to the city sanitary sewer system,
except upon proper application to and approval by the New Albany Sewer Board;



      (2)   The New Albany Sewer Board shall prepare and adopt a
form for the application;



      (3)   The application must be accompanied by a written
certification by the New Albany-Floyd County Health Department that the
property is presently served by a properly functioning on-site septic system
that complies with all provisions of applicable law;



      (4)   The New Albany Sewer Board may grant the application for
waiver in its sole discretion. In the event that the waiver is granted, the
property owner shall not be required to connect to the city sanitary system
for a period of three years, unless during the period the New Albany-Floyd
County Health Department determines that the on-site system is no longer
properly functioning and the connection is required to protect the public
health and safety;



      (5)   The property owner may reapply for one or more
additional connection waivers at the end of any such three-year period,
provided that a satisfactory certification regarding the on-site system is
again obtained from the New Albany-Floyd County Health Department. The Sewer
Board may grant, at its discretion, as many properly documented three-year
connection suspensions as it deems to be in the best interest of public
health and safety;



      (6)   Within 60 days after the New Albany Sewer Board grants
an initial waiver, it shall cause an instrument to be recorded in the office
of the Floyd County Recorder giving notice of the granting of the waiver, and
that the subject property will be required to connect to the city sanitary
system upon:



         (a)   Written determination by the New Albany-Floyd
County Health Department that the on-site disposal system is no longer
properly functioning and the connection is required to protect the public
health and safety; or



         (b)   Upon expiration of the three-year waiver period,
unless extended upon proper application to, and approval by, the New Albany
Sewer Board extending the waiver period;



      (7)   Upon being required to connect to the city sanitary
system, whether by expiration of the waiver period or otherwise, the subject
property owner shall be required to pay all costs and fees associated with
the connection as adopted by this Common Council and/or the New Albany Sewer
Board and then in effect; and



      (8)   The New Albany Sewer Board shall determine and assess an
application fee for such waiver requests which fee at a minimum must cover
the costs of recording the instrument described in division (B)(6) above, but
which may not exceed the sum of $100 without further approval of this Common
Council.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967; Ord. G-02-45, passed 11-21-2002; Ord.
G-03-25, passed 4-17-2003)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.030  NONINTERFERENCE WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the local
Health Officer.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)



§ 51.031  WRITTEN ORDER TO COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS.



   (A)   After receiving an order in writing from the duly appointed
Health Officer, or his or her authorized representative, the owner, agent of
the owner, the occupant or agent of the occupant of the property shall comply
with the provisions of this subchapter as set forth in the order, and within
the time limit included therein.



   (B)   The order shall be served on the owner or agent of the owner,
the occupant or on the agent of the occupant, or any person who, by contact
with the owner, has assumed the duty of complying with the provisions of an
order.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.032  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF INSPECTION.



   The Health Officer, or his or her agent bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at the proper
time for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing necessary, at all reasonable hours, to carry out the provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)



§ 51.033  EXCEPTIONS.



   Where the literal application of the requirements of this subchapter
would cause undue hardship, an exception may be granted by the Board of
Public Works and Safety in the following manner:



   (A)   The owner shall make written application to the Health Officer
for the exception. After an investigation the Health Officer shall present
the written application to the Board of Public Works and Safety, with his or
her recommendation attached thereto.



   (B)   The orders of exception shall be made only when it is found by
the Board that reasonable safety and sanitation is assured and the orders may
be conditioned in such a manner as to achieve that end. The conditions may
include restrictions not generally specified by this chapter.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.034  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person found to be violating any provision of this subchapter may
be served by the Health Officer or his or her agent, with a written order
stating the nature of the violation and providing time limit for satisfactory
correction thereof.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 51.999



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 51.045  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Controller.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.046  CLASSES OF PERMITS; FEES.



   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:



      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and



      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial waste.



   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit applications
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Inspector. A permit and
inspection fee shall be paid to the City Controller at the time the
application is filed. For current permit and inspection fees, see § 158.05,
Sewer Permits, Fees and Inspections.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.047  COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNER.



   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner or the person
installing the building sewer for the owner shall indemnify the city from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)



§ 51.048  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED FOR EVERY BUILDING; EXCEPTION.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.049  USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS WITH NEW BUILDINGS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Inspector to meet all
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.050  CONNECTION OF NEW BUILDINGS OR SUBDIVISION TO PUBLIC COMBINED OR
SANITARY SEWER.



   Whenever a new business building or subdivision is developed in an area
where a public combined or sanitary sewer is available, a connection shall be
made to the sewer.



(Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.051  PIPE AND JOINT SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM
specification or equal; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM specification or
equal; or other suitable material approved by the Inspector. Joints shall be
tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within
ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe
with leaded joints. Cast iron pipes with leaded joints may be required by the
Inspector where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If
installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast
iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a
suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Inspector.



   (B)   All joints and connections shall be made gas tight and water
tight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and
filled with molten lead, Federal Specification QQ-L-156, not less than one
inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and calked tight. No paint,
varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until
after the joint has been tested and approved.



      (1)   All joints in vitrified clay pipe or between such pipe
and metals shall be made with approved jointing material in accordance with
the latest edition of Volume III, Plumbing Rules and Regulations of the
Administrative Building Council of the State of Indiana.



      (2)   Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by
approval of the Inspector.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.052  SIZE AND SLOPE.



   The size and slope of the building sewers shall be subject to the
approval of the Inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than
six inches. The slope of the six-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth
inch per foot.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.053  ELEVATION OF BUILDING SEWER; ALIGNMENT.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The
building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment
insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipes and fittings.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.054  GRAVITY FLOW OF BUILDING DRAIN TO PUBLIC SEWER.



   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drains shall
be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
No water-operated sewage ejector shall be used.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.055  EXCAVATIONS; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.



   (A)   All excavations required for the installation of a building
sewer shall be open trench work, unless otherwise approved by the Inspector.
Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM
specifications, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected by the Inspector or his or her representative.



   (B)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
city.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.056  LOCATION OF CONNECTION.



   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made by the "Y" branch, if the branch is available at a suitable location. If
the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located
"Y" branch is available, the owner shall, at his or her expense, install a
"Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the Inspector.
Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter and no properly
located "T" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut in the public sewer
to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an
angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such
connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner
surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of
connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of
the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made
secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used
for the connection only when approved by the Inspector.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.057  INSPECTIONS; SUPERVISION OF CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Inspector
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or
his or her representative.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.058  CONTIGUOUS BUILDINGS TO PETITION FOR ANNEXATION PRIOR TO
CONNECTION TO CITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM.



   Any individual, firm or corporation who subdivides real estate into two
or more building lots, which real estate is contiguous to the city and if the
individual, firm or corporation is desirous of connecting the building lots
to the sanitary sewer system of the city, the individual, firm or corporation
must petition the Common Council of the city for annexation of the building
lots prior to connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city.



(Ord. G-76-598, passed 3-1-1976)



§ 51.059  REQUIREMENT TO INSTALL CLEANOUTS.



   (A)   Cleanouts. There shall be a cleanout at the junction of the
building drain and the building sewer. This cleanout shall be installed
outside the building within ten feet of the exterior wall. This cleanout
shall be brought up to finished grade. If a grease interceptor is installed
outside of the building, then a cleanout shall be installed in both sewer
lines that exit the building. In addition a cleanout shall also be installed
at the first accessible location at the property line. Cleanout locations
shall be approved by the Inspector.



   (B)   Direction of flow. Every cleanout shall be installed to open
in the direction of the flow of the drainage pipe or at right angles thereto.



   (C)   Size. Cleanouts shall be of the same size as the pipes they
serve up to four inches for larger pipes.



   (D)   Permanent covers prohibited. Cleanout plugs shall not be
covered with cement, plaster or any other permanent finishing material. When
necessary to conceal a cleanout plug, a covering plate or access door shall
be provided permitting ready access to the plug.



   (E)   Required installation. Required cleanouts shall be installed
when a sewer line is installed new or when an existing line is altered.



   (F)   Testing. All sewer lines shall be inspected and tested with
water or air. The water test shall be applied to the joints and piping
between cleanouts and shall be tested with a minimum ten-foot head of water.
The water shall be kept in the portion of piping under test for at least 15
minutes before inspection. The air test shall be at least five pounds of
pressure and it must be maintained for a period of at least 15 minutes before
inspection.



   (G)   Prohibited use. Cleanout openings shall not be used for
installation of new fixtures or floor drains, except where approved and where
another cleanout of equal access and capacity is provided.



(Ord. G-02-11, passed 4-17-2002)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 51.075  DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to the sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural
outlet.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.076  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause to
be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:



   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;



   (B)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease;



   (C)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 25 parts per
million, by weight, of soluble oils;



   (D)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;



   (E)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;



   (F)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;



   (G)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five, or higher
than nine, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;



   (H)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance
in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;



   (I)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of the
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle the materials at the sewage disposal plant; or



   (J)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating
a public nuisance.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.077  GREASE TRAPS AND GREASE INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   Requirement. A grease trap or grease interceptor meeting the
specifications in accordance with the Indiana Plumbing Code shall be
installed in all food handling establishments. These establishments include
restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, bars and clubs, hotels,
hospitals, sanitariums, factories, churches, retirement homes, school
kitchens or any other establishments where grease, fats or oils may be
introduced into the drainage sewage system in quantities that can affect line
stoppages or hinder sewage treatment. Grease interceptors located remotely
outside a building which discharge into the public sewers shall be in
accordance with the Indiana Plumbing Code requirements as are those grease
interceptors located inside the building.  Grease traps or interceptors are
not required for individual dwelling units or for any private living quarters.



   (B)   Grease trap and interceptor size. The characteristics and size
shall be determined by the requirements of the Indiana Plumbing Code.



   (C)   Maintenance and inspection. Traps and interceptors must be
located so as to provide easy access for routine inspection, cleaning, repair
and maintenance. All grease traps and interceptors shall be maintained by any
person owning or controlling the property upon which a grease trap or
interceptor is installed and the trap or interceptor shall be in continuously
efficient operation at all times.



   (D)   System of maintenance and clean-out. The owner or operator
shall develop and carry out a system of maintenance and clean-out of the
devices, but all traps and interceptors shall be cleaned out a minimum of
every six months, or sooner, if the owner or operator of the property knows
or should have known that a shorter period of time is required to keep the
grease trap or interceptor operating at all times at 90% or greater of rated
peak efficiency, or the New Albany Wastewater Treatment Plant Director so
notifies the owner or operator of the property that it deems a shorter period
necessary.



   (E)   Reports to the New Albany Waste Treatment Plant. All persons
required to install and maintain grease traps or  interceptors shall develop
and carry out this system of maintenance, clean-out and repair of such
devices, and shall send to the New Albany Waste Water Treatment Plant a form
certified by a licensed waste hauler that will include, but not be limited
to, the following information:



      (1)   The required maintenance and clean-out of the trap or
interceptor has been done and completed;



      (2)   The identity of the licensed plumber or waste hauler who
cleaned and maintained the trap or interceptor; and



      (3)   The method and location of grease disposal.



   (F)   Modifications and exceptions. A modification or exception to
this section must have the approval of the Building Commissioner and the
Sewer Board, and must not be in conflict with the Indiana Plumbing Code.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1058; Ord. G-99-330, passed 6-17-1999; Ord.
G-00-67, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. G-01-26, passed 8-6-2001)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.078  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF CERTAIN WASTES INTO PUBLIC SEWERS;
PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.



   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes, having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 400 parts per million, by
weight; containing more than 450 parts per million, by weight, of suspended
solids; containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics
described in § 51.076; or having an average daily flow greater than 2% of
the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent. Where necessary, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, the
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: Reduce the biochemical oxygen
demand to 400 parts per million, and the suspended solids to 450 parts per
million, by weight; reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
within the maximum limits provided for in § 51.076; or control the
quantities and rates of discharge of the waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
Superintendent and of the state's Board of Health and no construction of
facilities shall be commenced until approval is obtained in writing.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.079  PRETREATMENT OR CONTROL FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation, by the owner at his or her expense.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.080  CONTROL MANHOLE; MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   (A)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.



   (B)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in §§ 51.076 and 51.078, shall
be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for
in division (A) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at the
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.081  INDUSTRIAL WASTES; SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.100  COLLECTION OF RATES AND CHARGES; BOARD TO ESTABLISH BYLAWS.



   The rates and charges established by this subchapter shall be collected
by the city. The Sewage Works Board shall make and enforce the bylaws and
regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient
management of the city's sewerage system, regulator chambers and pumping
stations and sewage treatment plant, for the construction and use of house
sewers and connections to the sewerage system and for the regulation and
collection of the rates and charges.



(Ord. G-76-598, passed 3-1-1976; Ord. G-95-223, passed 7-20-1995)



§ 51.101  ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES.



   For the use of and service rendered by the sewage works, rates and
charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate or building that is connected with the city's sanitary sewerage
system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or
other liquids either directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewerage system
of the city, which rates and charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided
and shall be in an amount determinable as follows:



   (A)   Except as herein otherwise provided, the sewage rates and
charges shall be based on the quantity of water used on or in the property or
premises subject to the rates and charges, as the same is measured by the
water meter there in use, and shown by the consumption records of the water
utility serving the city and its inhabitants. Sewage service bills shall be
rendered once each month (or period equaling a month).



   (B)   Monthly flow charge, unmetered charge per month and wholesale
flow charge:



 



 

Phase I

 

Phase II





Monthly Flow Charge



   Flow charge per 100 cubic feet

 

$6.20

 

$7.68




   Minimum charge (200 cubic feet)

 

$12.40

 

$15.36



Unmetered Charge per Month (700 cubic feet)



   Residential dwelling inside the city limits

 

$43.40

 

$53.78




   Residential dwelling outside the city limits

 

$65.101

 

$80.67



Wholesale Flow Charge



   Town of Georgetown



Flow charge per 1,000 gallons

 




$3.832

 




$4.60



Excess Strength Surcharge


   BOD and/or TSS
 

$0.33

 

$0.33



   TSS
 

$0.33

 

$0.33



   Oil and grease
 

$0.33

 

$0.33



Debt Service Surcharge


   Residents of Jacqueline Estates, Winchester Estates, and Shagbark
Estates
 

$30

 

$30



   1  Users outside the city limits are charged based on their monthly
usage plus a 50% surcharge.

   2  This section shall not otherwise amend the provisions of the
city’s contract with the Town of Georgetown.




 



   (C)   (1)   The Phase I rates shall become effective April 13,
2010, and shall be applied thereafter, beginning with the next billing cycle
of the sewage works.



      (2)   The Phase II rates shall become effective on January 1,
2012, and shall be applied thereafter, beginning with the next billing cycle
following the date.



   (D)   In the event a lot, parcel or real estate or building
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquid into the
city sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in
excess of 10,000 cubic feet per month and it can be shown to the satisfaction
of the city that a portion of the water as measured by the water meter or
meters does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewer system, then the owner or
other interested party shall install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric
measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the city for the determination of wastewater discharge.



   (E)   In the event two or more dwelling units such as trailers,
apartments or housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water or other
liquids into the city's sanitary sewerage system, either directly or
indirectly, are users of water, and quantity of water is measured by a single
water meter, then in such case billing shall be for a single service in the
manner set out elsewhere herein. A DWELLING UNIT shall be interpreted as a
room or rooms or other living space or spaces in which cooking facilities are
provided.



   (F)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or buildings
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into
the city's sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, is not a
user of water supplied by the water utility serving the city, the owner or
other interested party shall be charged according to the following criteria:



      (1)   Residential dwellings inside the city limits will be
charged $32.69 per month; based on 700 cubic feet consumption.



      (2)   A nonresidential sewer user that discharges less than
6,000 cubic feet per month as estimated by the city shall be charged
according to the rate schedule herein provided as applied to an estimate of
the wastewater discharge approved by the city.



      (3)   Sewer users that discharge in excess of 6,000 cubic feet
per month as estimated by the city will be required to install a city
approved method of flow measurement and will be billed according to the
measured flow and the rate schedule herein provided.



      (4)   Residential dwellings outside the city limits will be
charged $49.03 per month; based on 700 cubic feet consumption.



      (5)   Residents outside the city limits using both city water
and city sewers will be charged their monthly usage plus a 50% surcharge.



   (G)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and
equitably adjusted to the service rendered, the city shall have the right to
base its charges not only on volume but also on the strength and character of
the sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of. The city
shall have the right to measure and determine the strength and content of all
sewage and wastes discharged, either directly or indirectly, into the city's
sanitary sewerage system, in such manner and by such method as it may deem
practicable in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances of the
case, in order to determine the proper charge.



      (1)   Normal domestic wastewater strength should not exceed:



         (a)   Five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): 225
milligrams per liter;



         (b)   Suspended solids (SS): 225 milligrams per liter;



         (c)   Oil and grease: 100 milligrams per liter; and



         (d)   Chemical oxygen demand (COD): 225 milligrams per
liter.



      (2)   Normal domestic wastewater strength should not exceed
the following:



 

Five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
 
225 milligrams per liter


Suspended solids
 
225 milligrams per liter


Oil and grease (O&G)
 
100 milligrams per liter


Chemical oxygen demand (COD)
 
325 milligrams per liter



 



         (a)   There shall be an excessive strength surcharge of
$.33 per pound for the following parameters in excess of the limitation.



 

BOD and/or COD
 
$.33 per pound


O & G
 
$.33 per pound


SS
 
$.33 per pound



 



         (b)   One pound of pollutant shall be its concentration
in mg/l x discharge flow (usage) in million gallons x 8.34 (lbs./gallon).



   (H)   Any and all garbage collection fees and recycling fees shall
be considered as and incorporated in the sewer rates and charges for purposes
of billing and collection.



   (I)   The rates and charges shall be billed by the city and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law and ordinance. The first billing may
be for a period of more or less than one full month in order to make the
monthly collection period correspond with the water meter readings of the
water utility serving the city, depending upon the date on which the rates
established by this chapter become effective.



   (J)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the
owners, but the billings shall in no way relieve the owner from liability in
the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of the
properties served, which are occupied by tenants, shall have the right to
examine the collection records of the city for the purpose of determining
whether such rates and charges have been paid by the tenants; provided that,
the examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept and
during the hours that the office is open for business.



   (K)   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as
well as for other uses, the city may, in its discretion, make adjustments in
the minimum charge and in the use charge as may be equitable.



   (L)   The New Albany Sewer Board is granted authority to hear,
determine and grant temporary waivers of sewer use charges on new and
unoccupied residential construction under the following circumstances and
conditions:



      (1)   The New Albany Sewer Board shall prepare and adopt a
form for the application;



      (2)   The owner of any property on which such new
single-family residential construction is planned shall make written
application for waiver of sewer use charges to the New Albany Sewer Board on
such form within 15 days after water service is first provided to the subject
property;



      (3)   The New Albany Sewer Board may grant a waiver from the
obligation to pay sewer use charges for the subject property for a period of
three months subsequent to the date on which water service is first provided
to the property. In the event that the waiver is granted, the New Albany
Sewer Board shall cause the sewer bill for the property to be adjusted in a
manner that will reflect a full credit for sewer and sanitation billing
during the period for which the waiver is granted; and



      (4)   The New Albany Sewer Board shall further have the
authority to extend such waiver on a month-to-month basis upon written
request by the owner and provided that the property is not occupied, but the
waiver shall not extend for a total period of more than six months. However,
if in the fourth, fifth or sixth month's water usage is greater than the
minimum billing usage, the Sewer Board shall not grant any additional
waivers. If no timely written request for extension is received, the waiver
shall lapse at the end of the then applicable waiver period and the property
shall not be eligible for the granting of further waivers.



(Ord. G-76-598, passed 3-1-1976; Ord. G-90-209, passed 2-6-1990; Ord.
G-91-255, passed 2-14-1991; Ord. G-93-147, passed 3-18-1993; Ord. G-98-240,
passed 4-16-1998; Ord. G-98-287, passed 12-9-1998; Ord. G-02-13, passed
5-6-2002; Ord. G-03-37, passed 5-15-2003; Ord. G-06-29, passed 8-29-2006;
Ord. G-10-13, passed 4-15-2010; Res. R-17-04, passed 3-16-2017)



§ 51.102  CONNECTION CHARGES.



   A "connection fee" shall be assessed for each new connection to the
city sanitary sewer system. The charge shall be made in all instances
regardless of whether the connection is to an existing city sanitary sewer or
is to a permitted extension of the sanitary sewer system. Connection fees
shall be calculated, assessed and collected as follows.



   (A)   Commencing on January 9, 2006, the connection fee for the
sanitary sewer connection of a single-family dwelling (hereinafter an
"equivalent dwelling unit" or "EDU") located within the corporate city limits
shall be $1,650.



   (B)   Commencing on January 6, 2006, the connection fee for the
sanitary sewer connection of a single-family dwelling or other EDU located
outside of the corporate city limits shall be $3,000.



   (C)   (1)   In the event that a sanitary sewer connection is made
from any multi-family residential, recreational, hospital, school,
commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure, the applicable
connection fee shall be calculated on a per-EDU basis based on:



         (a)   The then applicable rate under either division (A)
or (B) above; and



         (b)   The estimated flow in gallons per day from the
structure in accordance with the provisions of 327 I.A.C. 3-6-11.



      (2)   It shall be assumed that one EDU equals 310 gallons per
day. In the event that the connection fee calculation for a particular user
results in a fraction of an EDU, the connection fee shall be rounded to the
nearest whole EDU number, with a fraction of less than one-half being rounded
down, and a fraction of one-half or greater being rounded up. However, in no
event shall a connection be permitted with payment of a connection fee for
less than one EDU.



      (3)   If an applicant for a connection hereunder proposes a
multi-use facility such as a mall, office complex, or any other commercial
facility which may house multiple commercial entities, the categories of
which may change from time to time, the applicant for the connection shall,
with a reasonable degree of certainty, identify the specific use for each
individual office, store, or other commercial space within the facility, and
charges for the permit shall be based upon the collective anticipated uses of
the offices, stores or other commercial space within the facility.  Should
tenant changes occur, from time to time, in which the new tenant’s type of
business or commercial activity is significantly different form that of the
previous tenant, the applicant or owner of the multi-use facility is required
to report the changes to the city’s Utility Billing Office.  The Sewer
Board reserves the right to inspect and verify the actual uses of the
offices, stores, or other commercial entities.  The Sewer Board also
reserves the right to assess additional connection charges based upon the
actual category of business or other commercial activity being conducted on
such property at any given time.



   (D)   All connection fees shall be due and payable prior to
connection to the sanitary sewer system. If the connection fee established by
this section is not paid as required, a penalty in the amount of three times
the applicable connection fee may be assessed by the Sewer Board, and the
unpaid fee shall constitute a lien on the subject property pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-9-23-29 that may be enforced in the manner prescribed
by I.C. 36-9-23-34.



   (E)   In the event that an existing sanitary sewer connection is
proposed to be utilized by the owner to provide service to a new and/or
improved structure on any particular parcel of property, the Sewer Board
shall have the authority to waive the requirement that a connection fee be
paid for the parcel; provided that, the connection satisfactorily passes any
inspection required by the Sewer Board, and/or that the owner implements any
repairs to the connection required by the Sewer Board based on the
inspection, including without limitation, the installation of clean-outs as
required by § 51.059. In the event that it is determined that the existing
connection is deficient and cannot feasibly be repaired to the satisfaction
of the Sewer Board, a new sanitary sewer connection, with payment of the
applicable connection charge, shall be required.



   (F)   The proceeds of the connection fees collected under this
section may be used at the discretion of the Sewer Board as:



      (1)   Net revenues of the sewage works;



      (2)   Payment toward the cost of construction of the sewage
works; or



      (3)   Payment towards the cost of improving the sewage works
in the future.



   (G)   The connection fees established and set by this section shall
be in addition to any inspection, drainage or other fees established by
separate ordinance.



   (H)   This Council shall review the amount of the connection fees
established by this section from time to time as recommended by the Sewer
Board, or otherwise on an annual basis. This Council shall amend the amount
of the connection fees established by this section by an amending ordinance
as deemed appropriate following the recommendation and/or review.



(Ord. G-06-01, passed 1-9-2006; Ord. G-09-01, passed 1-5-2009)



§ 51.103  ANNUAL REVIEW OF RATE PROVISIONS.



   The city shall conduct an annual review of these rate provisions in
order that variations in the cost revenue pattern can be altered in an
equitable manner in the charges to all users.



(Ord. G-76-598, passed 3-1-1976; Ord. G-76-627, passed 10-4-1976; Ord.
G-80-840, passed 9-25-1980)



§ 51.104  PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   There shall be attached to the monthly sewer charges a 10% penalty per
month if the sewer charges are not paid on the due date thereof.



(Ord. G-80-840, passed 9-25-1980)



SEWER BOARD



§ 51.115  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   Authority. Pursuant to authority granted by I.C. 36-9-23-4,
the New Albany Sewer Board shall henceforth be established as a sanitary
board in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-23-4. The board
established by this section may hereinafter be referred to as either the "New
Albany Sanitary Board" or the "New Albany Sewer Board".



   (B)   Ratification of previous actions and determinations. All of
the actions and determinations previously taken or made by the New Albany
Sewer Board in administering the city wastewater collection, treatment and
disposal system are hereby ratified.



   (C)   Jurisdiction. The New Albany Sewer Board shall henceforth have
exclusive jurisdiction over the construction, acquisition, improvement,
operation and maintenance of sewage works within the city.



   (D)   Membership. The membership of the New Albany Sewer Board shall
hereinafter consist of the following:



      (1)   The Mayor of New Albany, or the Mayor's designee, who
shall serve as chairperson at all times during his or her tenure in such
office;



      (2)   Two members, appointed by majority vote of the members
of the Common Council, provided that one such member shall be the City
Engineer or a registered professional engineer, and further provided that
such non City Engineer person shall not be a paid or unpaid official or
employee of the city.



      (3)   The New Albany Sewer Board shall select a vice
chairperson.



   (E)   Quorum. A quorum at any properly convened regular or special
meeting of the New Albany Sewer Board shall consist of at least two members.



   (F)   Terms. The Common Council shall designate one of its
appointees to serve an initial term of two years, and the other appointee to
serve an initial term of three years.



   (G)   Compensation. The members of the New Albany Sewer Board shall
be entitled to such compensation as is fixed by the Mayor of New Albany,
subject to the approval of this Common Council. Each of the members of the
New Albany Sewer Board shall further be entitled to the payment for
reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, but such
compensation shall not exceed the sum of $1,200 annually per person ($100 per
month) annually unless approved by the Council before being incurred.



   (H)   Secretary and Treasurer.  The New Albany Sewer Board shall
select a secretary and a treasurer, who need not be members of the Board.
However, the Board may combine the offices of the secretary and treasurer
into a single office of secretary-treasurer. The secretary, treasurer, or
secretary-treasurer of the New Albany Sewer Board shall be entitled to
compensation as fixed by the Mayor of New Albany, subject to the approval of
this Common Council. This Common Council understands that the New Albany City
Clerk as its secretary and the New Albany City Controller as its Treasurer.



   (I)   Bond.



      (1)   This Common Council hereby determines that no bond shall
be required of the Mayor as chairperson of the New Albany Sewer Board.



      (2)   This Common Council hereby further hereby fixes the bond
required of the Mayor's designee and appointed members of the New Albany
Sewer Board in the amount of $5,000 each.



      (3)   This Common Council further hereby fixes the bond
required of the treasurer of the New Albany Sewer Board in the amount of
$20,000, provided that the requirement of such bond shall be waived if the
treasurer appointed by the New Albany Sewer Board is the City Controller.



      (4)   The City Clerk shall file all such bonds with the County
Recorder, as provided by I.C. 5-4-1-5.1.



   (J)   Rules, bylaws and regular meetings.



      (1)   The New Albany Sewer Board may establish rules and
bylaws for its own governance.



      (2)   The New Albany Sewer Board shall hold regular meetings
at least twice monthly, pursuant to schedule adopted by the New Albany Sewer
Board.



   (K)   Sanitary district not created. It is the specific finding and
intent of the Common Council that, notwithstanding the provisions of Ord.
G-96-105, the city be determined as not having created, either previously or
presently, a sanitary district under the control of a board of sanitary
commissioners pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-9-25 et seq.



(Ord. G-96-105, passed 3-13-1996; Ord. G-99-366, passed 12-16-1999; Ord.
A-04-07, passed 2-19-2004; Ord. G-08-03, passed 1-23-2008)



§ 51.116  DISPUTED CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The New Albany Sewer Board is hereby granted authority to
consider, determine and resolve disputes regarding the bills sent to the
city's sanitary sewer utility customers.



   (B)   Customers wishing to have a dispute determined shall first
contact the billing office staff of the New Albany Sewer Utility to determine
whether an administrative or clerical error has been made on the subject
bill(s) by IAWC or otherwise. In that event, the billing office staff is
authorized to take the actions reasonably necessary to correct the
administrative or clerical error.



   (C)   In the event that the billing office staff determines that the
disputed billing is not the result of any clerical or administrative error by
IAWC or otherwise, but the customer continues to demand adjustment to the
subject bill(s), the billing office staff shall have authority to consider,
determine and resolve the dispute as further authorized by the Board pursuant
to its adopted rules and procedures; provided, however, that, no adjustment
shall be granted by the billing office staff in excess of $200 in the
aggregate.



   (D)   In the event that the customer seeks an adjustment of his or
her bill in excess of the aggregate amount set forth in division (C) above
for any reason not related to clerical or administrative error, that request
shall be forwarded to the New Albany Sewer Board for its consideration. The
customer shall be given an opportunity to address the merits of his or her
contention at a regular or special meeting of the Board, and the subject
billing(s) may be affirmed or modified as determined by majority vote of the
Board.



   (E)   The Board shall within its reasonable discretion be entitled
to adopt such rules, regulations and procedures for addressing repeated
adjustments to the bills of sanitary sewer customers as it deems appropriate;
provided, however, that, no adjustment to a sanitary sewer bill shall be
granted on the basis that the water usage used to calculate the bill resulted
from water used to operate an irrigation system or swimming pool that was
first installed after April 1, 2005, unless the owner of the property on
which the irrigation system or swimming pool is installed causes a separate
meter to be installed solely for the purpose of measuring the water utilized
by the irrigation system or swimming pool. Furthermore, no adjustment shall
be granted on the basis that the water usage used to calculate the bill
resulted from water used to operate an irrigation system or swimming pool
after April 1, 2006, regardless of the date on which the irrigation system or
swimming pool was installed. After that date, any property owner seeking
relief from its sanitary sewer bill on account of water used by an irrigation
system or swimming pool shall obtain the relief solely by installation of a
separate meter.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall affect the manner in which the
Common Council or the New Albany Sewer Board administers any summer watering
program by which sanitary sewer use rates or bills may be reduced for
residential customers.



   (G)   The Clerk shall provide an executed copy of Ord. G-05-10 to
each of the following:



      (1)   John E. Eckart, President, Indiana-American Water
Company, Inc., P.O. Box 570, Greenwood, Indiana 46142;



      (2)   The Office of the New Albany Building Commissioner,
which office shall take all steps deemed reasonably necessary to advise
applicants for building permits of the restriction on sewer bill adjustments
set forth in division (E) above;



      (3)   Silver Creek Water Corporation;



      (4)   Borden Tri-County Water Corporation;



      (5)   Edwardsville Water Corporation;



      (6)   Floyds Knobs Water Company; and



      (7)   All irrigation and swimming pool companies listed in the
yellow pages for New Albany and surrounding areas.



(Ord. G-05-10, passed 3-8-2005)



§ 51.117  OPERATING RESERVE ACCOUNT.



   (A)   The Sewer Board is hereby granted authority to open and
maintain an operating reserve account into which the Controller shall
initially deposit the sum of $550,000 from the Sewer Utility's revenues. This
account shall be administered by, and under the control of, the Controller,
subject to the further terms, conditions and instructions established herein.



   (B)   The Controller shall open and maintain the operating reserve
account in an interest bearing account at a financial institution designated
by the Sewer Board; provided, however, that, institution must maintain an
office within the boundaries of the City or New Albany, Floyd County, Indiana.



   (C)   The Sewer Board may, from time to time as necessary, direct
the Controller to deposit additional Sewer Utility revenues into the
operating reserve account as deemed necessary to satisfy any and all
conditions of the previously issued bonds. The Sewer Board shall further be
authorized to allocate, transfer or expend amounts from the operating reserve
account by written approval of claims or transfers by the Sewer Board in the
manner and form prescribed by Indiana law; provided, however, that, the
balance within this account shall not be reduced below the amount required to
comply with any then existing bond covenants. The Controller shall disburse
funds from the operating reserve account except in compliance with the terms
of this section.



(Ord. G-05-25, passed 6-6-2005)



§ 51.118  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted by I.C. 36-4-6-18, the Sewer
Board will submit an annual itemized budget for review to the Common Council
no later than July 15 of each calendar year. All operational and project
expenses will be included in presented budget.



   (B)   Pursuant to authority granted by I.C. 36-4-6-18 the Sewer
Board will prepare and present detailed plans and preparations to the Common
Council for planned sewer project work to be initiated and completed inside
the county 30 days before start up. All emergency projects and costs will be
reported to the Council meeting immediately following the emergency.
Contractor selection and finalized construction cost will be included in
reports.



   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-21 the Sewer Board will provide
bi-annual documented progress reports to the Common Council regarding
agreements with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and all amended
"consent" regulation. These reports will be presented to the Common Council
on July 15 and December 15 respectively.



(Ord. G-06-39, passed 9-21-2006)



SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS



§ 51.125  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE. Compliance with the provisions of the subchapter set forth
herein, any amendments thereto and/or the provisions of this subchapter.



   COUNCIL. The Common Council for the City of New Albany, Indiana.



   EMPLOYEES. Employees or designated representatives or officials of the
New Albany Wastewater Treatment facility as the Council shall, from time to
time, designate and utilize in making the inspection and/or tests hereafter
described and in carrying out the other duties as prescribed herein to be
performed on behalf of the city.



   SUMP PUMP. A building subdrain which discharges into a sump or
receiving tank the contents of which are lifted and discharged into the
drainage system or sewer system.



   SYSTEM. All of the facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing for sewage owned by the city within the sanitary sewer service are
of the city.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof
runoff, foundation drainage, yard drains or other subsurface drainage to any
sanitary sewer.



   USER. The owner, lessee or occupant of the property on which the
building and/or appurtenances that are connected to the system are located.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996)



§ 51.126  COMPLIANCE.



   All users of the sanitary sewage treatment and collection system of the
city shall, on or before November 4, 1996, bring themselves into voluntary
compliance with the terms and conditions of the ordinances of the city,
particularly § 51.075 which prohibits discharge of stormwater and other
unpolluted water into the sanitary sewer system, and governing connection to
and use of the sanitary sewage treatment and collection system of the city,
including, but not limited to, the requirements of the subchapter set forth
herein.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996)



§ 51.127  INSPECTION.



   Upon expiration of the term provided for in § 51.126, a user of the
system may avoid the imposition of levy of additional charges with regard to
the use by presenting proof of compliance and continuing compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter and any amendments thereto, which proof shall
consist of and include compliance with the following procedures and
conditions as to each building and/or appurtenance connected to the system:



   (A)   A card shall be issued by an official of the Wastewater
Department or one of its designated employees, and each user shall, within
ten business days, for each building or appurtenance connected to the system
return the reply card and designate "yes" or "no" regarding the "consent to
inspection" to the city, to permit entry upon the property served by the
system on which the building and/or appurtenances are located, to inspect
and/or perform such tests as may be deemed necessary by the city, to verify
and prove compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, and any
amendments thereto (see in Appendix "A" of Ord. G-96-131 relay card "consent
to inspection").



   (B)   The consent to inspection shall be deemed to include the right
of periodic inspections and/or tests thereafter, as may be reasonably
determined to be necessary by the city, to maintain, monitor and ensure
continued compliance with the provisions of the city's ordinances and any
amendments thereto.



   (C)   Once a reply card with a consent to inspection has been
executed, it shall be deemed to be an ongoing authorization as provided for
herein and it may not be revoked by the original grantor. The reply card
shall be sent by city officials with a list of pre-approved bonded plumbing
inspectors and the user may use the City Inspector at no cost to the user or
the user may select from the list an approved inspector and return notice of
the user's choice of inspector. If the user appoints an inspector from the
pre-approved list, the user shall pay the inspection costs. However, if the
user refuses to select from the pre-approved list of inspectors and chooses
an independent licensed plumber, the independent inspector must be approved
by the city officials and all costs for inspection shall be paid by the user.



   (D)   Reasonable written notice of at least 24 hours shall be given
by the city officials or designated employees to the user of the time and
place at which the inspections and/or test provided for herein are to be made
and the inspector designated for inspection.



   (E)   Inspectors shall be certified, licensed and bonded plumbers
who shall qualify through the city. A list of approved inspectors shall be
made available by the city officials.



   (F)   There shall be no fees charged for any inspections and/or
tests conducted and performed by the designated representatives.



   (G)   In the event a user executes the consent to inspection, and
the city determines after inspection that the building and/or appurtenances
are in compliance, no additional charges shall be imposed or levied upon the
user; provided, however, that, the city shall have the right and authority,
pursuant to the consent to inspection executed as required hereby and the
terms of this subchapter, to conduct additional inspections and/or tests at a
later date to determine continuing compliance.



   (H)   If the user refuses to execute a consent to inspection, the
user may sign an affidavit swearing and attesting that the residence has no
illegal connection prohibited by ordinance. Any violation found on the
residence shall result in a $1,000 one-time additional charge if the illegal
connection is discovered up to five years after the affidavit is signed or a
$2,000 additional charge if the illegal connection is discovered more than
five years after the affidavit is signed. All charges shall be assessed to
the sewer bill.



   (I)   A user who fails or refuses to execute a consent to inspection
to the city and fails to execute an affidavit of compliance for the purposes
provided herein shall be charged an amount of $25 for each month the user
fails to return or refuses to execute a consent to inspection. All charges
shall be assessed to the sewer bill.



   (J)   In the event the city has determined through inspections or
other tests that the buildings and/or appurtenances of the user are not in
compliance, the city, by its designated employee, shall provide written
notice of the results of the inspection and/or tests to the user, who shall
be required to permanently comply with the applicable provisions of this
subchapter within 120 days of the date of the notice.



   (K)   (1)   In the event the building and/or appurtenances of the
user are determined not to be in compliance with the subchapter set forth
herein and any amendments thereto, and the time period of 120 days for
correction expires, and the user refuses or fails to bring the building
and/or appurtenances into compliance with the ordinance, the user shall be
fined an amount of $100 a day. Each day shall constitute a violation
hereunder. If seven or more violations occur the Sewer Board may, in its
discretion, disconnect the user from the sanitary sewer system.



      (2)   If a user's service has been disconnected under this
section, the user shall be responsible for all cost of connection and repairs
needed to bring the property into compliance.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996; Ord. G-98-262, passed 9-18-1998; Ord.
G-99-331, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 51.128  FINE FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.



   In the event a user is found to be in compliance and subsequent
inspections and/or tests determine that non-compliance now exists, all terms
and provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable. The user shall be
liable for knowingly, willfully and/or intentionally creating or permitting
the violation to commence and continue, and may be fined in an amount
$2,500/month to be assessed on sewer bill until proof of compliance is made
by the user.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996; Ord. G-98-262, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 51.129  ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY.



   (A)   Upon sale or transfer of real estate connected to the sanitary
sewer, an inspection must be performed to determine compliance with this
chapter for a fee set forth in § 158.05, Sewer Permits, Fees and
Inspections. Certification of compliance with this subchapter must be
submitted by a City Inspector or licensed plumber within 60 days of receipt
of notice of the required inspection.



   (B)   In the event of non-compliance, applicable charges as under §
51.127(I) and (K) shall be assessed to the sewer bill and become a lien upon
the property.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996; Ord. G-98-262, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 51.130  NON-REVERTING SEWER FUND.



   (A)   All additional charges set forth in this subchapter, are
charges for the cost of transporting and treating stormwater, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage and other unauthorized water
to the sanitary sewer.



   (B)   All such charges shall be placed in the non-reverting sewer
fund and be used for purposes of improving and maintaining the city sewer
system.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996; Ord. G-98-262, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 51.131  LIABILITY OF USER.



   Any user violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
liable to the city for any expenses, costs and fees, including, but not
limited to, reasonable attorney fees, occasioned or caused to the city by
reason of seeking enforcement of such ordinances against the violator, as
well as for any losses or damages occasioned or caused to the city of the
system's users by reason of the violation.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996)



§ 51.132  COMMON COUNCIL POWERS.



   (A)   The Common Council shall have full power and authority to
invoke any legal, equitable or special remedy for the enforcement of this
subchapter.



   (B)   In addition, the Common Council is hereby authorized to
institute proceedings on behalf of the city in the Circuit or Superior Court
of Floyd County, Indiana, for prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief to
prevent or discontinue any violations of this subchapter.



(Ord. G-96-131, passed 8-15-1996)



RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



§ 51.145  APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   This subchapter shall apply within the incorporated limits of
the City of New Albany, Indiana, and, except as may be otherwise expressly
set forth herein, shall apply only to those dwellings and commercial
facilities which are not presently served by or will not be connected to a
sanitary sewerage system. The applicability of this subchapter to commercial
on-site wastewater disposal facilities is expressly limited to those for
which the Floyd Health Department shall have jurisdiction to issue
construction permits.



   (B)   The administration and enforcement of this subchapter is
vested in the Floyd County Health Board appointed pursuant to I.C. 16-20-2-6,
the Floyd County Health Officer appointed pursuant to I.C. 16-20-2-16, and
the Floyd County Health Department created and established pursuant to I.C.
16-20-2-2.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.146  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply.



      COMMERCIAL FACILITY. Any structure or place intended for human
occupation, use, or commerce, other than a dwelling, including such
facilities as apartment buildings, campgrounds, churches, commercial
establishments, condominiums, medical facilities, mobile home parks, motels,
office buildings, restaurants and schools.



      COMMERCIAL ON-SITE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITY. All equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection storage, treatment
and on-site disposal of wastewater from other than one or two family
dwellings.



      COMMERCIAL RULE 410. Indiana State Department of Health Rule 410
I.A.C. 6-10 et seq., effective as of the date of this subchapter, as
thereafter amended and supplemented.



      DEPARTMENT. The Floyd County Health Department, being an agency
of local government, created and acting pursuant to the provisions of I.C.
16-20 et seq., and its duly authorized employees and representatives.



      DWELLING. Any house or structure or place used or intended to be
used as a place of seasonal or permanent human habitation or for sleeping for
one or two families. The term RESIDENCE shall be used interchangeably with
the term DWELLING.



      HEALTH BOARD. The Floyd County Board of Health duly constituted
and acting pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 16-20 et seq., and its duly
authorized representatives.



      HEALTH OFFICER. The Floyd County Health Officer duly appointed by
the Floyd County Board of Health and acting pursuant to the provisions of
I.C. 16-20 et seq., and his or her duly authorized representatives.



      OWNER. The holder of the fee simple title to a dwelling or
commercial facility, or the holder of equitable title thereto in the event
that the contract creating such equitable title confers exclusive possession
of and the obligation to maintain the dwelling or commercial facility, or the
agent of either.



      PERSON. An individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation,
firm, company, association, society, holding company, trustee, school
corporation, school city, school town, school district and unit of
government, or any other legal entity, or their successors or assigns, or
agent of the aforesaid.



      RESIDENTIAL RULE. Indiana State Department of Health Rule 410
I.A.C. 6-8.1 et seq., effective as of the date of this subchapter, as
thereafter amended and supplemented.



      RESIDENTIAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. All equipment and devices
necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment and on-site
disposal of sewage from a one- or two-family dwelling.



      SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM. A sewer or system of sewers which convey
sewage away from the lot on which it originates to a wastewater treatment
facility owned and operated by an incorporated city or town, conservancy
district, regional sewer district or private utility.



      SEWAGE. All water-carried waste derived from ordinary living
processes. The term WASTE WATER shall be used interchangeably with the term
SEWAGE.



   (B)   The definitions set forth in this subchapter, together with
those found in Residential Rule 410, Commercial Rule 410 and Indiana State
Department of Health Bulletin S.E. 13, shall be used in the application,
interpretation and enforcement of this subchapter, and each definition shall
be deemed to apply equally to a residential sewage disposal system or
commercial on-site wastewater disposal facility, unless the application of a
word, term or phrase only to a particular system, facility or rule is clearly
indicated.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.147  HEALTH HAZARD DECLARED.



   (A)   A failed residential sewage disposal system or failed
commercial on-site waste water disposal facility is hereby declared to be a
health hazard and nuisance.



   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, a sewage disposal system or
facility shall be deemed to have failed when:



      (1)   The system refuses to accept sewage at a rate of design
application thereby interfering with the normal use of plumbing fixtures;



      (2)   Effluent discharge exceeds the absorptive capacity of
the soil, resulting in ponding, seepage or other discharge of the effluent to
the ground or surface waters; or



      (3)   Effluent is discharged from the system or facility
causing contamination of a potable water supply, ground water or surface
waters.



   (C)   With respect to a failed sewage disposal system, the Health
Board shall issue such orders, pursuant to § 51.155 of this chapter, as it
shall deem necessary and appropriate for the abatement of the resulting
health hazard, subject only to the express limitations set forth in
Residential Rule 410.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.148  RIGHT ON ENTRY.



   (A)   The Health Board, the Health Officer and the duly authorized
representatives of each, may enter upon public or private property at
reasonable times and upon presentation of credentials to inspect facilities,
equipment or records, investigate allegations, determine soil
characteristics, conduct tests or collect samples for the purpose of
obtaining information necessary to the issuance of a permit pursuant to this
subchapter, Residential Rule 410, or Commercial Rule 410, or to determine
whether any person is subject to, or in violation of this subchapter or the
Rules or any permit or license issued pursuant thereto.



   (B)   Except in an emergency declared by the Health Officer or
Health Board, due notice of an intent to enter a residential or commercial
building shall be given.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.149  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person shall throw, run, drain, seep or otherwise dispose
into any of the surface waters of Floyd County, or cause, permit or suffer to
be thrown, run, drained, allowed to seep or otherwise disposed into such
waters, any organic or inorganic matter from a dwelling or commercial
facility or from a residential sewage disposal system or commercial on-site
wastewater disposal facility that would cause or contribute to a health
hazard or water pollution.



   (B)   No person shall commence or allow the construction of a
dwelling, or placement of a mobile home, or the construction of a commercial
facility without first having obtained a written permit for the construction
of a sewage disposal system.



   (C)   No person shall commence or allow the replacement,
reconstruction, expansion or remodeling of a residence which may increase the
number of bedrooms without first having obtained a written permit for the
addition to, replacement or alteration of the existing residential sewage
disposal system.



   (D)   No person shall cause or allow a change in occupancy or use of
any facility served by a commercial on-site wastewater disposal facility if
such change would result in wastewater flow on the peak day in excess of the
permitted capacity of the disposal facility, or if it would result in
wastewater being generated of a type incompatible with absorption field
disposal, without first having obtained a construction permit for appropriate
modification of the subject wastewater disposal facility.



   (E)   No person shall cause or allow the construction of any
outbuilding or the installation of any swimming pool, geothermal heat system,
underground utility connection or underground lawn sprinkler system in
association with an existing residence or commercial facility without first
obtaining a site approval permit for the construction.



   (F)   No person shall construct, install, replace, alter, modify,
repair or add to a residential sewage disposal system and no owner shall
knowingly suffer or allow any such system to be installed, replaced, altered,
modified, repaired or added to except in accordance with the duly issued
construction permit, the terms and provisions of Residential Rule 410, and
this subchapter.



   (G)   No person shall construct, install, replace, alter, modify,
repair or add to a commercial on-site wastewater disposal facility, and no
owner knowingly suffer or allow any such facility to be installed, replaced,
altered, modified, repaired or added to except in accordance with the duly
issued construction permit, the terms and provisions of Commercial Rule 410
and/or Indiana State Department of Health Bulletin S.E. 13, and this
subchapter.



   (H)   No person shall construct or install or thereafter replace,
alter, modify or repair a residential sewage disposal system without first
having been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (I)   No person shall construct or install or thereafter replace,
alter, modify or repair a commercial on-site wastewater disposal facility,
over which the Floyd County Health Department has jurisdiction for the
issuance of a construction permit, without first having been issued a license
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (J)   No person, having received a written order from the Health
Officer of the Health Board pertaining to a violation of this subchapter or
the terms, provisions, conditions or limitations of any permit or license
issued hereunder, shall fail or refuse to comply with the terms and
provisions of the order within the time limit specified therein.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.150  RESIDENTIAL PERMITS.



   (A)   Applications for permits for the construction, installation,
replacement, alteration, repair of or addition to, a residential sewage
disposal system shall be submitted by the owner or agent of the owner upon
forms provided by the Department, shall contain such information as is
required by Residential Rule 410 and/or deemed necessary by the Health
Officer, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee payable to the
Department, as the fee may be established from time to time by the County
Council of the City of New Albany.



   (B)   Construction permits for residential sewage disposal systems
shall be issued by the Health Officer only upon a determination that the
proposed system, or the alteration, repair of, or addition to an existing
system, complies with the requirements, terms and provisions of Residential
Rule 410, this subchapter, and the following:



      (1)   The terms and provisions of Residential Rule 410 and
Indiana State Department of Health Bulletin S.E. 11 to the contrary,
notwithstanding, permits for the construction or installation of permanent
privies, to include sanitary vault privies, shall not be issued.



      (2)   The terms and provisions of Residential Rule 410 to the
contrary, notwithstanding, no septic tank having a capacity of fewer than
1,000 gallons and no soil absorption system containing less than 400 lineal
feet of pipe shall be installed.



      (3)   The Health Officer may specify in the construction
permit any limitations, term or condition necessary to provide a functional,
easily operated, enduring residential sewage disposal system in accordance
with Residential Rule 410, or to prevent a health hazard, nuisance, surface
water pollution or groundwater pollution.



      (4)   Subsurface gravity feed residential sewage disposal
systems for duplex dwelling shall be separate for each dwelling unit. For
design system, the absorption area shall be computed using the following
formula are:



 


  150g x l + no. of bedrooms and bedroom equivalents 




loading rate in gpd/sq. ft.




 



      (5)   A construction permit shall expire on the last day of
the thirty-sixth month following the month of permit issuance, unless the
applicant has commenced the activity for which the permit was issued on or
before the date of permit expiration; provided, a permit issued pursuant to
this section shall be deemed amended and supplemented to include the terms,
conditions and requirement of this subchapter, and any amendments thereof,
effective as of the date of commencement of the activity.



   (C)   Site approval permits for the construction of any outbuilding
or the installation of any swimming pool, geothermal heat system, underground
utility connection or underground lawn sprinkler system shall be issued upon:



      (1)   Proper application of the owner or the agent of the
owner on forms furnished by the Department;



      (2)   The payment of the fee established by the Common Council
of the City of New Albany, from time to time; and



      (3)   A determination by the Health Officer that the proposed
location of such construction or installation conforms with Residential Rule
410, and shall not damage the residential sewage disposal system or interfere
with its proper operation.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.151  COMMERCIAL PERMITS.



   (A)   Application for permits for the construction, installation,
replacement, alteration, repair of, or addition to, a commercial on-site
wastewater disposal facility, shall be upon forms provided by the Indiana
State Department of Health and shall be submitted to the state's Department
as permitted and required by Commercial Rule 410. In the event that the
Indiana State Department of Health shall determine that the Floyd County
Health Department shall have jurisdiction over the review of the application
and the issuance of a construction permit, the owner or agent of the owner
will be advised by letter.



   (B)   Construction permits for commercial on-site wastewater
disposal facilities over which the Department has jurisdiction shall be
issued in accordance with this subchapter. Commercial Rule 410 and Indiana
Department of Health Bulletin S.E. 13, provided, that references in the Rule
and Bulletin to the "Board" or "State Board of Health" shall be interpreted
to mean the Floyd County Board of Health and references therein to the
"Commissioner" shall be interpreted to mean the Floyd County Health Officer.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.152  PERMIT DENIAL.



   (A)   An application for a construction permit for a residential
sewage disposal system may be denied by the Health Officer for the following
causes:



      (1)   Any misrepresentation made in the application;



      (2)   Failure of the owner or the agent of the owner to
respond to a request for information from the Health Officer within 30 days
of receiving the request;



      (3)   A sanitary sewerage system of adequate capacity is
available for connection at a construction cost estimated by the Health
Officer not to exceed 150% of the cost estimated by the Health Officer for
installing a residential sewage disposal system; or



      (4)   Failure to show that the residential sewage disposal
system can be constructed, operated, maintained, or abandoned in compliance
with Residential Rule 410.



   (B)   If a permit is denied by the Health Officer, the applicant
shall be given notice in writing which notice shall set forth the basis for
denial and the fact that a petition for review may be filed in accordance
with § 51.156 of this subchapter.



   (C)   Denial of a permit for the construction of a commercial
on-site wastewater disposal facility shall be as permitted by Commercial Rule
410.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.153  PERMIT REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION.



   (A)   A construction permit for a residential sewage disposal system
may be revoked or modified by the Health Board for any of the following
causes:



      (1)   Violation of Residential Rule 410 or this subchapter:



      (2)   Violation of any limitation, term or condition contained
in the construction permit: or



      (3)   Failure to disclose all facts relevant to the
construction and use of the disposal system or any misrepresentation
contained in the application for a construction permit.



   (B)   If a permit is modified or revoked by the Health Board, the
permittee shall be given notice in writing, which notice shall set forth the
basis for the modification or revocation and the fact that a petition for
review may be filed in accordance with § 51.156 of this subchapter.



   (C)   A construction permit for a commercial on-site wastewater
disposal system may be revoked or modified by the Health Board for a
violation of this subchapter or as otherwise permitted by Commercial Rule 410.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.154  LICENSES.



   (A)   Application for a license to construct, install, replace,
alter, modify or repair a residential sewage disposal system or commercial
on-site wastewater disposal facility shall be submitted upon forms provided
by the Department and shall be accompanied by the fee established by the
Common Council of the City of New Albany, from time to time. The application
shall disclose the type of license requested, namely, residential, commercial
or combination.



   (B)   (1)   No license shall be issued by the Department unless
the applicant has demonstrated a working knowledge of the laws, rules and
regulation pertaining to the type of system for which a license is to be
issued namely;



         (a)   Residential Rule 410 and this subchapter for a
residential license;



         (b)   Commercial Rule 410, Indiana State Department of
Health Bulletin S.E. 13, and this subchapter for a commercial license; or



         (c)   Residential Rule 410, Commercial Rule 410,
Bulletin S.E. 13 and this subchapter for a combination license.



      (2)   Minimum required knowledge shall be demonstrated by a
score of at least 82% on a standardized written proficiency examination to be
administered by the Department; provided that, in the event that the reading
or language skills of the applicant would preclude the use of a written
examination, an oral exam may be given by the Department; and further
provided that, if the applicant is not a natural person, the examination
shall be administered to a designated representative who shall be an officer,
partner, official or employee of the applicant.



   (C)   The following terms and conditions shall apply to a license
and the issuance thereof under this section.



      (1)   A license shall expire on the anniversary of its
issuance.



      (2)   If a license is continually renewed, re-examination
shall not be required.



      (3)   Opportunity for re-examination shall be afforded persons
failing to pass the license exam, but not more frequently than once every 30
days.



      (4)   The standardized examination may be revised by the
Department, from time to time and more than one comparable version may be
administered.



      (5)   A list of those persons holding a valid license under
this section may be made available to the public.



      (6)   A licensee may be required by the Health Officer to
attend one educational class or program annually pertaining to sewage
disposal to be conducted by the Department of the Indiana State Department of
Health.



   (D)   A license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked if the licensee shall be found by the Health Officer to have
committed any act prohibited by § 51.149 of this subchapter, any act that
might result in the denial or revocation of a construction permit issued
hereunder, or violated any term or provision of this subchapter, to include
Residential Rule 410, Commercial Rule 410 and Indiana State Department of
Health Bulletin S.E. 13 pertaining to the system or facility for which the
license was issued. Notice of suspension or revocation shall be in writing,
shall specify the acts or violations committed, and shall be served upon the
licensee as permitted by division (A) of § 51.155 of this subchapter.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.155  ORDERS OF THE HEALTH OFFICER AND BOARD.



   (A)   Any person found to be violating this subchapter to include
the terms, conditions, provisions and limitations of any permit or license
issued hereunder, may be served by the Health Officer with a written notice
and order stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. A written notice and order
under this section shall be served upon the person to whom directed by
personal delivery, certified mail or otherwise as a summons may be served
under the Indiana Rule of Civil Procedure.



   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the written order of the
Health Officer or the Health Board issued under this section shall, by such
failure, violate division (J) of § 51.149 of this subchapter, which
violation shall be separate from and in addition to any violation giving rise
to or prompting the issuance of the written order.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-97)



§ 51.156  PETITION FOR REVIEW.



   (A)   (1)   Within 30 days following the date of:



         (a)   Receipt of an issued permit, notice of permit
denial, notice of permit modification, or notice of permit revocation
pertaining to a residential sewage disposal system;



         (b)   Issuance or denial of a site approval permit; or



         (c)   Issuance, denial or revocation of a license, or
within 15 days of the receipt of an order of the Health Officer or Health
Board issued pursuant to § 51.155 of this subchapter, any person aggrieved
by the action may file a petition for review with the Health Board.



      (2)   A petition for review shall:



         (a)   State the name and address of the person making
the request (petitioner);



         (b)   Identify the interest of the petitioner which is
affected by the action complained of;



         (c)   Identify any persons whom the petitioner
represents;



         (d)   State with particularity the reason(s) for the
request; and



         (e)   Set forth the relief requested.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a timely petition for review, the Health Board
shall, at its next scheduled regular meeting, or at an earlier special
meeting to be called, conduct a hearing into the matters addressed by the
petition, and shall take such action thereon, if any, as it shall deem
necessary and appropriate. Upon the mutual agreement of the petitioner and
the Health Board, the hearing may be conducted in accordance with the
procedures set forth in I.C. 4-21.5 et seq., being the Administrative
Procedures and Orders Act.



   (C)   A petition for review with respect to an issued permit, permit
modification, notice of permit denial or notice of permit revocation for a
commercial on-site wastewater disposal facility shall be in accordance with
Commercial Rule 410.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.157  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement of this subchapter as against a person violating
the terms and provisions of same shall be in accordance with the provisions
of I.C. 34-28-5. An action to enforce this subchapter shall be brought in the
name of the Health Officer or the Health Board, as appropriate, and upon
proof by a preponderance of the evidence of a violation hereof, judgment
shall be entered against the defendant for a sum of not less than $100 for
each violation. A separate violation of this subchapter shall be deemed to
occur for each day that a person shall be in violation of the terms and
provisions hereof. No action under this division shall be commenced, however,
with respect to a violation for which a petition for review is pending under
§ 51.156 hereof.



   (B)   In addition to the remedy set forth in division (A) of this
section, an action may be brought for mandatory or injunctive relief as
against any person violating the terms and provisions of this subchapter,
which action shall be brought in the name of the Health Officer or Health
Board, as appropriate, but only after notice of violation has been given as
permitted by division (A) of § 51.155 of this subchapter. Except in an
emergency expressly declared by the Health Board, no action under this
division shall be commenced with respect to a violation for which a petition
for review is pending under § 51.156 hereof.



   (C)   To the extent permitted by law and this subchapter, an action
under division (A) of this section may be joined with an action under
division (B), and to any judgment in favor of the Health Officer and/or
Health Board shall be added costs of the action, reasonable attorney fees,
and expenses incurred by the Department in the enforcement of this subchapter.



   (D)   In all actions under this subchapter, the Health Board and/or
the Health Officer shall be represented by the attorney retained by the
Health Board pursuant to I.C. 16-20-1-1.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.158  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Unless and until Indiana State Board of Health Rule 410 I.A.C.
6-8.1 is amended to include an express provision pertaining to the proper
abandonment of septic tanks, holding tanks, drywells or sanitary vault
privies, any owner who shall discontinue use of a septic tank, holding tank,
drywell or sanitary vault privy shall cause same to be pumped by a licensed
septic tank hauler and shall either:



      (1)   Remove the structure from the ground; or



      (2)   Open and fill same with sand or clean fill in a manner
approved by the Health Officer.



   (B)   Indiana State Board of Health Rules 410 I.A.C. 6-8.1 and 410
I.A.C. 6-10, together with Bulletin S.E. 13, as each such rule and Bulletin
may be amended and supplemented from time to time, are incorporated herein by
reference and made a part of this subchapter. To the extent that these rules
may be found to be inconsistent with one another or with Bulletin S.E. 13
Rule I.A.C. 6-8.1 shall be deemed to apply only to residential sewage
disposal systems and Rule I.A.C. 6-10 and Bulletin S.E. 13 only to commercial
on-site wastewater disposal facilities. Any inconsistency between the Rules
and Bulletin and this subchapter shall be resolved against this subchapter
unless the inconsistent provision hereof is more restrictive than the
provision of the Rules or Bulletin.



   (C)   Should any term or provision of this subchapter be declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the
determination shall not affect the remainder of this chapter which shall
remain in full force and effect.



   (D)   In the interpretation and application of this subchapter, the
masculine form shall mean and apply to the feminine and the singular form
shall mean and apply to the plural. The title thereof and those of all
sections of this subchapter shall be disregarded.



   (E)   Any provisions of any subchapter, rule or regulation
heretofore adopted by the Common Council of New Albany, Indiana, which is
inconsistent or in conflict with this subchapter is hereby repealed.



(Ord. G-97-208, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions in this chapter for which
another penalty has been provided, beyond the time limit provided in §
51.006, shall be fined not more than $10 for each violation. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any person violating this
chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of the violation.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 51.002(A), 51.022
through 51.027, 51.029, 51.031 through 51.034 and 51.050, shall, for a first
offense, be fined not more than $100; for the second offense, the person
shall be fined not more than $300; for the third and each subsequent offense,
the person shall be fined not more than $500, to which may be added
imprisonment for any determinate period of not more than 90 days. Each day
after the expiration of the time limit for abating unsanitary conditions and
completing improvements to abate the conditions as ordered by the Health
Officer, or his or her agent, shall constitute a distinct and separate
offense.



   (C)   Every person responsible for violations of § 51.077 shall be
liable for up to $5,000 per day for each violation. If more than two
violations occur within one year, the Sewer Board may, in its discretion,
disconnect the establishment from the sanitary sewer system.



(Ord. G-58-34, passed 6-18-1958; Ord. G-67-293, passed 6-5-1967; Ord.
G-99-330, passed 6-17-1999; Ord. G-00-67, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. G-01-26,
passed 8-6-2001)  Penalty, see § 51.999



CHAPTER 52:  WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Purpose and policy



   52.002   Administration



   52.003   Abbreviations



   52.004   Definitions



General Sewer Use Requirements



   52.005   Prohibited discharge standards



   52.006   National categorical pretreatment standards



   52.007   State pretreatment standards



   52.008   Local limits



   52.009   City's right of revision



   52.010   Dilution



   52.011   Pretreatment facilities



   52.012   Water pollution treatment control facility



   52.013   Additional pretreatment



   52.014   Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans



   52.015   Wastewater analysis



   52.016   Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement



   52.017   Individual wastewater discharge permitting; existing
connections



   52.018   Individual wastewater discharge permitting; new connections



   52.019   Individual wastewater discharge permit application contents



   52.020   Application signatories and certifications



   52.021   Individual wastewater discharge permit decisions



   52.022   Individual wastewater discharge permit duration



   52.023   Individual wastewater discharge permit contents



   52.024   Permit issuance process



   52.025   Permit modification



   52.026   Individual wastewater discharge permit transfer



   52.027   Individual wastewater discharge permit revocation



   52.028   Individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance



   52.029   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions



   52.030   Baseline monitoring reports



   52.031   Compliance schedule progress reports



   52.032   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   52.033   Periodic compliance reports



   52.034   Reports of changed conditions



   52.035   Reports of potential problems



   52.036   Reports from unpermitted users



   52.037   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   52.038   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   52.039   Analytical requirements



   52.040   Sample collection



   52.041   Date of receipt of reports



   52.042   Recordkeeping



   52.043   Certification statements



   52.044   Right of entry; inspection and sampling



   52.045   Confidential information



   52.046   Publication of users in significant noncompliance



Administrative Enforcement Remedies



   52.047   Notification of violation



   52.048   Administrative orders



   52.049   Show cause hearing



   52.050   Compliance schedule



   52.051   Cease and desist orders



   52.052   Administrative fines



   52.053   Emergency suspensions



   52.054   Termination of discharge



   52.055   Injunctive relief



   52.056   Civil penalties



   52.057   Criminal prosecution



   52.058   Remedies nonexclusive



   52.059   Penalties for late reports



   52.060   Performance bonds



   52.061   Liability insurance



   52.062   Payment of outstanding fees and penalties



   52.063   Water supply severance



   52.064   Public nuisances



   52.065   Contractor listing



   52.066   Upset



   52.067   Prohibited discharge standards



   52.068   Bypass



Miscellaneous Provisions



   52.069   Pretreatment charges and fees



   52.070   Severability



   52.071   Right of appeal



   52.072   Conflict



   52.073   Effective date



   Appendix A:   Toxic pollutants



   Appendix B:   Local limits



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly owned treatment Works (POTW) for the civil city and enables the
civil city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
that will interfere with its operation;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
that will pass through the POTW inadequately treated, into receiving waters,
or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;



      (3)   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public;



      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the POTW;



      (5)   To enable the civil city to comply with its national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use,
and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
POTW is subject.



   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW.  The
chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits;
provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for
the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from
the program established herein.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.002  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.  Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated
by the Superintendent to a duly authorized city employee.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:



   BOD.  Biochemical oxygen demand.



   BMP.  Best management practice.



   BMR.  Baseline monitoring report.



   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.



   CIU.  Categorical industrial user.



   COD.  Chemical oxygen demand.



   EPA.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



   GPD.  Gallons per day.



   IU. Industrial user.



   mg/l.  Milligrams per liter.



   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   NSCIU.  Non-significant categorical industrial user.



   O and M.  Operation and maintenance.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works,



   RCRA.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



   SIU.  Significant industrial user.



   SNC.  Significant noncompliance.



   TSS.  Total suspended solids.



   U.S.C. United States Code.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT.  The federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean 155 Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The regional water management division director,
or the regional administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or
other duly authorized official of said agency.



   AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



      (1)   If the user is a corporation:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided that the manager is authorized
to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major
capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to
sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility,
or his or her designee.



      (4)   The individuals described in subdivisions (1) through
(3) of this definition, above, may designate a duly authorized representative
if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is
submitted to the City.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (for
example, mg/l).



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in this chapter.  BMPs
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD.  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that
apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471.



   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER.  An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.



   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.



   COMPLIANCE OFFICER.  The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent.



   CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The civil city and its designated agents.



   CITY.  The civil city or the City Council.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD.  A measure of the oxygen required to
oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.



   DAILY DISCHARGE.  Industrial process wastewater discharged to the
collection system during any calendar day.



   DAILY MAXIMUM.  The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.



   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT.  The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day.  Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed
in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of
the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management
Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized
official of said agency.



   EXISTING SOURCE.  Any source of discharge that is not a new source.



   GARBAGE.  Any solid wastes from preparation, cooking, or dispensing of
food or from the handling, storage, or sale of produce.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The introduction of pollutants into
the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under the Clean Water Act, §
307(b), (c), or (d).



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or from the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources.



   INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT.  The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed
to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use, or
disposal, and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit
or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any
of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.



   LOCAL LIMIT.  Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and
specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 C.F.R. 403.5(a)(1) and (b).



   MAXIMUM DAILY DISCHARGE LIMITATION.  The highest concentration or mass
allowable of a pollutant for any calendar day or any 24-hour period that
reasonably represents the calendar day for purposes of sampling.



   MAY.  Is permissive.



   MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   MONTHLY AVERAGE.  The sum of all daily discharges measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that
month.



   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT.  The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily
discharges measured during that month.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.  In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of subdivision (1)(b) or (c) of this
definition above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process
or production equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this
definition has commenced if the owner or operator has:



         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous
onsite construction program:



            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this paragraph.



   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling that does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   NPDES.  National pollutant discharge elimination system permit as
administered through the EPA.



   OTHER WASTE.  Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse,
ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals, and all other substances except
sewage and industrial wastes.



   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.  This definition includes all federal, state, and local
governmental entities.



   pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed
in standard units.



   POLLUTANT.  Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (for example,
pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW.  This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment
standard, as promulgated by the EPA in accordance with the Clean Water Act,
§ 307(b) and (c).



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS.  Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.



   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.  Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in § 52.005 of this chapter.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.  A treatment works, as defined
by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the city.  This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.



   SEPTIC TANK WASTE.  Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the pretreatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable
or substantial, and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably
be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.  SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE
does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   SEWAGE.  Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried
human wastes from residences, businesses, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with ground, surface, storm, or other waters that
may be present.



   SEWER.  Any pipe, conduit, ditch, or other device used to collect and
transport sewage or storm water from the generating.



   SHALL.  Is mandatory.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU. Except as provided in this section:



      (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or



      (2)   An industrial user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
subdivision (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response
to a petition received from an industrial user, and, in accordance with
procedures in 40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



   SLUDGE.  Any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a
municipal or industrial wastewater treatment plant or any other waste having
similar characteristics and effect.



   SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE.  Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 52.005 of this chapter.  A SLUG DISCHARGE is any discharge
of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits, or permit conditions.



   STATE.  The state of Indiana.



   STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The person designated by the Mayor of the city to
supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this chapter.  The term also means a duly authorized
representative of the superintendent.



   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended
matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater,
or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.



   TOXIC POLLUTANTS.  Those substances listed in 40 C.F.R. 401.15,
Priority Pollutants Derived from the Toxic Pollutants.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally
and temporarily is in a state of non-compliance with the standards set forth
in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the
discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof.



   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any person who contributes, causes, or
permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's sewerage system.



   WASTEWATER.  Industrial waste, sewage, or any other waste, including
that which may be combined with ground water, surface water, or storm water,
that may be discharged to the POTW.



   WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS.  The chemical, physical,
bacteriological, and radiological properties, including volume, flow rate,
and such other properties which serve to define, classify, or measure the
contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.



   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A control document issued by the
authority to individual users, specifying applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements pertaining to discharge to the city's sewerage system.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT.  That portion of the
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.005  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference.  These general prohibitions apply to all users of
the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or cause to
be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the POTW;



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 104°F
(40°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);



      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through;



      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit;



      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent;



      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Superintendent in an individual wastewater discharge permit;



      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
which that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin
discharged into the collection system in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;



      (18)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
of more than five percent, or any single reading over ten percent of the
lower explosive limit of the meter;



      (19)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or
treatment residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and
reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.  In no case shall a
substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under
§ 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, or any criteria, guidelines, or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Act, being 15 U.S.C.
§§ 2601 et seq., or state standards applicable to the sludge management
method being used.



      (20)   Any slug load, which shall mean any pollutant,
including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a
single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause
interference to the POTW.



      (21)   Any pollutant strength exceeding the values in Appendix
B of this chapter.



      (22)   Any substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be
hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261.



      (23)   Any pollutant(s) which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources would pass through or cause
interference as defined in this chapter.



      (24)   Any wastewater which is a cause of or significantly
contributes to a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.



   (C)   Processing and storage.  Pollutants, substances, or
wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.006  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at
40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 – 471.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with § 52.006(D) and (E).



   (B)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the
Superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed
either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual
industrial users.



   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
403.6(e).



   (D)   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the
city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits.  The determination to
convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the
Superintendent.  The city may establish equivalent mass limits only if the
industrial user meets all the conditions set forth below.



      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the
industrial user must:



         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water
conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use
during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;



         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies
adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment
standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;



         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the
facility's actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on
data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the
facility's long-term average production rate.  Both the actual average daily
flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of
current operating conditions;



         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or
pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are
not appropriate to control the discharge; and



         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable
categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial
user's request for equivalent mass limits.



      (2)   An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits
must:



         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and
treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent
mass limits;



         (b)   Continue to record the facility's flow rates
through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;



         (c)   Continue to record the facility's production rates
and notify the Superintendent whenever production rates are expected to vary
by more than 20% from its baseline production rates determined in subdivision
(D)(1) of this section.  Upon notification of a revised production rate, the
Superintendent will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit
as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and



         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water
conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to
subdivision (D)(1) of this section as long as it discharges under an
equivalent mass limit.



      (3)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the
Superintendent:



         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by
multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es)
of the industrial user by the concentration- based daily maximum and monthly
average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the
appropriate unit conversion factor;



         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate,
will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as
necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and



         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in
subsequent individual wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial
user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the
implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual
average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent
mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for
treatment pursuant to this chapter.  The industrial user must also be in
compliance this chapter regarding the prohibition of bypass.



   (E)   The Superintendent may convert the mass limits of the
categorical pretreatment standards of 40 C.F.R. Parts 414, 419, and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual industrial users.  The conversion is at the discretion of the
Superintendent.



   (F)   Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply
with the equivalent limitations developed in this chapter in lieu of the
promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were
derived.



   (G)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. 
Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure
shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent
limitation.



   (H)   Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based
standard shall notify the Superintendent within two business days after the
user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month.  Any user not notifying
the Superintendent of such anticipated change will be required to meet the
mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original
estimate of the long term average production rate.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.007  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users must comply with state administrative code codified at 327 I.A.C.
5, Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Programs and NPDES.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.008  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The Superintendent is authorized to establish local limits
pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.5(c).



   (B)   The pollutant limits outlined in Appendix B of this chapter
are established to protect against pass through and interference.  No person
shall discharge wastewater containing in excess limits listed in Appendix B.



   (C)   The Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to
the concentration- based limitations in Appendix B.



   (D)   Surcharge limits for conventional pollutants CBOD 5 and TSS,
and ammonia, are outlined under Chapter 51 of the City Code in order to
ensure just and equitable rates and charges with respect to the services
rendered by the POTW.  Mass-based upper limits for CBOD 5 and TSS to
maintain proper plant operations will be established in individual IU
permits.  The Superintendent shall be responsible for establishing these
upper limits to ensure no adverse effect on the POTW.  The total allocation
of the pollutants shall not exceed the calculated maximum allowable
industrial load.



   (E)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW.  All concentrations for metallic substances are for
total metal unless indicated otherwise.  Individual limits may be necessary
when required by federal categorical pretreatment standards or as established
through an individual industrial user permit, issued by the Superintendent. 
Alternative limits may be granted to an industrial user by issuance of an
industrial user permit, provided that the Superintendent has determined that
no adverse effect on the POTW will occur from the alternative limits and the
IU can justify to the Superintendent's satisfaction that the above limit
cannot reasonably be achieved.  Deviations from the above limits may be
authorized by the Superintendent at his sole discretion, upon an affirmative
showing by the requesting IU that such deviation will not be harmful to the
POTW.



   (F)   The Superintendent may develop best management practices
(BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to
implement local limits and the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.009  CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.010  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. 
The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER



§ 52.011  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in this chapter within
the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Superintendent,
whichever is more stringent.  Any facilities necessary for compliance shall
be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense.  Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the Superintendent
before such facilities are constructed.  The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable
to the city under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.012  WATER POLLUTION TREATMENT CONTROL FACILITY.



   (A)   No person shall cause or allow the construction, installation,
or modification of any wastewater pollution treatment/control facility,
without a valid construction permit issued by the Superintendent.



   (B)   Applications for permits to construct or modify a water
pollution treatment/control facility must be made in accordance with
procedures established by the Superintendent.  The applications must be made
on forms provided by the Superintendent.  Incomplete applications may result
in the return of plans and specifications without action.



   (C)   A completed application shall be submitted together with the
required plans, specifications, description of project, and appropriate fee a
minimum of 60 days in advance of the proposed date of start of construction.
Construction shall not commence until all necessary approvals and permits are
obtained.



   (D)   The contents of a wastewater pollution treatment/control
facility construction permit application shall include at least the following:



      (1)   Application form signed by the applicant or its
designated agent;



      (2)   One set of construction plans and specifications;



      (3)   Plans and specifications for treatment/ control
facilities shall be prepared by or under the personal supervision of a
professional engineer; plans and specifications shall be certified and sealed
by said registered professional engineer; and



      (4)   A project design summary, on forms provided by the
Superintendent, containing but not limited to the following information:



         (a)   Description of present facility, if any;



         (b)   Discharge point to the city system;



         (c)   Design data, that is, design flows, design waste
strengths, anticipated effluent characteristics, and the like;



         (d)   Details on design of unit operations of proposed
treatment facilities; and



         (e)   Effluent limitation capability of proposed
facility.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.013  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. 
An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.



   (C)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand, except
that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users.  All
interception units shall comply with the city's oil and grease management
ordinance and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.  Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired in
accordance with the city's oil and grease management ordinance by the user at
their expense.



   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.014 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control
slug discharges. The Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit
for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be
necessary to control slug discharges.  Alternatively, the Superintendent may
develop such a plan for any user.



   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent
of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 52.035 of this
chapter; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge.  Such procedures include but are not limited to
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER
DISCHARGE PERMITS



§ 52.015  WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.



   When requested by the Superintendent, a user must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the
request.  The Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.016 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into
the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit
from the Superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to this chapter may continue to discharge
for the time period specified therein.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require other users to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.



   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this
chapter.  Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.017  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXISTING CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of
this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within 30 days after said date, apply to the Superintendent for an individual
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this chapter and shall not
cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days of the
effective date of this chapter except in accordance with an individual
wastewater discharge permit issued by the Superintendent.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.018  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; NEW CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain
such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge.  An
application for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance
with this chapter, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon
which any discharge will begin or recommence.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.019  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.



   (A)   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater
discharge permit must submit a permit application.  The Superintendent may
require users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a
permit application:



      (1)   Identifying information.



         (a)   The name and address of the facility, including
the name of the operator and owner.



         (b)   Contact information, description of activities,
facilities, and plant production processes on the premises;



      (2)   Environmental permits.  A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations.



         (a)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and
rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user.  This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.



         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw
materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation,
and proposed or actual hours of operation;



         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by
size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



      (4)   Time and duration of discharges;



      (5)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the
permit;



      (6)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in this chapter.  (40 C.F.R.
403.6(e))



      (7)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for
existing sources.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process.



         (c)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.



         (d)   The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
this chapter. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by
the Superintendent or the applicable standards to determine compliance with
the standard.



         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in this chapter.



      (8)   Where additional pretreatment facilities and/or
operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this
chapter, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule
by which the discharger will provide the additional pretreatment or
implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities:



         (a)   The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply
with the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to dates
relating to hiring appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans,
completing final plans, executing the contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts
necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.



         (b)   Under no circumstances shall the Superintendent
permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which
exceeds 270 days.



         (c)   Within 14 days following each milestone date in
the schedule and within 14 days following the final date for compliance, the
discharger shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent, including no
less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay,
and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the
approved schedule.  In no event shall more than 270 days elapse between the
progress reports to the Superintendent.



      (9)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the permit application.



   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.020  APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports,
and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative
of the user and contain the certification statement in § 52.043.



   (B)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying
the requirements of this section must be submitted to the Superintendent
prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.021  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.



   The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete
permit application, the Superintendent will determine whether to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit.  The Superintendent may deny any
application for an individual wastewater discharge permit.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE



§ 52.022  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.



   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of
the permit.  An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five years, at the discretion of the Superintendent.  Each
individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon
which it will expire.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.023  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.



   (A)   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such
conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Superintendent to
prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safely,
facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the
POTW.



   (B)   Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to the level
required in this chapter shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's
expense.  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information
relating to the proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent, and no construction of the facilities shall
be commenced until the approval is received in writing.



   (C)   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:



      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge
permit issuance date, expiration date, and effective date;



      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable in accordance with this chapter;



      (3)   Effluent limits, including best management practices,
based on applicable pretreatment standards;



      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record-keeping requirements.  These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal,
state, and local law.



      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule.  Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.



      (6)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by
the Superintendent to be necessary.



   (D)   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain but need
not be limited to the following conditions:



      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of
spill control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or
nonroutine discharges;



      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices.  All sewers shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or
structure with an opening of no less than 24 inches diameter and an internal
diameter of no less than 36 inches containing flow measuring, recording, and
sampling equipment as required by the Superintendent to assure compliance
with this chapter;



      (7)   A statement that compliance with the individual
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility
for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the individual
wastewater discharge permit;



      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations;



      (9)   Special conditions as the authority may reasonably
require under particular circumstances of a given discharge, including
sampling locations, frequency, number and type of sample, as well as
standards for tests and reporting schedule; and



      (10)   Compliance schedules.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.024  PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.



   (A)   Public notification.  The Superintendent will publish in an
official government publication and/or newspaper(s) of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice with the jurisdiction(s) served by the
POTW, or on a Web page, a notice to issue a pretreatment permit, at least 14
days prior to issuance.  The notice will indicate a location where the draft
permit may be reviewed and an address where written comments may be submitted.



   (B)   Permit appeals.  The Superintendent shall provide public
notice of the issuance of an individual wastewater discharge permit.  Any
person, including the user, may petition the Superintendent to reconsider the
terms of an individual wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice
of its issuance.



      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
individual wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons
for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place
in the individual wastewater discharge permit.



      (3)   The effectiveness of the individual wastewater discharge
permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.



      (4)   If the Superintendent fails to act within 30 days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.  Decisions not to
reconsider an individual wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify an individual
wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.



      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative individual wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by
filing a complaint with the appropriate municipal court, superior court, or
circuit court.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.025  PERMIT MODIFICATION.



   (A)   The Superintendent may deny or condition new or increased
industrial contributions, based on information or lack thereof in a permit
application.



   (B)   The Superintendent may modify an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including but not limited to the following
reasons:



      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;



      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;



      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge
poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;



      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual
wastewater discharge permit;



      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting;



      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.13;



      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
individual wastewater discharge permit.



   (C)   Within 270 days of promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of each discharger
subject to these standards, if such standards are more stringent than those
in the existing permit, shall be amended to assure compliance with the new
standards, within the time frame prescribed by the standards. All national
categorical pretreatment standards promulgated after the adoption of this
chapter shall be adopted by the authority as part of this chapter. Where a
discharger, subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, has not
previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as
required by this Chapter, the discharger shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit from the authority within 180 days after the promulgation of
the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A discharger shall be notified of any proposed changes to his
or her permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. 
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
for compliance.



   (E)   All industrial users shall notify the Superintendent promptly
in advance of substantial changes in volume or character of industrial
discharges.  The authority reserves the right to amend the discharge permit
in light of any change in volume or character of discharge or if additional
information is obtained which indicates a modification is necessary to
protect public health or the POTW.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.026  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.



   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a discharger for a specific
operation and are not assignable to another discharger or transferable to
another location.  In the case of transfer of ownership the new owner must
submit a separate permit application prior to discharging.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.027  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Superintendent may revoke an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including but not limited to the following
reasons:



      (1)   Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to this chapter;



      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification
statements;



      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



      (6)   Refusing to allow the Superintendent timely access to
the facility premises and records;



      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



      (8)   Failure to pay fines;



      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of
business ownership of a permitted facility; or



      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement,
or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.



   (B)   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership.  All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.028  INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.



   A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall
apply for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete permit application, in accordance this chapter, a minimum of 180
days prior to the expiration of the user's existing individual wastewater
discharge permit.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.029  REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.



   (A)   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Superintendent shall
enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.



   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A)
of this section above, the Superintendent shall request the following
information from the contributing municipality:



      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;



      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the
contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and



      (3)   Such other information as the Superintendent may deem
necessary.



   (C)   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by division (A) of
this section above, shall contain the following conditions:



      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt
a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and
local limits, including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are
at least as stringent as those set out in this chapter.  The requirement
shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to
reflect changes made to the city's chapter or local limits;



      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;



      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection, and sampling, and enforcement will be conducted by the
contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the
Superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by
the contributing municipality and the Superintendent;



      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
provide the Superintendent with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing
municipality's discharge;



      (7)   A provision ensuring the Superintendent access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Superintendent; and



      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of
the terms of the intermunicipal agreement.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.030 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled
to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in subdivision (B)(3) of this section
below.  At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the
Superintendent a report which contains the information listed in division (B)
of this section below.  A new source shall report the method of pretreatment
it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards.  A new source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants
to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   All information required in § 52.019(A)(1), (2), (3),
and (6).



      (2)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The user shall provide the information required in
§ 52.019(A)(7).



         (b)   The user shall take a minimum of one
representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this section.



         (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream
from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists.  If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the
pretreatment standards.  Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has
been calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e), this adjusted limit
along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority;



         (d)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with § 52.039;



         (e)   The Superintendent may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures;



         (f)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date,
and place of sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected
pollutant discharges to the POTW.



         (g)   All monitoring data submittals shall include the
appropriate chain- of-custody forms.



      (3)   Compliance certification.  A statement, reviewed by the
user's authorized representative as defined in § 52.004 and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.



      (4)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M must be provided.  The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard.  A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in this chapter.



      (5)   Signature and report certification.  All baseline
monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with this chapter and
signed by an authorized representative as defined in § 52.004.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.031  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 52.030(B)(4) of this chapter:



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards.  (Such events include but are
not limited to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.032  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report containing the information described in §
52.019(A)(6) and (7) and § 52.030(B)(2) of this chapter.  For users subject
to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in this chapter, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of
the user's long-term production rate.  For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period.  All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 52.043(A) of this chapter.  All sampling will be done in conformance
with § 52.040.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.033  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   Except as specified in this chapter, all significant
industrial users as defined in § 52.004, including all categorical users,
must, at least semiannually, submit reports indicating the nature,
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
pretreatment standards, and the measured or estimated average and maximum
daily flows for the reporting period.  In cases where the pretreatment
standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or
pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required
by the Superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the user.



   (B)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with § 52.043 of this chapter.



   (C)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge.  Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times.  The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (D)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Superintendent, using the procedures
prescribed in § 52.040 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in the report.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.034  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Each user must notify the Superintendent of any significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 52.019 of this chapter.



   (C)   The Superintendent may issue an individual wastewater
discharge permit under § 52.028 of this chapter or modify an existing
wastewater discharge permit under § 52.025 of this chapter in response to
changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.035  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, a slug discharge, or slug load that might
cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone
and notify the Superintendent of the incident.  This notification shall
include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences.  Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in division (A) of this section above. Employers
shall ensure that all employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.



   (D)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.036  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge
permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Superintendent as the
Superintendent may require.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.037  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation.  Resampling by the industrial user is not required
if the city performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month,
or if the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the
initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city
receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.038  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. Part 261.  Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).  If the
user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to
the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to
the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste
stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass
of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months.  All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences.  Any notification under this division
(A) need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under § 52.034 of this
chapter.  The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§ 52.030, 52.032, and
52.033.



   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
of this section above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more
than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).  Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which
the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director,
and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance
within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.039  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136
and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard.  If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Superintendent or other parties approved by EPA.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.040  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be
based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative
of conditions occurring during the reporting period.



   (B)   (1)   Except as indicated in subdivisions (B)(2) and (3)
below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour
flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Superintendent. 
Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge.  Using
protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 C.F.R. Part
136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a
24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows:  for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory.  Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate.  In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
limits.



      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.



      (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring
and 90-day compliance reports required in §§ 52.030 and 52.032 [40 C.F.R.
403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
Superintendent may authorize a lower minimum.  For the reports required by
§ 52.033 [40 C.F.R. 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance by the user with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.



      (4)   If a regulated pollutant is monitored more frequently
than required, the additional data shall be included by the user in the
submitted report.



      (5)   The Superintendent is responsible for properly
maintaining sampling and measuring equipment owned and/or operated by the
city in working order to endure accuracy of the data.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.041  DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked.  For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.042  RECORDKEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices
established under this chapter.  Records shall include the date, exact
place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the
analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. 
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. 
This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Superintendent.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.043  CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.



   (A)   All permit applications, reports required by permits, and all
other information requested by the Superintendent shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial discharger as defined in this
section.



   (B)   If an authorization under division (A) of this section above
is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements in the definition of an authorized representative
as contained in § 52.004 must be submitted to the control authority prior to
or together with any reports, information, or applications to be signed by an
authorized representative.



   (C)   Any person signing a document under divisions (A) and (B) of
this section above shall make this following certification:



   I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete.  I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 52.044  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user at reasonable times or under emergency circumstances, as outlined
in 40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(1)(v), to determine whether the user is complying with
all requirements of this chapter and any individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Superintendent ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



   (B)   (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent shall be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.



      (2)   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the
user's property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.



      (3)   The Superintendent may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense.  All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated per manufacturer's
recommendations to ensure their accuracy.



      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent
and shall not be replaced.  The costs of clearing such access shall be borne
by the user.



      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent
access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.



      (6)   Search warrants.  If the Superintendent has been
refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof and
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to
verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder,
or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community,
the Superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate
municipal court, superior court, or circuit court.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.045  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs and from the Superintendent's inspection and
sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent, that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state law.  Any such request
must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.  When
requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
other effluent data, as defined at 40 C.F.R. 2.302, shall not be recognized
as confidential information and shall be available to the public without
restriction.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.046  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (B)   The term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
subdivisions (B)(3), (4), or (8) of this section) and shall mean:



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined in this chapter;



      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits, as defined by this chapter, multiplied by the applicable criteria
(1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by this chapter (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Superintendent
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such
a discharge;



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;



      (6)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



      (8)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of
best management practices, which the Superintendent determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 52.047  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation.  Within 14 days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user
to the Superintendent.  Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation.  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of
the Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.048  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.



   The Superintendent may enter into administrative orders, assurances of
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for noncompliance.  Such documents shall include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document.  Such documents shall have the same force
and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§ 52.051 and
52.052 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.049  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the Superintendent and show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken.  Notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.  The
notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the
hearing.  Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user as defined in this chapter and required by § 52.004.  A show cause
hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.050  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a
specified time.  If the user does not come into compliance within the time
provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated.  Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged
to the sewer.  A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation.  Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.051  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:



   (A)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



   (B)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.052  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may fine such user in an amount
not to exceed $1,000 per violation.  Such fines shall be assessed on a per
violation, per day basis.  In the case of monthly or other long-term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation.



   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after ten calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 5% per month.  A lien against
the user's property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.



   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the Superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment
of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine.  Where a
request has merit, the Superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. 
In the event the User's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Superintendent
may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as
notices and orders, to the fine.



   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.053  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge
permit, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears
to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangennent to the health or
welfare of persons.  The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present,
an endangerment to the environment.



   (B)   (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge
shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution.  In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order,
the Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals.  The
Superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings outlined in this
chapter are initiated against the user.



      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing as outlined in this chapter.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.054  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions in this chapter, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:



      (1)   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit
conditions;



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for
the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in this chapter.



   (B)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 52.047 of this
chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the Superintendent shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 52.055  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may petition the appropriate municipal court,
superior court, or circuit court through the City's Attorney for the issuance
of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or
compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of
the user.  The Superintendent may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation.  A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against a user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.056  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $2,500 per
violation, per day.  In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.



   (B)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city.



   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.



   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   (E)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement,
representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or
other document filed or required to be maintained under the provisions of
this chapter or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with,
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this chapter, shall upon conviction be punished by the imposition of a
minimum fine of $1,000 per day per violation.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.057  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   (A)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,500 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or
both.



   (B)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at
least $2,500 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one
year, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under state law.



   (C)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
chapter, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500 per violation, per
day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.



   (D)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $7,500 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for
not more than three years, or both.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.058  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive.  The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against
a noncompliant user.  Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally
be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan.  However, the
Superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant.  Further, the Superintendent is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION



§ 52.059  PENALTIES FOR LATE REPORTS.



   A penalty of $1,000 shall be assessed to any user for each day that a
report required by this chapter, a permit, or an order issued hereunder is
late, beginning five days after the date the report is due.  (Higher
penalties may also be assessed where reports are more than 30-45 days
late.)  Actions taken by the Superintendent to collect late reporting
penalties shall not limit the Superintendent's authority to initiate other
enforcement actions that may include penalties for late reporting violations.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.060  PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a
sum not to exceed a value determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to
achieve consistent compliance.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.061  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances
sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.062  PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding
fees, fines, or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this
chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.063  WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.



   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service
to the user may be severed.  Service will recommence, at the user's expense,
only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.064  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
corrected or abated as directed by the Superintendent.  Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city
code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.065  CONTRACTOR LISTING.



   Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award
for the sale of goods or services to the city.  Existing contracts for the
sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in
significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be
terminated at the discretion of the Superintendent.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



§ 52.066  UPSET.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user.  An UPSET does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless
or improper operation.



   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (C) of this section below are met.



   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset.  If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days:



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (E)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.  This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.067  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
52.005 of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in § 52.005(B) of this
chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that
its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources,
would cause pass through or interference and that either:



   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.068  BYPASS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, BYPASS means the intentional
diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.



   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.  These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.



   (C)   Bypass notifications.



      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Superintendent, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Superintendent of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.  A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of
the bypass.  The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.  The Superintendent may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.



   (D)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



      (1)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;



      (2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such
as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes,
or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.  This condition
is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and



      (3)   The user submitted notices as required under division
(C) of this section.



   (E)   The Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass after
considering its adverse effects, if the Superintendent determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) of this section.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 52.069  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the
payment of fees from industrial dischargers to the city's wastewater
collection and treatment system in order to defray the cost of administration
of the city's industrial pretreatment program.



   (B)   The following charges and fees are established:



      (1)   Application fee:



         (a)   Discharge permit: $500; and



         (b)   Construction permit: $400.



      (2)   Appeal fee: $100;



      (3)   Site inspection: $100;



      (4)   Annual sampling/inspection: $400;



      (5)   Pollutant analysis fees:



         (a)   Conventional pollutants (TBOD, TSS, COD, O&G, pH,
and the like): $145 each sample;



         (b)   Total toxic organics (includes volatiles,
semi-volatiles, and pesticides): $875 each sample;



         (c)   Cyanide, total: $38 each sample;



         (d)   Hexavalent chromium: $25 each sample;



         (e)   Mercury: $50 each sample;



         (f)   Each individual metal: $20 each sample;



         (g)   BTEX: $150 each sample;



         (h)   Turbidity: $18 each sample;



         (i)   Sulfide or sulfite: $23 each sample;



         (j)   Nitrate or nitrite: $18 each sample;



         (k)   Surfactants (MBAS): $40 each sample;



         (l)   Phenols: $33 each sample; and



         (m)   Flashpoint: $35 each sample.



   (C)   The city sewer board is further authorized and directed to
obtain competitive quotes from laboratory service providers on a not less
than annual basis for the costs of performing sample analysis of each of the
items listed in subdivision (B)(5) above and to adjust the above-listed rates
in a manner such that the fee charged shall not be more than 110% of the cost
charged by the selected laboratory service provider for any such item without
further review or action by this Common Council.  All other provisions of
this subchapter shall require review and amendment by the Common Council to
effectuate any changes.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.070  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and
shall continue in full force and effect.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.071  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request
in writing an interpretation or ruling by the authority on any matter covered
by this chapter and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. Appeal of
any final administrative order entered pursuant to this chapter may be taken
in accordance with local or state law.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.072  CONFLICT.



   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of any inconsistency or conflict.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



§ 52.073  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following
its passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.



(Ord. G-13-07, passed 4-1-2012)



APPENDIX A:  TOXIC POLLUTANTS



[Code of Federal Regulations]
[Title 40, Volume 28]
[Revised as of July 1,2009]
From the U.S. Government Printing Office via GPO Access
[CITE: 40 C.F.R. 401.15]
[Page 8-9]
TITLE 40 - PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER I - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (CONTINUED)
PART 401 - GENERAL PROVISIONS - Table of Contents
Sec. 401.15  Toxic pollutants.



   The following comprise the list of toxic pollutants designated pursuant
to section 307(a)(1) of the Act:



1.   Acenaphthene



2.   Acrolein



3.   Acrylonitrile



4.   Aldrin/Dieldrin \1\



      \1\   Effluent standard promulgated (40 C.F.R. Part 129).



5.   Antimony and compounds \2\



      \2\   The term compounds shall include organic and inorganic
compounds.



6.   Arsenic and compounds



7.   Asbestos



8.   Benzene



9.   Benzidine \1\



10.   Beryllium and compounds



11.   Cadmium and compounds



12.   Carbon tetrachloride



13.   Chlordane (technical mixture and metabolites)



14.   Chlorinated benzenes (other than di-chlorobenzenes)



15.   Chlorinated ethanes (including 1,2-di-chloroethane,
1,1,1-trichloroethane, and hexachloroethane)



16.   Chloroalkyl ethers (chloroethyl and mixed ethers)



17.   Chlorinated naphthalene



18.   Chlorinated phenols (other than those listed elsewhere; includes
trichlorophenols and chlorinated cresols)



19.   Chloroform



20.   2-chlorophenol



21.   Chromium and compounds



22.   Copper and compounds



23.   Cyanides



24.   DDT and metabolites \1\



25.   Dichlorobenzenes (1,2-., 1,3-, and 1,4-di-chlorobenzenes)



26.   Dichlorobenzidine



27.   Dichloroethylenes (1,1-, and 1,2-dichloroethylene)



28.   2,4-dichlorophenol



29.   Dichloropropane and dichloropropene



30.   2,4-dimethylphenol



31.   Dinitrotoluene



32.   Diphenylhydrazine



33.   Endosulfan and metabolites



34.   Endrin and metabolites \1\



35.   Ethylbenzene



36.   Fluoranthene



37.   Haloethers (other than those listed elsewhere; includes
chlorophenylphenyl ethers, bromophenylphenyl ether, bis(dichloroisopropyl)
ether, bis-(chloroethoxy) methane and polychlorinated diphenyl ethers)



38.   Halomethanes (other than those listed elsewhere; includes methylene
chloride, ethylchloride, methylbromide, bromoform, dichlorobromomethane



39.   Heptachtor and metabolites



40.   Hexachlorobutadiene



41.   Hexachlorocyclohexane



42.   Hexachlorocyclopentadiene



43.   Isophorone



44.   Lead and compounds



45.   Mercury and compounds



46.   Naphthalene



47.   Nickel and compounds



48.   Nitrobenzene



49.   Nitrophenols (including 2,4-dinitrophenol, dinitrocresol)



50.   Nitrosamines



51.   Pentachlorophenol



52.   Phenol



53.   Phthalate esters



54.   Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) \1\



55.   Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (including benzanthracenes,
benzopyrenes, benzofluoranthene, chrysenes, dibenz-anthracenes, and
indenopyrenes)



56.   Selenium and compounds



57.   Silver and compounds



58.   2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)



59.   Tetrachloroethylene



60.   Thallium and compounds



61.   Toluene



62.   Toxaphene \1\



63.   Trichloroethylene



64.   Vinyl chloride



65.   Zinc and compounds



[44 FR 44502, July 30, 1979, as amended at 46 FR 2266, Jan. 8,1981; 46 FR
10724, Feb. 4, 1981]



APPENDIX B:  LOCAL LIMITS



 

Parameter
 
Limit (mg/L)




Ammonia
 
60.0


Cadmium
 
0.24


Chromium
 
29.64


Copper
 
9.09


Lead
 
0.60


Mercury
 
2.10


Nickel
 
11.86


Silver
 
1.30


Zinc
 
9.55


Cyanide
 
0.59


pH
 
5.0 to 10.0


Oil and grease
 
100


Temperature
 
Not to exceed 104°F (40°C)




 



CHAPTER 53:  WATER



Section



   53.01   Size of water mains as part of fire protection system



§ 53.01  SIZE OF WATER MAINS AS PART OF FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM.



   All water mains hereafter installed in or adjacent to the city, with
respect to which fire protection shall be requested for the benefit of owners
of property adjoining or served from the mains, shall be made with pipe of
not less than six inches inside diameter.



(Ord. G-58-31, passed 5-12-1958)



CHAPTER 54:  DRAINAGE



Section



   54.01   Policy and purpose



   54.02   Review of drainage plans for new developments



   54.03   Fees



   54.04   Use of drainage fees; non-reverting fund established



§ 54.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is hereby the policy of the city that all new developments
constructed within the jurisdiction to the city's Plan Commission shall be
built consistent with the provisions set forth in the Storm Water Master
Plan. New developments shall share in the cost of storm drainage improvements
throughout the city.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to define responsibility for
the review of drainage plans for new developments within the jurisdiction of
the city's Plan Commission, and to establish a schedule of drainage fees.



(Ord. G-98-280, passes 11-19-1998)



§ 54.02  REVIEW OF DRAINAGE PLANS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Any person seeking a building permit for any new development,
including single-family residences, duplexes, apartment buildings containing
three or more units, or a commercial or industrial building, or its
expansion, shall submit with the required documentation a plan containing
sufficient information to demonstrate the method by which site drainage will
be accommodated.



   (B)   The drainage method depicted on the plan shall be consistent
with the provisions of the Storm Water Master Plan and any drainage plans
approved by the city's Plan Commission or other municipal storm drainage
facilities approved by the City Engineer.



   (C)   The Building Commissioner may issue a building permit for said
structure only after he or she is assured, either personally or by expressed
written documentation of the City Engineer or the city's Plan Commission,
that the proposed plan to accommodate drainage is consistent with division
(B) above.



(Ord. G-98-280, passed 11-19-1998)



§ 54.03  FEES.



   (A)   The following drainage fees shall be collected for new
developments:



      (1)   Single-family residence or duplex residence: $100 per
unit. There shall be no charge if a new single-family residence is a
replacement of previous structure having been demolished within 366 days
previous to applying for a building permit or demolished in conjunction with
the building permit; and



      (2)   Commercial or industrial buildings or residential
apartment buildings containing three or more units: $0.05 per square foot of
building and impervious areas including parking lots.



   (B)   The drainage fees imposed in division (A) above shall be
collected by the New Albany Sewer Utility in conjunction with any fees
collected for sanitary sewer connection or other charges collected in
accordance with Chapter 51 of the code.



   (C)   The Building Commissioner shall furnish a receipt of payment
for the fees imposed and collected through divisions (A) and (B) above prior
to the issuance of any building permit.



(Ord. G-98-280, passed 11-19-1998)



§ 54.04  USE OF DRAINAGE FEES; NON-REVERTING FUND ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The drainage fees collected shall be utilized to off-set the
costs incurred to process, review or inspect drainage plans or related
construction proposed or required under this chapter, or to fund the
improvement of storm drainage facilities anywhere within the jurisdiction of
the city's Plan Commission. The drainage fees may be used to fund expenses
related to personnel, contracts for professional services, the purchase of
right-of-way or easements, contracts for the installation of public drainage
improvements, the purchase or lease of equipment and the purchase of supplies
and materials.



   (B)   The Controller of the city shall place all drainage fees
collected under this chapter in a special non-reverting drainage fund herein
created for the purposes set forth in division (A) above.



   (C)   The Drainage Advisory Committee shall review and provide its
recommendation regarding any and all expenditures form the special drainage
fund developed in division (B) above.



(Ord. G-98-280, passed 11-19-1998)



CHAPTER 55:  CEMETERIES



Section



   55.01   Fairview Cemetery charges



   55.02   West Haven Cemetery charges



§ 55.01  FAIRVIEW CEMETERY CHARGES.



   The following charges for services at the Fairview Cemetery are hereby
established.



 


Service

 

New Charge

 

Old Charge





Adult Interment (three feet by nine feet)



   Weekdays before 3:00 p.m.

 

$700

 

$600




   After 3:00 p.m.

 

$800

 




   Saturday before noon
 

$950

 

$850



   Saturday between noon - 3:00 p.m.
 

$1,050

 

$950



   Saturday after 3:00 p.m.
 

$1,150

 




Cremation Interment Prices
 


 




   Weekday interment
 

$375

 

$250



   Weekday after 3:00 p.m.
 

$475

 




   Saturday morning until noon
 

$575

 




   Saturday after noon
 

$675

 




Cremation Entombment Prices
 


 




   Weekday entombment
 

$350

 

$250



   Weekday entombment after 3:00 p.m.
 

$450

 

$250



   Saturday morning until noon
 

$550

 

$500



   Saturday after noon
 

$650

 

$600



Infant Interment (two feet by four feet), includes perpetual care and grave



   Weekday before 3:00 p.m.

 

$225

 

$175



Infant Interment (two feet by four feet), includes perpetual care and grave



   Weekday after 3:00 p.m.

 

$325

 




   Additional $125 for tent set up.  This prices excludes chairs,
lowering device and artificial grass.  Theses items must be used by the
vault company.


No interments or entombments on Sundays or holidays


Grave Prices


   Cost
 

$600

 

$500



   Perpetual care
 

$300

 

$200



Fairview Mausoleum Prices


   Dual tombs (side by side or tandem)
 

$2,100

 

$2,000



   Single
 

$1,050

 




   Cremation niche
 

$500

 

$350



Adult Entombment Prices


   Weekdays before 3:00 p.m.
 

$525

 

$425



   Weekdays after 3:00 p.m.
 

$625

 




   Saturday before noon
 

$775

 

$675



   Saturday between noon and 3:00 p.m.
 

$875

 

$775



   Saturday after 3:00 p.m.
 

$975

 




   Add $125 for tent set up.  This price excludes chairs, lowering device
and artificial grass.  These items must be used by the vault company.


Welfare/Destitute Includes


   Grave and perpetual care
 

$400

 

$300



   No graveside for welfare/destitute
 


 




   No welfare/destitute on weekends or holidays
 


 




Disinterment/Disentombment


   Weekdays
 

$1,500*

 

$800



   Weekends
 

$3,000*

 




   *(Does not include re-interment, re-entombment or any outside
contractor fees that, at the sole discretion of cemetery management, are
deemed necessary)


Foundation


   Government markers
 

$150

 

$100





 



(Ord. A-04-73, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. G-09-46, passed 12-7-2009)



§ 55.02  WEST HAVEN CEMETERY CHARGES.



   The following charges for services at the West Haven Cemetery are
hereby established.



 


Service

 

New Charge

 

Old Charge





Adult Interment (three feet by nine feet)



   Weekdays before 3:00 p.m.

 

$700

 

$600




   After 3:00 p.m.

 

$800

 




   Saturday before noon
 

$950

 

$850



   Saturday between noon - 3:00 p.m.
 

$1,050

 

$950



   Saturday after 3:00 p.m.
 

$1,150

 




   Add $125 for tent set up.  This price excludes chairs, lowering device
and artificial grass.  These items must be used by the vault company.


Cremation Interment Prices


   Weekdays interment
 

$375

 

$250



   Weekdays interment after 3:00 p.m.
 

$475

 




   Saturday until noon
 

$575

 




   Saturday noon until 3:00 p.m.
 

$675

 




   Add $75 for tent set up.  This price excludes chairs, lowering device
and artificial grass.  These items must be used by the vault company.


Infant Interment (two feet by four feet), includes perpetual care and grave



   Two feet by four feet, includes perpetual care and grave

 

$225

 

$175




   After 3:00 p.m.

 

$325

 




No interments or entombments on Sundays or holidays


   Grave prices
 

$600

 

$500



   Perpetual care
 

$300

 

$200



   Grave and perpetual care
 

$400

 

$300



   No graveside for welfare/destitute
 


 




   No welfare/destitute on weekends or holidays
 


 




Disinterment/Disentombment


   Weekdays
 

$1,500*

 

$800



   Weekends
 

$3,000*

 




   *(does not include re-interment, re-entombment or any outside
contractor fees that, at the sole discretion of cemetery management, are
deemed necessary)


Foundation


   Government markers
 

$150

 

$100





 



(Ord. A-04-73, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. G-09-46, passed 12-7-2009)



CHAPTER 56:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section



Stormwater Management User Fee



   56.01   Definitions



   56.02   Purpose



   56.03   User fee



   56.04   Property affected



   56.05   Fees established



   56.06   Collection



   56.07   Credits; adjustments



   56.08   Revenue administration



   56.09   Policy fairness and equitability



   56.10   Enforcement



   56.11   Appeals



Construction Site Runoff Control



   56.20   Title, purpose and general provisions



   56.21   Objectives



   56.22   Definitions



   56.23   Authority and right-of-entry



   56.24   Permit application process



   56.25   Perimeter control plan requirements



   56.26   Perimeter and outfall inspections



   56.27   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan requirements



   56.28   Requirements for individual lots



   56.29   Notice of termination



   56.30   Inspections and maintenance



   56.31   Enforcement and penalties



   56.32   Appeals



   56.33   Compatibility and severability



   56.34   Permit fees



Stormwater Illicit Discharge Control



   56.45   Title, purpose and general provisions



   56.46   Definitions



   56.47   Authority and right-of-entry



   56.48   Illicit discharges



   56.49   Accidental discharges



   56.50   Enforcement and penalties



   56.51   Appeals



   56.52   Compatibility and severability



Post-Construction Runoff Control



   56.60   Title, purpose and general provisions



   56.61   Goals and objectives



   56.62   Definitions



   56.63   Authority and right-of-entry



   56.64   Post-Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan



   56.65   BMP design requirements and criteria



   56.66   BMP ownership and easements



   56.67   Regional facilities management



   56.68   Stormwater quality management plan permit closure



   56.69   Oversight inspections and authority



   56.70   Enforcement and penalties



   56.71   Appeals



   56.72   Compatibility and severability



STORMWATER MANAGEMENT USER FEE



§ 56.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD. Stormwater Board charged with administering the storm
sewer/stormwater program pursuant to I.C. 36-9-23 and 36-9-1-8. For the time
period in which the interim user fee (as defined in § 56.05) is in effect
the New Albany Sewer Board will serve as the Stormwater Board. A separate
Stormwater Board shall be established to manage the program after the
transition from the interim user fee structure.



   ERU (EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT). The national accepted average of
impervious area square footage of a detached single-family residential
property equal to 2,500 square feet. This is the unit to which the base rate
is applied.



   IDEM. Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



   IMPERVIOUS AREA. Surface areas of residential and non-residential
properties which water will not penetrate and from which stormwater runoff
will be produced. This includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks,
parking lots, pavements, concrete, compacted aggregate or gravel and asphalt.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPED PROPERTY. All tracts of real property either
zoned or developed for:



      (1)   Residential use intended for occupancy by more than two
families per residential structure (e.g., apartment houses with three or more
units under a single roof);



      (2)   Commercial uses;



      (3)   Non-profit non-residential uses (e.g., governmental
organizations, churches and fraternal organizations); and



      (4)   Industrial uses.



   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   RESIDENTIALLY DEVELOPED PROPERTY. All tracts of real property either
zoned or developed for residential use in structures designed and permitted
for habitation by one or two families (i.e., single-family homes or
two-family homes (duplex units)).



   SFR (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL). All tracts of real property with
improvements intended for occupancy by one or two families for residential
purposes (i.e., single-family homes or duplex units), regardless of the
number of sewer taps and fees it incurs.



   STORMWATER SYSTEM. A system of constructed and naturally occurring
above ground and below ground facilities or infrastructure intended to
collect, treat, convey and otherwise manage runoff from rain, snow and other
precipitation including, but not limited to, drains, inlets, conduits,
culverts, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and
detention basins, infiltration facilities, lakes, ponds, streams, creeks,
rivers and other related components.



   VACANT/UNIMPROVED PROPERTY. All tracts of real property that are wholly
vacant and unimproved, regardless of the zoning classification assigned to
the property or the uses permitted thereon by applicable law, rules and
regulations.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.02  PURPOSE.



   This chapter establishes a stormwater management user fee to fund and
support the city's efforts to address the issues presented in the recital
provisions of Ord. G-05-52. The user fees include general public
(institutional, agency, federal, state and local government and the like)
and/or property owner user fees.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.03  USER FEE.



   (A)   All owners of real property in the city shall be charged for
the use of the stormwater system based on the amount of stormwater and rate
of flow of stormwater that is projected to discharge into the stormwater
system from the property.



   (B)   By this chapter, which may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Council, the city hereby sets and establishes a system of
fees that is intended to assess users their fair and equitable share of the
costs for use of the stormwater system for each property within the city.
These fees shall be established in an amount sufficient to defray the
reasonable costs for operation, maintenance and construction of necessary
improvements or additions to the stormwater system. The subsequent amendments
or adjustments shall take into consideration the amount of funds reasonably
necessary to meet the level and cost of service necessary to manage and
operate the stormwater system, including any previously unforeseen
inflationary pressures, system expansion, increases in state and federal
program mandates or related issues that may necessitate management program
expansion.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.04  PROPERTY AFFECTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, all residentially developed
property, non-residential developed property and vacant/unimproved property
located within the limits of the city shall be subject to the stormwater
service charges established by this chapter regardless of whether the
properties are privately or publicly owned.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.05  FEES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, each and every
owner and/or operator of residentially developed property, non-residential
developed property, and vacant/unimproved property shall have imposed upon
them a stormwater user fee. The stormwater user fee shall be a monthly
service charge and shall be determined by the provisions of this chapter and
the applicable ERU and ERU rate established hereunder, which provisions may
be amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or by resolution of the Council.



   (B)   The Board shall have the authority and discretion to adjust
this definition of ERU from time to time by resolution to reflect development
trends within the city or further equitably divide the costs of supporting
the operation and maintenance of the stormwater system. In adjusting this
definition, the Board shall take into consideration the source of the data
from which the subject ERU is to be established, the general acceptance and
use of the source on the part of other stormwater systems, and the
reliability and general accuracy of the source. The Board may also utilize
information obtained from property tax assessor's rolls or site examination,
mapping information, aerial photographs and other reliable information in
order to determine impervious surface areas.



   (C)   (1)   An interim monthly stormwater fee is hereby
established. These rates set forth in the table below will remain effective
until the Council establishes by resolution a final stormwater management
user fee schedule. The interim monthly rate is to be paid by each owner
and/or user and shall be paid according to the following schedule:



 

Zoning Classification
 
Monthly Charge
 
Final Rate Structure Implementation Priority


Residential or vacant
 
$2
 
N/A - flat base rate


Institutional/agency
 
$60
 
Third


Industrial
 
$60
 
Second


Commercial
 
$18
 
First



 



      (2)   This rate structure will remain effective until a final
rate is implemented for the type of property listed above. This interim rate
structure will remain effective no longer than:



         (a)   Six months for commercial;



         (b)   Nine months for industrial and institutional; and



         (c)   Twelve months for residential or vacant property.



   (D)   At a time when the city has the data and administrative
capacity to implement a final user fee and the Council enacts a final user
fee schedule by resolution, the interim fee schedule defined in division (C)
above shall  become null and void and shall be replaced with the final fee
schedule. The final fee schedule shall incorporate the following rate
structure provisions:



      (1)   Residentially developed properties and unimproved
properties shall be billed on a per unit basis at a flat fee of $4.17 per
month, established for an equivalent residential unit (ERU), effective upon
any publication and/or hearing as required by statute.



      (2)   The fee for non-residential developed properties shall
be calculated based on the total impervious area of the property divided by
the then-effective average impervious area for an ERU multiplied by a rate of
$4.17 per month established for an ERU, effective upon any publication and/or
hearing as required by statute. The impervious area estimate shall be based
on construction plans as approved through the building permit process or
other sources at the discretion of the Board.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
Board shall propose to the Common Council any changes to the base rate, rate
structure or any other levees, fees or taxes on the public.



   (E)   Rates and charges incurred under this section shall be
prepared and collected by the city in accordance with those provisions
regulating the preparation and issuance of bills for sewer service generally.
The monies collected under this section shall be used expressly for the
benefit of the stormwater system and may not be distributed to the general
fund or other unrelated funds.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005; Ord. G-06-21, passed 6-5-2006; Ord. G-09-32,
passed 8-20-2009)



§ 56.06  COLLECTION.



   (A)   The billing and collection of stormwater user fees shall be
administered by the Board. The stormwater user fees for residentially
developed properties and non-residential developed properties shall be billed
as frequently as monthly with payment due as of the date stated in the
billing. The Common Council is authorized to amend the city's contract with
Indiana-American Water Company for the purpose of affecting those billings.
The Board shall determine a policy and procedure for billings and collections
from all properties without Indiana-American Water Company service. The
Common Council shall have authority to enter into agreement with
Indiana-American Water Company to provide for suspension of drinking water
service in the event of partial or incomplete payment of fees required by
this chapter.



   (B)   For billings and collections administered directly by the city
(i.e., not through the Indiana-American Water Company contract), in the event
that a partial payment is received, the payment shall be applied pro-rata to
each account billed on a consolidated statement by city services in the
proportion that the account bears to the total consolidated statement of all
current charges for all accounts. All bills for stormwater user fees shall
become due and payable in accordance with the rules and regulations in
effect, or subsequently adopted by, the Board.



   (C)   The Board shall have authority to annually place tax liens on
properties in default of fees required by this chapter. The Board shall
provide notice of any intended tax liens subject to the provisions of
applicable Indiana law. Removal of the property tax lien will only occur upon
full payment of the stormwater user fees or other payment arrangements
approved by the Board. In the alternative, the Board may take appropriate
legal action to collect unpaid charges.



   (D)   The interim user fee defined in § 56.05(C) shall be billed
and collected through the existing sanitary sewer billing. The Board shall
consider migrating to billing through the county tax bill over the long term
and take into account the cost of billing, administration and collection
rates.



   (E)   The threshold for retroactive billing shall be six months.
Vacant or unidentified property that has not been charged stormwater user
fees may be billed retroactively up to six months.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.07  CREDITS; ADJUSTMENTS.



   In order to recognize property owners' efforts to reduce stormwater
impacts and the resulting decrease in the city's level of service, the city
may develop a policy for credits and adjustments to lessen the stormwater
user fee for certain properties. This policy for credits and adjustments
shall be adopted by resolution of the Board. The Board may also elect to
adjust (either upwards or downwards) the user fee rate for selected
properties that do not meet the city's minimum stormwater management
standards. Property owners may also elect to compensate the city for the
additional level of service necessary to address the increased impact on
stormwater resulting from a particular property.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.08  REVENUE ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   All revenues generated by or on behalf of the stormwater
management program shall be deposited in a non-reverting stormwater revenue
fund and used exclusively for the stormwater management program.



   (B)   Revenues generated by or on behalf of the stormwater
management program pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed the estimated
cost of service required to implement the city's identified stormwater
quantity and quality level of service. While contingency planning and
budgeting is permissible, revenues cannot exceed long-term program cost of
service estimates.



   (C)   To the extent that the stormwater user fees collected are
insufficient to construct needed stormwater drainage facilities, the cost of
the same may be paid from the city funds as may be determined by the Board
and the Common Council. However, revenues from the city's sanitary sewer
utility shall not be utilized for stormwater drainage expenses without the
prior expressed written consent of the City of New Albany Sewer Board.



   (D)   The Stormwater Utility Fund shall be used for the following
purposes:



      (1)   Acquisition of property by gift, purchase or
condemnation necessary to construct, operate and maintain stormwater
management facilities;



      (2)   Costs of administration and implementation of the
stormwater management program;



      (3)   Engineering and design, debt service and related
financing expenses, planning, construction costs for new stormwater
facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities;



      (4)   Operation and maintenance of the stormwater system,
including the monitoring and inspection of stormwater control devices and
facilities;



      (5)   Water quality monitoring and water quality programs;



      (6)   Inspection and enforcement activities;



      (7)   Elected official, appointed official, stakeholder and
general public education and outreach relating to stormwater;



      (8)   Billing, revenue collection and associated
administrative costs; and



      (9)   Other activities that are reasonably required to manage
and operate the stormwater system.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.09  POLICY FAIRNESS AND EQUITABILITY.



   The Board shall develop, periodically update and make available to the
public a document that expresses in the necessary detail the city's policies
governing the stormwater user fee rate structure, billing administration and
other related issues.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Board and Common Council are authorized to take appropriate legal
action to require compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



§ 56.11  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or organization notified of
non-compliance with this chapter who or that is required to perform
monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective actions that is aggrieved
by a decision of a city employee or contractor issuing the decision, may
appeal the decision in writing to the Board within ten days following the
effective date of the decision.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the request, the Board shall request a report
and recommendation from the subject city employee or contractor and shall set
the matter for administrative hearing at the earliest practicable date.



   (C)   At the hearing, the Board may hear additional evidence, and
may revoke, affirm or modify the earlier decision. The decision shall be
final, subject to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   The threshold for retroactive credits and adjustments shall be
six months and shall not be applied to properties in the interim user fee
rate structure billing period with exception to vacant or unidentified
property that has not been charged stormwater user fees.



(Ord. G-05-52, passed 11-2-2005)



CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROL



§ 56.20  TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Title. This subchapter shall be known as the "Construction
Site Runoff Control Ordinance" of the City of New Albany, Indiana, and may be
so cited.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide
regulations and measures that will address the issue of clean stormwater in
the city and to establish procedures by which these requirements are to be
administered and enforced.



   (C)   Jurisdiction.



      (1)   This subchapter shall govern all properties within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city, including areas of shared development
review through a fringe with Floyd County, Indiana, as established by an
interlocal agreement adopted by both jurisdictions.



      (2)   The city requires that all development or redevelopment
activities that result in the disturbance of one or more acres of land,
including land disturbing activities on individual lots of less than one acre
as part of a larger common plan of development or sale, shall obtain a
stormwater quality management permit (SWQMP).



      (3)   (a)   The following activity is exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter: Agricultural land management activities.



         (b)   This exemption applies only to permitting
procedures and does not apply to any discharge of sediment or other form of
water pollution that may leave a site. These discharges may be defined as
illicit discharges.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.21  OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Protection of the short-term and long-term public health,
safety and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by:



      (1)   Providing for regulation and management of the city's
stormwater system, including public and private facilities in the city's
jurisdiction; and



      (2)   Protecting and preserving water quality and fish and
wildlife habitat within the city.



   (B)   Compliance with state and federal stormwater regulations
developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act Amendments of 1987 and subsequent
amendments. The objectives of these regulations include:



      (1)   Managing the quality of water discharged to the
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) by controlling the contribution
of pollution and pollutants associated with new development and
redevelopment; and



      (2)   Protecting or enhancing stormwater quality to a level of
"designated use" as defined by the Clean Water Act §§ 305(b) and 303(d),
being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1315(b) and 1313(d).



   (C)   Control. To control the discharge of sediment and construction
site materials into the stormwater system and onto adjacent properties by:



      (1)   Minimizing erosion and sedimentation;



      (2)   Reducing the velocity of flows from the project site; and



      (3)   Protecting all points of discharge from outlets such as
pipes, drains, culverts, conduits and channels.



   (D)   Developing plans. To guide the construction of stormwater
management facilities by developing stormwater master plans that address
quantity and quality.



   (E)   Preservation. To encourage the preservation of floodplains,
floodways and open spaces to protect and benefit the community's quality of
life and natural resources.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.22  DEFINITIONS.



   Definitions established in § 56.46 of this chapter shall apply, in
addition to the following definitions, abbreviations and acronyms.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Those measures described in the
latest edition of The Indiana Department of Natural Resource's guidance
documents, including the Handbook for Erosion Control in Developing Areas,
1985 or the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual. This shall also include
related documents published and distributed by the city.



   CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL IN EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (CPESC). A
national certification sponsored by the Soil and Water Conservation Society
(SWCS) and the International Erosion Control Association (IECA). Applicants
go through a process including peer reviews and written exams. CERTIFIED
PROFESSIONALS can design and evaluate erosion and sediment control and/or
storm water control plans as well as educate others in sound approaches for
preventing off-site impacts from development activities.



   CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL IN STORMWATER QUALITY CONTROL (CPSQC). A
national certification sponsored by the Soil and Water Conservation Society
(SWCS) and the International Erosion Control Association (IECA). Applicants
go through a process including peer reviews and written exams. CERTIFIED
PROFESSIONALS can design and evaluate erosion and sediment control and/or
storm water control plans as well as educate others in sound approaches for
preventing off-site impacts from development activities.



   EUTROPHICATION. A natural process of nutrients and sediment building up
over time in a body of water until it gradually fills in and disappears from
the landscape. Human activities within a watershed can greatly accelerate
this process.



   FLOCCULATING. Agitation of chemically treated water to induce
coagulation. Very small suspended particles collide and agglomerate into a
larger heavier "floc" that settle out by gravity. FLOCCULATION is a principal
mechanism in removing turbidity from water.



   HYDROLOGIC PERIMETER. The watershed(s) perimeter for subject property.



   HYDROLOGIC UNIT CODE (HUC). A number unique to a specific watershed,
enabling agencies to have common terms of reference and agree on the
boundaries of a watershed. These commonly understood boundaries foster
understanding of how landscapes function, where water quality problems should
be addressed, and who needs to be involved in the planning process.



   PERIMETER CONTROL PLAN (PCP). A component of the stormwater quality
management permit that illustrates the steps taken around the perimeter of
the project site to prevent sediment discharge and other construction
pollutants from leaving the site.



   PERIMETER OUTFALL(S). The watershed discharge point(s) for subject
property.



   PERMITTEE. The person responsible for the land-disturbing activity and
who shall have ownership interest in the subject property.



   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in
stormwater treatment techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated by
state registration, professional certification, experience or completion of
coursework that enable the individual to make sound, professional judgments
regarding stormwater control or treatment and monitoring, pollutant fate and
transport and drainage planning.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A component of the
stormwater quality management permit that illustrates how the discharge of
sediment and other construction pollutants will be maintained on the site.



   STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PERMIT (SWQMP). A legal document that
allows the permit holder to break ground or disturb soil on an entire
construction site within the provisions of a Perimeter Control Plan and a
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The permit addresses erosion
prevention, sediment control and non-sediment pollution prevention activities.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.23  AUTHORITY AND RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   (A)   Designated representatives from the city shall have the
right-of-entry on or upon the property of any person subject to this
subchapter and any permit/document issued hereunder, at all reasonable times.



   (B)   The city or its designated representatives shall be provided
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
monitoring, sampling, inventory, records examination and copying and the
performance of any other duties necessary to determine compliance with this
subchapter.



   (C)   Where a property, site or facility has security measures in
place which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, designated
representatives from the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for
the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.



   (D)   Designated representatives from the city shall have the right
to set up on a person's property such devices necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the person's stormwater operations or discharges.



   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the areas to be inspected and/or monitored shall be removed promptly by
the person at the written or verbal request of the city. The costs of
clearing the access shall be borne by the owner/operator.



   (F)   The City Stormwater Engineer, or a designated representative,
may inspect the facilities of any person in order to ensure compliance with
this subchapter. The inspection shall be made with the consent of the owner,
manager or signatory official. If the consent is refused, denied or not
promptly addressed, the city may seek issuance of an administrative search
warrant.



   (G)   The city has the right to determine and impose inspection
schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Inspections
shall include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   An initial inspection prior to stormwater management
plan approval;



      (2)   An inspection prior to burial of any underground
drainage structure;



      (3)   Inspections as necessary to ensure effective control of
sediment prior to discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system;



      (4)   Inspections to verify that action plans identified in
previous site visits were successfully implemented; and



      (5)   A final inspection when all work, including installation
of storm management facilities, has been completed.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.24  PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.



   (A)   This SWQMP alone does not authorize or grant permission to
begin development or redevelopment on subject property. It does not supersede
other permits required by the city.



   (B)   All project site owners, as applicable in § 56.20(C), shall
submit an application for a SWQMP on forms provided by the city.



   (C)   Applications must include a notice of intent (NOI), Perimeter
Control Plan (PCP), Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and any
other necessary information or documentation requested by the city. The NOI
requirements are included in division (E) of this section.



   (D)   The PCP and SWPPP are components of the SWQMP. While both
plans may be approved simultaneously, the provisions of a PCP shall be
implemented, inspected and accepted by the city prior to implementing the
SWPPP and before other construction proceeds.



   (E)   The project site owner must notify the city and the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) within 48 hours prior to the
commencement of construction activities through the submittal of an updated
NOI. Upon completion of construction activities, stabilization of the project
site and removal of all temporary erosion protection and sediment control
measures, the applicant shall submit a notice of termination (NOT). The city,
or its designated representative, shall inspect the project site to verify
that the requirements of the NOT have been met. Once the city verifies the
NOT, the city will forward a copy of the verified NOT to IDEM.



      (1)   Submittal for a SWQMP application shall include a NOI
letter, as required by 327 I.A.C. 15-5 and 327 I.A.C. 15-13, with proof of
publication of a public notice, construction plans, a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan and any other necessary information or documentation
requested by the city.



      (2)   The NOI letter, proof of publication of public notice
and construction plans for the SWQMP shall be submitted to the city.



   (F)   The city reserves the right to require a checklist of
necessary items to be completed and included with the SWQMP application
submittal. Upon submittal, the SWQMP application shall be rejected in its
entirety should any item on the checklist be incomplete.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.25  PERIMETER CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A PCP shall be approved by the city prior to breaking ground
or disturbing soil in order to install sediment control practices at the
hydrologic perimeter/outfall(s) of a construction site.



   (B)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been
installed and have been stabilized.



   (C)   The PCP does not give permission to the permit holder to break
ground or disturb soil on the entire construction site, as is granted through
the approval and issuance of a SWQMP.



   (D)   Contractors shall install sediment control measures in
accordance with the PCP and regularly inspect and maintain the facilities
throughout construction.



   (E)   The PCP shall:



      (1)   Include measures to minimize erosion and prevent
sediment from leaving the site during initial disturbance activities and
prior to temporary or permanent erosion prevention and/or sediment control
practices;



      (2)   Address downstream outfall points;



      (3)   Address prevention of sediment deposition on properties
adjacent to the project site. Consider applicable BMPs relevant to the type
of flow, site terrain, soil type and other factors;



      (4)   Only utilize buffer strips for sheet flow and shall be
at least, but not limited to, 25 feet in width;



      (5)   Include locations and descriptions of construction
entrances and exits that comply, at a minimum, with BMP standards; and



      (6)   Protect outlets such as pipes, drains, culverts,
conduits or channels and significantly minimize erosion and sedimentation by
implementing BMPs to reduce the velocity of flows from the project site.



   (F)   The Indiana Department of Natural Resource's guidance
documents, including the Handbook for Erosion Control in Developing Areas,
1985, or the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual should be reviewed and
considered when preparing the PCP.



   (G)   The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other guidance
documents to serve as design and implementation standards. These documents
may be applied by the city as standards by which designs are to be prepared
and controls implemented.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.26  PERIMETER AND OUTFALL INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon implementation of the PCP, a perimeter and outfall
protection inspection will be performed to ensure that the contractor
installed the sediment control measures in accordance with the PCP approved
by the city. The inspection shall include participation by the city, the
permittee and the permittee's contractor.



   (B)   Inspection shall be performed within seven normal business
days after the submittal of a written request to the city, but prior to any
disturbance or clearing of soil permitted under the SWQMP. The inspector
shall either approve the portion of work completed or shall notify the
permittee where the work fails to comply with the approved PCP. If the
inspection is not performed within seven normal business days of receipt of
written notice, then it shall be considered approved for site-wide work, but
open to future comments from the city.



   (C)   Inspection of perimeter protection BMPs shall consist of a
visual checklist for each type of BMP to ensure that each was designed and
installed according to site specific conditions.



   (D)   The PCP shall consider and address any seasonal variations
which may hinder the effectiveness of the BMPs. Seasonal variations may
include changes in flow, hydrology, temperature and vegetation. BMPs shall be
designed according to these variations and maintained to the appropriate
level of service.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.27  STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Construction plan sheets and an accompanying narrative report
shall be submitted describing existing and proposed site conditions.



   (B)   Included are the following:



      (1)   An index indicating the location in the construction
plans of all information required by this division;



      (2)   Description of the nature and purpose of the project;



      (3)   Legal description of the project site. The description
should be to the nearest quarter section, township and range, and include the
civil township;



      (4)   Soil properties, characteristics, limitations, and
hazards associated with the project site and the measures that will be
integrated into the project to overcome or minimize adverse soil conditions;



      (5)   General construction sequence of how the project site
will be built, including phases of construction;



      (6)   Fourteen-digit watershed hydrologic unit code (HUC);



      (7)   A reduced plat or project site map showing the lot
numbers, lot boundaries and road layout and names. The reduced map must be
legible and submitted on a sheet or sheets no larger than 11 inches by 17
inches for all phases or sections of the project site;



      (8)   A general site plan exhibit with the proposed
construction area superimposed on ortho-aerial map at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet. The exhibit should provide two-foot contour information and
include all roads and buildings within a minimum 500-foot radius beyond the
project boundaries;



      (9)   Identification of any other state or federal water
quality permits that are required for construction activities associated with
the owner's project site;



      (10)   Temporary stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation;



      (11)   Permanent stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation;



      (12)   Temporary and permanent stabilization plans shall
include the following:



         (a)   Specifications and application rates for soil
amendments and seed mixtures; and



         (b)   The type and application rate for anchored mulch.



      (13)   Anticipated inspection and maintenance requirements for
permanent and temporary measures. This shall include the expected frequency
of routine inspections and maintenance activities (such as removal of waste
concrete);



      (14)   A description of potential pollutant sources associated
with the construction activities that may reasonably be expected to add a
significant amount of pollutants to stormwater discharges, including:



         (a)   Waste concrete management;



         (b)   Material delivery, handling and storage;



         (c)   Sanitary/septic waste management;



         (d)   Solid waste/trash and debris management;



         (e)   Spill prevention control and countermeasures;



         (f)   Vehicle and equipment cleaning, fueling and
maintenance; and



         (g)   Sensitive and vegetated area preservation.



      (15)   Material delivery, handling and storage associated with
construction activities shall meet the spill prevention and spill response
requirements of 327 I.A.C. 2-6.1;



      (16)   The SWPPP shall include provisions for addressing the
following issues as applicable to the site-specific construction activities:



         (a)   Dewatering operations;



         (b)   Contaminated soil management;



         (c)   Hazardous materials and waste management;



         (d)   Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizer use;



         (e)   Collection system maintenance;



         (f)   Drainage system flushing; and



         (g)   Over-water activities.



      (17)   The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other
guidance documents to serve as design and implementation standards;



      (18)   Vicinity map depicting the project site location in
relationship to recognizable local landmarks, cities and major roads, such as
a USGS topographic quadrangle map or county or municipal road map;



      (19)   An existing project site layout that must include the
following information:



         (a)   Location, name and normal water level of all
wetlands, lakes, ponds and water courses on, or adjacent to, the project site;



         (b)   Location of all existing structures on the project
site;



         (c)   One-hundred year floodplains, floodway fringes and
floodways. Please note if none exists;



         (d)   Soil map of the predominant soil types, as
determined by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Soil Survey or as determined by a soil
scientist. A soil legend must be included with the soil map;



         (e)   Identification and delineation of vegetative
cover, such as grass, weeds, brush and trees, on the project site;



         (f)   Location of storm, sanitary, combined sewer and
septic tank systems and outfalls;



         (g)   Location of regulated drains, farm drains, inlets
and outfalls, if any exist of record;



         (h)   Land use of all adjacent properties; and



         (i)   Existing topography at a contour interval
appropriate to indicate drainage patterns.



      (20)   Final project site layout, including the following
information:



         (a)   Location of all proposed site improvements,
including roads, utilities, lot delineation and identification, proposed
structures and common areas;



         (b)   One-hundred year floodplains, floodway fringes and
floodways. Please note if none exists; and



         (c)   Proposed final topography at a contour interval
appropriate to indicate drainage patterns.



      (21)   Plans shall include the following information:



         (a)   Provisions for operation and maintenance of
measures identified in the PCP;



         (b)   Make clear the erosion prevention and sediment
controls which are most appropriate to the specific site conditions;



         (c)   Illustrate the location and extent of erosion
prevention and sediment controls;



         (d)   Sequencing and schedule information, structural
and nonstructural Best Management Practices (BMPs), temporary and permanent
stabilization measures;



         (e)   Anticipated inspection and maintenance
requirements for permanent and temporary measures. This shall include the
expected frequency of routine inspections and maintenance activities (such as
removal of sediment and construction debris);



         (f)   Provisions for construction phasing. This shall be
designed so that stripping and clearing of the site exposes only the area
necessary for immediate activities and minimizes the amount of soil exposed
at any one time. This includes rough grading, construction of utilities,
infrastructure and buildings and final grading and landscaping. Phasing shall
identify an expected date when clearing of the area will begin and the
estimated duration of exposure. The sequence of phased clearing and the
installation of temporary and permanent erosion control measures shall be
identified;



         (g)   Provisions for stabilizing denuded areas and soil
stockpiles within 15 days of final grade;



         (h)   Provisions for stabilizing cut and fill slopes.



            1.   Minimization of erosion shall be the
objective when designing and constructing cut and fill slopes. Length,
steepness, soil type, upslope tributary area, groundwater and other relevant
factors shall all be taken into account.



            2.   Stabilization practices such as rock rip-rap,
geosynthetic material or other methods approved by the city shall be used on
cut and fill slopes at three to one (3:1) (horizontal to vertical) or greater.



            3.   Cut and fill slopes, except those indicated
in division (B)(21)(h)4. below, shall be stabilized with permanent or
temporary soil stabilization measures within 15 days of either achieving
final grade, or within 15 days to any area that will remain dormant for over
60 days.



            4.   Any cut and fill slopes with a grade of 18%
or greater shall be either temporarily or permanently stabilized within 48
hours.



         (i)   Erosion prevention measures shall be designed to
minimize the suspension of sediment from the soil. The controls may function
independently or in combination with sediment control measures, to prevent
sediment laden runoff from leaving the construction site. Acceptable erosion
prevention practices shall be defined by the city guidance documents; and



         (j)   Sediment control measures shall be designed to
remove sediment, by settling, flocculating, filtering or other means, from
storm runoff prior to discharge from the construction site. The controls may
function independently or in combination with erosion prevention measures to
prevent sediment laden runoff from leaving the construction site. Acceptable
sediment control practices shall be defined by city guidance documents.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.28  REQUIREMENTS FOR INDIVIDUAL LOTS.



   (A)   Although no permit is required for individual lots disturbing
less than one acre within a larger permitted project, a formal stormwater
review shall be required prior to the issuance of an improvement location
permit.



   (B)   All stormwater management measures necessary to comply with
this subchapter must be implemented in accordance with the permitted plan for
the larger project.



   (C)   The city requires the following surveyed information be
submitted for review and approval prior to the issuance of an improvement
location permit.



      (1)   Dimensions, elevations, drainage patterns and swales and
location of existing buildings and natural features which are pertinent to
this subchapter;



      (2)   Proposed drainage patterns;



      (3)   Location of the construction access to the site; and



      (4)   Location of perimeter erosion and sediment control
measures prior to land disturbance.



   (D)   Temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures may
be removed for completion of the finish grade. Prior to removal of temporary
erosion prevention and sediment control measures, permanent stabilization
shall be in place a minimum of seven calendar days for sod and 45 calendar
days for seed and straw.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.29  NOTICE OF TERMINATION.



   (A)   The project site owner shall plan an orderly and timely
termination of the construction activities, including the implementation of
stormwater quality measures that are to remain on the project site.



   (B)   The project site owner shall submit a notice of termination
(NOT) letter to the city in accordance with the following:



      (1)   The project site owner shall submit a NOT letter when
the following conditions have been met:



         (a)   All land disturbing activity, including
construction on all building lots, has been completed and the entire site has
been stabilized; and



         (b)   All temporary erosion and sediment control
measures have been removed.



      (2)   The NOT letter must contain a certified statement that
each of the conditions in this section have been met.



      (3)   The project site owner may submit a NOT letter to obtain
early release from compliance with this subchapter, if the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   The remaining 95% is built and stabilized with
contiguous areas not exceeding one acre;



         (b)   A map of the project site, clearly identifying all
remaining undeveloped lots, is attached to the NOT letter. The map must be
accompanied by a list of names and addresses of individual lot owners or
individual lot operators of all undeveloped lots;



         (c)   All public and common improvements, including
infrastructure, have been completed and permanently stabilized and have been
transferred to the city or another appropriate local entity;



         (d)   The remaining acreage does not pose a significant
threat to the integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties or water
quality; and



         (e)   All permanent stormwater quality measures have
been implemented and are operational.



      (4)   The city or a representative designated by the
Stormwater Board may inspect the project site to evaluate the adequacy of the
remaining stormwater quality measures and compliance with the NOT letter
requirements. If the inspection finds that the project site owner has
sufficiently filed a NOT letter, the city shall forward notification to IDEM.
Upon receipt of the certified NOT letter and receipt of written approval from
IDEM, the project site owner shall no longer be responsible for compliance
with this subchapter.



      (5)   After a certified NOT letter has been submitted for a
project site, maintenance of the remaining stormwater quality measures shall
be the responsibility of the individual lot owner as well as occupier of the
property.



   (C)   Acceptance of site conditions shall be made by the city or its
designated representative based upon an inspection. If any of the following
items are deemed to be insufficient, not appropriate and/or inconsistent with
the SWPPP or objectives stated in this subchapter, the NOT application shall
not be approved:



      (1)   Pipes, channels, catch basins, water quality treatment
devices and other infrastructure are clear of sediment, obstructions and
debris and are designed and operating as appropriate for final site
conditions;



      (2)   Slopes are permanently stabilized;



      (3)   Temporary erosion prevention or sediment control devices
(such as silt fence and staking, outlet protection and the like) have been
removed (as appropriate) and any resulting soil disturbance stabilized;



      (4)   Temporary pollution prevention practices have been
demobilized or removed and affected areas stabilized;



      (5)   Sediment has been removed and slopes stabilized for
permanent flood control and water quality control practices;



      (6)   Detention pond grading is stabilized and/or excess
sediment removed so that actual volume is at least equal to designed volume
and condition; and



      (7)   Other items as deemed to be important by the city.



   (D)   As-built requirements.



      (1)   A SWQMP shall be considered open and active until a time
when the city accepts the site conditions and as-built requirements have been
completed.



      (2)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the
as-built condition of critical stormwater management facilities must be
reviewed and approved.



      (3)   The volume, capacity, slope, configuration, condition,
as-built plans and topographic information, as well as all pipe size,
material, lengths, for all detention, retention and water quality practices
shall be certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed in
the State of Indiana. This information shall be provided to the city in the
form of an as-built drawing or other electronic format accepted by the city.
The as-built certification shall indicate if final conditions are consistent
with, or exceed, the SWQMP provisions.



      (4)   If it is determined that information provided in the
as-built drawing, certification, inspection or survey of the site do not meet
or exceed the SWQMP requirements, the city reserves the right to withhold
certification of occupancy. Furthermore, other enforcement mechanisms may be
applied to the person certifying the as-built information.



      (5)   If, upon inspection by the city or designated
representative, it is determined that there is an item that must be addressed
to receive acceptance of site conditions, then the inspections and
maintenance shall continue as described in the SWQMP.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.30  INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Permittee-performed inspections and maintenance.



      (1)   Permittee-performed inspections (self inspections) must
be performed by a qualified professional.



      (2)   Inspections shall be performed at all control measures
every seven days and within 24 hours of a one-half inch rain event. The
inspections will determine the overall effectiveness of the SWPPP and grading
plan, needed maintenance activities and the need for additional control
measures.



      (3)   All inspections shall be documented in written form and
be made available to the city or submitted at the time interval specified in
the approved permit.



      (4)   Inspections shall be performed consistent with a visual
maintenance checklist approved by the city.



      (5)   Documentation of permittee performed inspections and
inspection findings shall be kept on site, if appropriate facilities (such as
a project trailer or building) are available.



      (6)   Documentation of permittee performed inspections and
inspection findings shall be made available within 48 hours of a request by
the city or designated representative. Failure to post or timely submit
documentation, as requested, shall indicate that inspections were not
performed and the city has discretion to implement enforcement procedures.



   (B)   Oversight inspections.



      (1)   The city, or the city's designated representative, has
the authority to periodically inspect the site of land disturbing activities
for which permits have been issued. The city may make inspections of the site
at its discretion and shall either approve the portion of the work completed
or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the SWPPP
as approved or is ineffective (regardless of consistency with an approved
plan).



      (2)   The city or its designated representative's inspections
and findings will be presented and reviewed with the permittee at the time of
inspection (as available to site personnel), and be available in the city
permit file within seven normal business days.



      (3)   In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall make
a written request at least two normal business days before the following
activities:



         (a)   PCP inspection. After perimeter protection,
erosion prevention and sediment control practices have been installed, but
prior to disturbance of the remaining site; and



         (b)   Upon completion of the project in order to receive
approval to cease permittee inspections in compliance with the SWQMP.



      (4)   The city or its designated representative may identify
any repairs, sediment/debris removal or replacement of all or portions of the
stormwater system(s) necessary to comply with the objectives of this
subchapter and the SWQMP.



      (5)   The city or its designated representative may develop
and require the implementation of an action plan to prevent the premature
system failure that exceeds the SWQMP provisions, but are necessary to
prevent stormwater pollution from leaving the site.



   (C)   Qualified professional registration and certification.



      (1)   A qualified professional is required to perform routine
inspections and direct and/or supervise maintenance activities to ensure that
the SWQMP provisions are being implemented properly.



      (2)   All qualified professionals performing inspections or
overseeing maintenance activities under this subchapter must be registered
with the city prior to execution of those actions. All applicants must file
an application with the city. Applicants must demonstrate knowledge of:



         (a)   Construction practices;



         (b)   Operational standards;



         (c)   Cause and failure indicators; and



         (d)   Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct
failures.



      (3)   Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the
following will be considered for registration:



         (a)   Professional engineer license in good standing in
the State of Indiana with demonstrated experience in erosion prevention and
sediment control on construction sites;



         (b)   Professional land surveyor license in good
standing in the State of Indiana with demonstrated experience in erosion
prevention and sediment control on construction sites;



         (c)   Landscape architect license in good standing in
the State of Indiana with demonstrated experience in erosion prevention and
sediment control on construction sites;



         (d)   Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control (CPESC) in good standing;



         (e)   Certified Professional in Stormwater Quality
Control (CPSQC) in good standing;



         (f)   Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control (EPSC)
Inspector Certification in good standing from Louisville and Jefferson County
Metropolitan Sewer District;



         (g)   Similar certification of any other similar program
in the State of Indiana or in the United States so long as that program
requires the applicant to pass a written test; and



         (h)   Documentation demonstrating the above will be
required by the city before registration is granted.



   (D)   Suspension and revocation. The city shall suspend or revoke
the registration of a qualified professional for activities not consistent
with the policies and procedures identified in this subchapter. This may
include registration suspension for submittal of false or misleading
information or for repeated incompetence or negligent actions. The city shall
issue a written warning and evaluate subsequent actions before suspending or
revoking the registration.



   (E)   Appeals.



      (1)   The city shall give written notice to a qualified
professional whose registration is subject to an action for suspension or
revocation.



      (2)   The city shall provide the qualified professional an
opportunity at an informal meeting with the city to demonstrate why no action
is warranted.



      (3)   Any qualified professional whose registration is revoked
or suspended may appeal that decision to the city's Stormwater Board.



   (F)   Reinstatement. A qualified professional whose registration has
been suspended or revoked may apply for reinstatement upon completing the
requirements established in this section after a period of at least one year.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.31  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Enforcement and penalties shall be governed according to §
56.50 of this chapter.



   (B)   At the Stormwater Board's discretion, it may withhold or delay
any permit application, inspection requests, appeals, or other plan approvals
from person(s) that have unresolved enforcement matters.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.32  APPEALS.



   (A)   The Stormwater Board shall be charged with addressing appeals
to violations and related matters of this subchapter.



   (B)   In order to have an appeal considered, the applicant shall
submit a written request. The Board shall have the authority to grant appeals
to violations of this subchapter or overwrite decisions made by the city
provided they are consistent with the objectives and policies of this
subchapter. The Board does not have the authority to permit actions by the
applicant that are based in lack of proper planning or implementation of site
development as defined in this subchapter and other measures applied to the
city.



   (C)   The Board will be made available to review accepted request(s)
for appeals on an as-needed basis. The decisions of the Board are final and
conclusive, but may be reviewed through the appropriate court actions. The
Board shall make its findings within five normal business days after the
appeal hearing.



   (D)   Upon issuance of a decision, citation or notice of violation
of this subchapter, it shall be conclusive and final unless the accused
violator submits a written notice of appeal to the city within ten normal
business days of the violation notice being served. If the city does not
issue a decision within ten normal business days of the written notice of
appeal, then the violation is considered upheld. If the city does not reverse
the decision, the aggrieved party may appeal to the Stormwater Board, by
filing a written request for hearing within ten normal business days of the
city's decision on the appeal. The request for hearing shall state the
specific reasons why the decision of the city is alleged to be in error, and
shall be accompanied by a cost bond in the amount of $500 with sufficient
surety to secure the costs of the appeal, including the cost of court
reporters, transcripts, plan reviews and other costs.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.33  COMPATIBILITY AND SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Should any section, division, clause or provision of this
subchapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of
the subchapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid, each section clause and provision being
declared severable.



   (B)   If any provisions of this subchapter and any other provisions
of law impose overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain any
restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is
more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern.



   (C)   Provisions in § 56.32 of this subchapter are hereby declared
to be severable. If any provisions in § 56.32 of this subchapter and any
other provisions of law impose overlapping or contradictory regulations, or
contain any restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that
provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or
requirements shall govern.



(Ord. Z-06-09, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.34  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The City of New Albany shall collect administration fees for
plan review and site inspections associated with Stormwater Quality
Management Plan (SWQMP) permit issuance as outlined below.



   (B)   (1)   Fees shall be based on the amount of disturbed
acreage associated with any proposed project. Applications will not be
accepted for review without payment of the appropriate fee. The fees below
shall include inspection for perimeter control, grading and stormwater
quality management permits.



 

Residential Developments
 
Initial
 
Re-Submissions


1 to 4 lots
 
$450
 
$35


5 to 25 lots
 
$600
 
$50


26 to 75 lots
 
$1,100
 
$100


76 to 150 lots
 
$1,600
 
$150


More than 150 lots
 
$2,600
 
$250 sites w/ un-permitted construction underway two times the above



 



 

Non-Residential Developments
 
Initial
 
Re-Submissions


Up to 5.0 acres
 
$600
 
$50


5.1 to 10.0 acres
 
$1,300
 
$120


10.1 to 25.0 acres
 
$2,100
 
$200


25.1 or more acres
 
$2,600
 
$250 sites w/ un-permitted construction underway two times the above



 



      (2)   Disturbed acres are defined as the area of the project
in which the surface of the land is disturbed by excavations, embankments,
land development, residential lot construction, mineral extraction and
moving, depositing or storing of soil, rock, earth or other earthmoving
activity.



   (C)   Applications will not be accepted for review without payment
of the appropriate fee, as collected by city staff and as directed by the
Stormwater Board.



   (D)   Contracted services shall be compensated for plan review and
inspections administered on behalf of the city as outlined below.



 

Residential Developments
 
Initial
 
Re-Submissions


1 to 4 lots
 
$350
 
$35


5 to 25 lots
 
$500
 
$50


26 to 75 lots
 
$1,000
 
$100


76 to 150 lots
 
$1,500
 
$150


More than 150 lots
 
$2,500
 
$250



 



 

Non-Residential Developments
 
Initial
 
Re-Submissions


Up to 5.0 acres
 
$500
 
$50


5.1 to 10.0 acres
 
$1,200
 
$120


10.1 to 25.0 acres
 
$2,000
 
$200


25.1 or more acres
 
$2,500
 
$250



 



(Ord. G-07-10, passed 3-22-2007)



STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGE CONTROL



§ 56.45  TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Title. This subchapter shall be known as the "Stormwater
Illicit Discharge Control Ordinance" of New Albany, Indiana and may be so
cited.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide
regulations and measures that will address the issue of clean stormwater in
the city and to establish procedures by which these requirements are to be
administered and enforced.



   (C)   Jurisdiction. This subchapter shall govern all properties
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, including areas of shared
development review through a fringe with Floyd County, Indiana as established
by an interlocal agreement adopted by both jurisdictions.



   (D)   Goals and objectives.



      (1)   Protection of the short-term and long-term public
health, safety, general welfare. This objective will be achieved by:



         (a)   Providing for regulation and management of the
city's stormwater system, including public and private facilities in the
city's service area;



         (b)   Protecting and preserving water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat within the city and in downstream receiving waters; and



         (c)   Protecting those downstream from stormwater
quality impairment(s);



      (2)   Compliance with state and federal stormwater regulations
developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act Amendments of 1987 and subsequent
amendments through 2004. The objectives of these regulations include:



         (a)   Controlling the quality of water discharged by
controlling the contribution of pollutants to the stormwater system by
stormwater discharges associated with residential, commercial and industrial
activity;



         (b)   Prohibiting illicit discharges to stormwater; and



         (c)   Controlling the discharge of spills and dumping or
any disposal of materials other than stormwater into the stormwater system.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge or release prohibited by this
subchapter which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to
occurrence.



   APPEALS COMMITTEE. Comprised of Stormwater Board members.



   CITY STORMWATER ENGINEER. The person, persons or entity designated by
the Stormwater Board. The engineer shall be qualified through applicable
professional licensure and/or have related stormwater expertise, experience
or other qualifications acceptable by a majority vote of the Common Council.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land disturbance activities subject to state
NPDES general construction permits related to "Rule 13" or "Rule 5" or local
permits. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges
pursuant to a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (other
than the city's NPDES stormwater permit) or otherwise defined by this
subchapter.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management (IDEM) under delegated authority by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group or general area-wide basis.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). Any facility designed or
used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited
to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs,
gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities,
structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and human-made or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures, and
which is:



      (1)   Owned or maintained by the city;



      (2)   Not a combined sewer; and



      (3)   Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.



   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater.



   PERSON. Except to the extent exempted from this subchapter, any
individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private
corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution,
utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the
state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.



   POLLUTANT. Anything of a chemical or component nature which causes or
contributes to pollution.



   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water's
physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any
constituent.



   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.



   SHALL. Indicative that something must happen or somebody is obliged to
do something because of a rule or law.



   STANDARD OF PRACTICE FOR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT. A document that defines the management practices for erosion
prevention, sediment control and other construction site waste management by
which homebuilders may use as guidance and minimum expectations to be
achieved during inspections by the city. In the event that this document is
not published, then the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual developed by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) may be used as equivalent or
if it is not published then the Indiana Handbook for Erosion and Sediment
Control in Urban Areas developed by IDNR may be used as equivalent.



   STORMWATER BOARD. Persons defined in § 56.01.



   STORMWATER ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Designated or contracted by the
Stormwater Board.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF or STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage
consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and
resulting from the precipitation.



   STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL or BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). A
structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater
runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not
limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity
of flow.



   UNDILUTED DISCHARGES. A discharge that has not been mixed with that of
another source such as a septic tank or other source.



   USEPA. An acronym for United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies
of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or
forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Indiana which are not
entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single
person.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.47  AUTHORITY AND RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   (A)   Designated city staff shall have right-of-entry on or upon the
property of any person subject to this subchapter and any permit/document
issued hereunder, at all reasonable times. The staff shall be provided
access, as described in this section, to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, monitoring, sampling, inventory, records examination
and copying and the performance of any other duties necessary to determine
compliance with this subchapter.



   (B)   Where a property, site or facility has security measures in
force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the
designated city staff will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities.



   (C)   Designated city staff shall have the right to set up on the
person's property the devices necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering
of the person's stormwater operations or discharges.



   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the areas to be inspected and/or monitored shall be removed promptly by
the person at the written or verbal request of the city staff. The costs of
clearing the access shall be borne by the person.



   (E)   The City Stormwater Engineer or his or her designee may
inspect the facilities of any user in order to ensure compliance with this
subchapter. The inspections shall be made with the consent of the person or
signatory official. If consent is refused, denied or not promptly addressed,
the designated city staff may seek issuance of an administrative search
warrant.



   (F)   The city has the right to determine and impose inspection
schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Inspections
may include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   An initial inspection prior to stormwater management
plan approval;



      (2)   An inspection prior to burial of any underground
drainage structure;



      (3)   Erosion control inspections as necessary to ensure
effective control of sediment prior to discharge to the municipal separate
storm sewer system;



      (4)   A finish inspection when all work, including
installation of storm management facilities, has been completed; and



      (5)   An inspection to determine the effectiveness or
operational viability of a permanent or long-term stormwater quality
management practice.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-06)



§ 56.48  ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.



      (1)   Pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Program, illicit
discharges to the MS4 are defined as illegal. This is being done by
identifying both allowable and illegal non-stormwater discharges in a manner
that is in the best interest of the city.



      (2)   Except as hereinafter provided, all non-stormwater
discharges into the MS4 are prohibited and declared to be unlawful.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open
channel or any other conveyance system that discharges anything except
stormwater or unpolluted water, which is approved by the City Stormwater
Engineer based on exemptions listed in division (B) of this section, to the
stormwater system.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge waters from
residential construction activities that are not complying with the standard
of practice for residential construction stormwater management as approved
and advertised by the City Stormwater Engineer.



      (5)   In addition to illicit discharges, the discharge of
spills and the dumping and/or disposal of materials other than stormwater,
including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial wastes, commercial
car wash wastes, sewage, garbage, yard waste, trash, petroleum products
(including used motor vehicle fluids, leaf litter, grass clippings and animal
wastes), into the MS4, whether directly or indirectly, are prohibited, unless
authorized under an NPDES permit.



   (B)   Allowable discharges.  Unless the City Stormwater Engineer
has identified a discharge as an unacceptable source of pollutants to the
"Waters of the State of Indiana", the following non-stormwater discharges
into the MS4 are lawful:



      (1)   Discharges from emergency fire-fighting activities;



      (2)   Diverted stream flows;



      (3)   Rising ground waters;



      (4)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to separate
storm sewer systems (as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20));



      (5)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



      (6)   Discharges from potable water sources as required for
system maintenance;



      (7)   Drinking water line flushing;



      (8)   Air conditioning condensate;



      (9)   Uncontaminated landscape irrigation;



      (10)   Uncontaminated irrigation water;



      (11)   Lawn watering;



      (12)   Uncontaminated springs;



      (13)   Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;



      (14)   Uncontaminated water from footing drains and pumps;



      (15)   Individual residential car washing;



      (16)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



      (17)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;



      (18)   Controlled flushing stormwater conveyances (contained
and treated by appropriate Best Management Practices (BMPs));



      (19)   Discharges made from residential construction sites
fully and completely utilizing guidance provided by Standard of Practice for
Residential Construction Stormwater Management;



      (20)   Discharges within the constraints of an NPDES permit
from the Indiana Department Environmental Management (IDEM); and



      (21)   Discharges approved at the discretion of the City
Stormwater Engineer.



   (C)   Illegal discharges.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to improperly
dispose any contaminant into the MS4. Contaminants include those identified
by applicable state and federal laws and regulations.



      (2)   It is not the intent of the city to impose penalties for
discharges that have no significant adverse impact, as defined by the USEPA
and Indiana state law, on safety, health, the welfare of the environment or
the functionality of the stormwater drainage/collection system.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.49  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance in
amounts that could cause a threat to public drinking supplies, a spill having
a significant adverse impact as defined by the USEPA and Indiana state law,
or any other discharge that could constitute a threat to human health or the
environment, as may be asserted by the city, the owner or operator of the
facility shall give notice to the City Stormwater Engineer and IDEM as soon
as practicable, but in no event later than two hours of discovery of the
accidental discharge or the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances.



   (B)   If an emergency response by governmental agencies is needed,
the owner or operator should also call 911 immediately to report the
discharge. Furthermore, as required by the Indiana Spill Rule (327 I.A.C.
2-6.1-7) reports must be made within two hours of discovery. A written report
must be provided to the city Stormwater Engineer within five days of the time
the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances, unless this requirement is
waived by the City Stormwater Engineer for good cause shown on a case-by-case
basis, containing the following information:



      (1)   A description of the discharge;



      (2)   The exact dates and times of discharge; and



      (3)   Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of
the discharge.



   (C)   The discharger shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any
adverse impact to the MS4 or the waters of state, including accelerated or
additional monitoring necessary to determine the nature and impact of the
discharge. It shall not be a defense for the discharger in an enforcement
action to claim that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the
business or activity of the facility in order to maintain water quality and
minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.50  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   The person responsible for any connection in violation of this
subchapter shall immediately cause the illegal connection to be disconnected
and redirected, if necessary, to the city's sanitary sewer system upon
approval by the City Stormwater Engineer. The person shall provide to the
city written confirmation, satisfactory to the City Stormwater Engineer, that
the connection has been disconnected, and, if necessary, redirected to the
city sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Any person responsible for illicit discharges or noncompliance
with BMPs at industrial and/or construction sites, and who fails to correct
any prohibited condition or discontinue any prohibited activity at the order
of the City Stormwater Engineer shall be liable to the city for expenses
incurred in abating pollution. This may include expenses incurred in testing,
measuring, sampling, collecting, removing, treating, disposing of the
polluting materials, preventing further noncompliance and/or illicit
discharges and legal counsel fees of any such proceedings.



   (C)   The city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings by
law or equity for the enforcement of this subchapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or
permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each
day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for
injunctive relief. Any of the following enforcement remedies and penalties,
available to be applied independently or in a sequence deemed necessary,
shall be to the city in response to violations of this subchapter. If the
person, property or facility has or is required to have a stormwater
discharge permit from IDEM, the city shall alert the appropriate state
authorities of the violation.



      (1)   Notice of violation (NOV). Whenever designated city
staff find that any person owning or occupying a premises has violated or is
violating this subchapter or order issued hereunder, the enforcement official
shall serve, by personal service or by registered or certified mail, upon the
person a written NOV. Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of this notice,
or shorter period as may be prescribed in the NOV, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof,
which shall include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the city
Stormwater Engineer or his or her designee. Submission of this plan shall, in
no way, relieve liabilities for violations occurring before or after receipt
of the NOV.



      (2)   Revocation of permit. The city Stormwater Engineer shall
revoke and require the return of a permit or certificate by notifying the
permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits or
certificates shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved
application plans or specifications, refusal or failure to comply with the
requirements of state or local law or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit or certificate. Any permit or
certificate mistakenly issued in violation of any applicable state or local
law may also be revoked.



      (3)   Stop work order. The City Stormwater Engineer may issue
a stop work order and require that all construction cease except those
actions that are necessary to eliminate the illicit discharge. Unacceptable
or untimely actions to eliminate the illicit discharge shall be used as
grounds to revoke permits for the construction site as described in division
(C)(2) of this section.



      (4)   Compliance order. If any person shall violate the
provisions of this subchapter, the city shall give notice to the owner or to
any person in possession of the subject property ordering that all unlawful
conditions existing thereupon be abated within a schedule defined from the
date of the notice.



         (a)   The enforcement official shall have the authority
to establish elements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan and to
require any business to adopt and implement such a plan as may be reasonably
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. The enforcement official
may establish the requirements of BMPs for any premises.



         (b)   The notice and order may be given, provided that
if in the opinion of the City Stormwater Engineer, the unlawful condition is
such that it is of imminent danger or peril to the public, then the city
shall, with or without notice, proceed to abate the same, and the cost
thereof shall be charged against the property. The city, as described further
in this division, may recover the cost of such actions from the property
owner.



      (5)   Penalties. Any person that has been found to have been
in violation of any provision of this subchapter, may be assessed a penalty
not to exceed the amount presented in this division.



         (a)   The penalty shall increase by 25% of the previous
penalty amount for every subsequent, but separate offense made by the same
person. The penalty shall be in addition to other enforcement actions of this
section.



         (b)   The penalty may be assessed for each day, beyond
schedules applied in compliance orders or other schedules issued to the
property owner or other person responsible, for unauthorized activity defined
in this section.



         (c)   In determining the amount of the penalty the Board
shall consider the following:



            1.   The degree and extent of the harm to the
natural resources, to the public health or to the public or private property
resulting from the violation;



            2.   The duration and gravity of the violation;



            3.   The effect on ground or surface water quality;



            4.   The cost of rectifying the damage;



            5.   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



            6.   Whether the violation was committed willfully
or intentionally;



            7.   The cumulative effect of other enforcement
actions applied for the same offense;



            8.   The prior record of the violator in complying
or failing to comply with the stormwater quality management program; and



            9.   The costs of enforcement to the city.



         (d)   The maximum penalties will be determined by the
type of offense. This indicates the maximum that may be imposed for a first
offense and does not reflect the increases described above for repeat
offenses.



            1.   Development without permit: $2,500. To engage
in any development, use, construction, remodeling or other activity of any
nature upon land or improvements thereon, subject to the jurisdiction of this
subchapter without all required permits, certificates or other forms of
authorization as set forth in this subchapter.



            2.   Development inconsistent with permit: $2,500.
To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or other activity
of any nature in any way inconsistent with any approved plan, permit,
certificate or other form of authorization granted for the activity.



            3.   Violation by act or omission: $2,500. To
violate, by act or omission, any term, variance, modification, condition or
qualification placed by the city or its agent departments upon any required
permit, certificate, or other form of authorization of the use, development
or other activity upon land or improvements thereon.



            4.   Illicit discharge: $2,500. Any person who is
found to have improperly disposed of any substance defined as an illicit
discharge, not an allowable discharge or causes the city to be in
noncompliance with any applicable environmental permit.



            5.   Household products: $500. Any person who is
found to have improperly disposed of any substance not included in Section
3(a) or 3(b) that was purchased over-the-counter for household use, in
quantities considered normal for household purposes, which upon discharge to
the MS4 or drainage network would have an adverse impact on water quality or
cause the city to be in noncompliance with any applicable environmental
permit.



         (e)   In the event there are penalties assessed by the
state against the city caused by any person, the person shall be assessed the
equivalent amount of penalty. This shall include, but is not limited to,
penalties for improper disposal or illegal dumping, or illicit connection
into the MS4.



      (6)   Administrative fee. Any person who undertakes any
development activity requiring a stormwater management plan hereunder without
first submitting the plan for review and approval shall pay to the city, in
addition to any permit or inspection fee, an administrative fee of up to
$2,500.



      (7)   Order to clean and abate/restore. Any violator may be
required to clean and/or restore land to its condition prior to the violation.



      (8)   Cost recovery. If corrective action is not taken in the
time specified, the city may take the corrective action. The cost of the
corrective action, abatement and/or restoration shall be borne by the
property owner. If the invoice is not paid within 90 calendar days, the
enforcement official shall have the authority to place a lien upon and
against the property. If the lien is not satisfied within 90 calendar days,
the enforcement official is authorized to take all legal measures available
to enforce the lien as a judgment, including, without limitation, enforcing
the lien in an action brought for a money judgment, by delivery to the
assessor or a special assessment against the property.



      (9)   Injunctions and/or proceedings at law or in equity.



         (a)   Any violation of this subchapter or of any
condition, order, requirement or remedy adopted pursuant hereto may be
restrained, corrected, abated, mandated or enjoined by other appropriate
proceeding pursuant to state law.



         (b)   The Stormwater Board shall pursue, through a court
of competent jurisdiction, any penalties that are not paid in full.



      (10)   Fee or utility credit revocation or adjustment. This
enforcement tool is intended to be available or used if there are, at any
time, provisions for a funding mechanism managed by the city. This
enforcement tool permits that credits (reductions), adjustments (increases)
or other measures to modify fees or utility charges may be revoked or added,
in full or in part, if any provisions of this subchapter are violated.



      (11)   Civil actions. In addition to any other remedies
provided in this section, any violation may be enforced by civil action
brought by the city's Attorney. Monies recovered under this division shall be
paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with
implementing or enforcing the provisions of this subchapter. In any such
action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following
remedies:



         (a)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;



         (b)   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any
investigation, inspection or monitoring survey which lead to the
establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and
bringing legal action under this division;



         (c)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting or
terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation; and



         (d)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to
water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life.



      (12)   Emergency orders and abatements. The enforcement
official may order the abatement of any discharge from any source to the
stormwater conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement
official, the discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition that
presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or the
environment or a violation of a NPDES permit. In emergency situations where
the property owner or other responsible party is unavailable and time
constraints are such that service of a notice and order to abate cannot be
effected without presenting an immediate danger to the public health, safety
or welfare, or the environment or a violation of a NPDES permit, the city may
perform or cause to be performed such work as shall be necessary to abate the
threat or danger. The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the
property owner and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of
this division.



      (13)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter
is a threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable
relief as provided by state and local law.



      (14)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this
subchapter are not exclusive of any remedies available under any applicable
federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies.



      (15)   Citizen actions. Any citizen may commence a civil
action, against any person who is alleged to be in violation of this
subchapter, to the extent permitted by the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §
1365), including an action against the city for an alleged failure to perform
or administer any act or duty under this subchapter that is not
discretionary. No action may be taken against the city if it has commenced
and is diligently pursuing corrective or administrative actions, or if the
city is prosecuting a civil or criminal action against an alleged violator in
a court of appropriate authority or jurisdiction within the state.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.51  APPEALS.



   (A)   The Stormwater Board shall be charged with addressing appeals
to violations and related matters of this subchapter.



   (B)   In order to have an appeal considered, the applicant shall
submit a written request. The Stormwater Board shall have the authority to
grant appeals to violators of this subchapter or overwrite decisions made by
the City Stormwater Engineer or stormwater enforcement officer, provided they
are consistent with the objectives and policies of this subchapter. The
Stormwater Board does not have the authority to permit actions by the
applicant that are based in lack of proper planning or implementation of site
development as defined in this subchapter and other measures applied to the
city.



   (C)   The Stormwater Board will be made available to review accepted
request(s) for appeals on an as-needed basis. The decisions of the Stormwater
Board are final and conclusive, but may be reviewed through the appropriate
court actions. The Stormwater Board shall make its findings within five
normal business days after the appeal hearing.



   (D)   Upon issuance of a decision, citation or notice of violation
of this subchapter, it shall be conclusive and final, unless the accused
violator submits a written notice of appeal to the city within ten normal
business days of the violation notice being served. If the City Stormwater
Engineer or stormwater enforcement officer does not issue a decision within
ten normal business days of the written notice of appeal then the violation
is considered upheld. If the City Stormwater Engineer or stormwater
enforcement officer does not reverse the decision, the aggrieved party may
appeal to the Stormwater Board or successor, by filing a written request for
hearing within ten normal business days of the City Stormwater Engineer's
decision on the appeal. The request for hearing shall state the specific
reasons why the decision of the City Stormwater Engineer is alleged to be in
error and shall be accompanied by a cost bond in the amount of $500 with
sufficient surety to secure the costs of the appeal, including the cost of
court reporters, transcripts, plan reviews and other costs.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 56.52  COMPATIBILITY AND SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Should any section, division, clause or provision of this
subchapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of
the subchapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid, each article, section, clause and
provision being declared severable.



   (B)   If any provisions of this subchapter and any other provisions
of law impose overlapping or contradictory regulations or contain any
restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is
more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern.



   (C)   Provisions in § 56.50 are hereby declared to be severable. If
any provisions in § 56.50 and any other provisions of law impose overlapping
or contradictory regulations, or contain any restrictions covering any of the
same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes
higher standards or requirements shall govern.



(Ord. G-06-10, passed 4-3-2006)



POST-CONSTRUCTION RUNOFF CONTROL



§ 56.60  TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Title. This subchapter shall be known as the
"Post-Construction Runoff Quality Control Ordinance" of the city and may be
so cited.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide
regulations and measures that will address the issue of stormwater quality in
the city and to establish procedures by which these requirements are to be
administered and enforced.



   (C)   Jurisdiction.



      (1)   This subchapter shall govern all properties within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city, including areas of shared development
review through a fringe with Floyd County, Indiana as established by an
interlocal agreement adopted by both jurisdictions.



      (2)   The city requires that all development or redevelopment
activities that result in the disturbance of one or more acres of land,
including land disturbing activities on individual lots of less than one acre
that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, shall obtain a
stormwater quality management permit (SWQMP).



      (3)   (a)   The following activities are exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter:



            1.   Agricultural land management activities; and



            2.   Renovations and amendments to existing
buildings disturbing less than one acre.



         (b)   This exemption applies only to permitting
procedures and does not apply to any discharge of sediment or other form of
water pollution that may leave a site. These discharges may be enforced as
illicit discharges by other sections of the city code.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.61  GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Protection of the short-term and long-term public health,
safety and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by:



      (1)   Providing for regulation and management of the city's
stormwater system, including public and private facilities in the city's
jurisdiction; and



      (2)   Protecting and preserving water quality and fish and
wildlife habitat within the city.



   (B)   Compliance with state and federal stormwater regulations
developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act Amendments of 1987 and subsequent
amendments. The objectives of these regulations include:



      (1)   Managing the quality of water discharged to the
municipal separate storm sewer system by controlling the contribution of
pollution and pollutants associated with new development and redevelopment;
and



      (2)   Protecting or enhancing stormwater quality to a level of
"designated use", as defined by the Clean Water Act §§ 305(b) and 303(d),
being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1315(b) and 1313(d).



   (C)   Damage. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities.



   (D)   Maintenance costs. To ensure the use of the public and private
stormwater management system so as not to result in excessive maintenance
costs to the city.



   (E)   Preservation of natural areas. To encourage the use of natural
and aesthetically pleasing designs that maximize the preservation of natural
areas.



   (F)   Plan development. To guide the construction of stormwater
management facilities by developing stormwater master plans that address
quantity and quality.



   (G)   Preservation of floodplains and the like. To encourage the
preservation of floodplains, floodways and open spaces to protect and benefit
the community's quality of life and natural resources.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.62  DEFINITIONS.



   Definitions established in §§ 56.22 and 56.46 of this chapter shall
apply in addition to the following definitions, abbreviations and acronyms.



   DETENTION. To store excess stormwater runoff prior to discharging it
into the conveyance system.



   FIRST FLUSH. The first one-half-inch of rainfall over the drainage area
to the BMP.



   RETENTION. To store excess stormwater runoff prior to ground
infiltration.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.63  AUTHORITY AND RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   (A)   Designated representatives from the city shall have the
right-of-entry on or upon the property of any person, at all reasonable
times, subject to this subchapter and any permit/document issued hereunder.



   (B)   The city or its designated representatives shall be provided
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
monitoring, sampling, inventory, records examination and copying and the
performance of any other duties necessary to determine compliance with this
subchapter.



   (C)   Where a property, site or facility has security measures in
place which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, designated
representatives from the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for
the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.



   (D)   Designated representatives from the city shall have the right
to set up on a person's property the devices necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the person's stormwater operations or discharges.



   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the areas to be inspected and/or monitored shall be removed promptly by
the person at the written or verbal request of the city. The costs of
clearing the access shall be borne by the owner/operator.



   (F)   The City Engineer, or a designated representative, may inspect
the facilities of any person in order to ensure compliance with this
subchapter. The inspection shall be made with the consent of the owner,
manager or signatory official. If such consent is refused, denied or not
promptly addressed, the city may seek issuance of an administrative search
warrant.



   (G)   The city has the right to determine and impose inspection
schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Inspections
may include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   An initial inspection prior to stormwater management
plan approval;



      (2)   An inspection prior to burial of any underground
drainage structure;



      (3)   Inspections as necessary to ensure effective control of
sediment prior to discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system;



      (4)   Inspections to verify that action plans identified in
previous site visits were successfully implemented; and



      (5)   A final inspection when all work, including installation
of storm management facilities, has been completed.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.64  POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.



   (A)   SWQMP requirements established in §§ 56.20 through 56.33 of
this chapter shall be amended to include review of a Post-Construction
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). The post-construction SWPPP
shall include the following information:



      (1)   A description of the proposed land use including amount
of impervious area, directly connected impervious area and nature of the
development;



      (2)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and
construction details of all post-construction stormwater quality best
management practices (BMPs), as defined in the city guidance documents;



      (3)   A sequence describing when each post-construction
stormwater quality BMP will be installed; and



      (4)   A long-term operation and maintenance agreement
containing maintenance guidelines for all post-construction stormwater
quality measures to facilitate their proper long-term function. This
agreement shall be made available to future parties, including property
owners, who will assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of
the post-construction stormwater quality measures.



   (B)   The post-construction SWPPP shall include provisions for
buffers.



      (1)   The waterway buffer will be used to define areas where
land disturbance activities shall be permitted, but construction of any
building or structure shall not be permitted.



      (2)   A waterway buffer shall be applied to all waterways
serving more than 25 acres of tributary area or presented on a United State
Geological Survey map as a blue line stream.



      (3)   Automatic exemptions are granted so long as, erosion
prevention and sediment control, water quality and cut-fill policies are
adequately addressed. Exemptions shall be granted for:



         (a)   Roads and utilities crossing waterways; and



         (b)   Pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to
waterways.



      (4)   The waterway buffer shall be defined as the area
contained within a boundary established 25 feet beyond the floodplain
boundary as defined by FEMA or city master planning or 50 feet from the top
of waterway bank as defined by geomorphic shape (not by the current water
surface elevation); whichever is larger.



      (5)   The waterway buffer and floodplain may be used for
application of water quality devices. This may only be permitted if erosion
prevention and sediment control, water quality and cut-fill policies are
adequately addressed as determined by the city according to the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (C)   A licensed professional engineer in the State of Indiana shall
stamp all construction plans and long-term maintenance documentation. This
shall include all proposed improvements or modifications to existing or new
stormwater infrastructure and other related improvements or modifications.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.65  BMP DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND CRITERIA.



   (A)   The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other guidance
documents to serve as design and implementation standards. Other guidance
documents distributed by the city should be reviewed and considered when
preparing the post-construction SWPPP. These documents may be applied as
standards by which designs are to be prepared and controls implemented.



   (B)   The city shall have authority to implement this subchapter by
appropriate regulations, guidance or other related materials. In this regard,
technical, administrative or procedural matters may be modified as needed to
meet the objectives defined herein, so long as the modifications as to
technical, administrative or procedural matters are not contrary or beyond
the intent of the objectives defined above.



      (1)   Regulations, guidance or other related materials that
may be given authority by this subchapter may include, but are not limited
to: best management practice (BMP) manuals, design regulations and
requirements, submittal checklists, review checklists, inspection checklists,
certifications, stormwater management manuals and operation and maintenance
manuals.



      (2)   Materials may include information deemed appropriate by
the city including guidance and specifications for the preparation of grading
plans, selecting environmentally sound practices for managing stormwater,
minimum specifications and requirements, more complete definitions and
performance standards.



      (3)   The above referenced documents may restrict or prevent
the use of specific products, techniques or management practices (that are to
be accepted by the public or are deemed to have a negative impact on public
infrastructure or the MS4) that have been identified as unacceptable for
performance, maintenance or other technically based reasons.



      (4)   Documents referenced above may be updated periodically
to reflect the most current and effective practices and shall be made
available to the public. However, the failure to update the manual shall not
relieve any applicant from the obligation to comply with this subchapter, and
shall not prevent the city from imposing the most current and effective
practices.



   (C)   The post-construction SWPPP shall include provisions for
stormwater quality BMPs functioning independently or in combination.
Acceptable stormwater quality BMPs shall be defined by policy and guidance
documents as approved by the Stormwater Board.



   (D)   The post-construction SWPPP shall include provisions for
stormwater quality BMPs that are designed to achieve the following
design/performance objectives:



      (1)   Reduce total suspended solids (TSS) from the first flush
as defined by land use characteristics and contributing area; or, capture and
treatment of at least 0.5-inch precipitation applied over the contributing
area;



      (2)   Reduce or buffer increases in stormwater runoff
temperature caused by contact with impervious surfaces;



      (3)   Reduce or buffer increases in stormwater runoff volume
and flow rate caused by increases in directly connected impervious area and
overall impervious area; and



      (4)   Storm water detention/retention facilities shall be
designed to address the rate at which flow is released over the entire runoff
discharge period and the volume of discharge over the critical design-storm
period if defined by city stormwater master plans. The outlet structure shall
be designed as a v-notch weir or other multiple stage configurations capable
of controlling the discharge rates for the first flush, two-, ten- and
25-year design-storm events. The outlet structure shall be designed to safely
bypass the 100-year storm event.



   (E)   Soil bioengineering, "green" and other "soft" slope and stream
bank stabilization methods shall receive preference over rip rap, concrete
and other hard armoring techniques. "Hard" alternatives shall only be
permitted when their necessity can be demonstrated given site-specific
conditions.



   (F)   Retention-supportive data must be submitted to justify the
type of facility selected. If the facility is designed to retain (volume
control) all or a significant portion of runoff (as opposed to temporarily
detain), then appropriate soils analyses findings shall be submitted to the
city. This submission shall also discuss the impacts the facility will have
on local karst topography as found through a geotechnical investigation of
the site. The facility may be designed to infiltrate runoff to groundwater
rather than transmit it downstream under conditions up to a ten-year storm
event. It must be able to bypass all other storms including 100-year event
with a discharge rate equivalent to or less than pre-development conditions
without negatively impacting the 100-year floodplain above or below the site.
If data indicates that the facility can not retain a significant portion of
the runoff (95%), then the facility must be designed to detain runoff.



   (G)   If available, each post-construction SWPPP shall be evaluated
for consistency with the stormwater master plan or watershed study for the
major watershed or watersheds within which the project site is located. The
individual project evaluation will determine if stormwater quantity and
quality management practices can adequately serve the property and limit
impacts to downstream public and private properties. The presence of a
regional facility(s) will be considered in determining the extent to which
quantity and/or quality controls will be necessary.



   (H)   The city reserves the right to require superceding or
additional treatment criteria or objectives for specific pollutant(s) as
necessary to meet overall storm water quality management program objectives
or directives under a watershed improvement or total maximum daily load
(TDML) program as administered by the USEPA or the State of Indiana.



   (I)   On-site BMP coordination with regional BMPs.



      (1)   All properties are expected to implement on-site
stormwater quality control measures, but the extent of application may be
reduced given the availability, proximity and nature of regional stormwater
quality BMPs.



      (2)   The extent and type of on-site stormwater quality
management practices implemented shall be proportionate to the land use,
pollutant discharge potential and proximity to regional stormwater quality
management practices.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.66  BMP OWNERSHIP AND EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services
individual property owners shall be privately owned. General routine
maintenance (controlling vegetative growth and removing debris) shall be
provided by the owner(s). The owner shall maintain a perpetual, non-exclusive
easement that allows for access for inspection and emergency maintenance by
the city. The city has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for
emergency repairs.



   (B)   Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services an
individual residential subdivision in which the facility or BMP is within
designated open areas or serves as an amenity with an established homeowners
association shall be privately owned and maintained consistent with
provisions of this subchapter. The owner shall maintain a perpetual,
nonexclusive easement which allows access for inspection and emergency
maintenance by the city. The city has the right, but not the duty, to enter
premises for emergency repairs.



   (C)   Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services
commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and
maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which
allows access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The city
has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.



   (D)   All regional stormwater management control facilities proposed
by the owners, if approved and accepted by the city for dedication as a
public regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or maintained. All
other stormwater management control facilities and BMPs shall be privately
owned and/or maintained unless accepted for maintenance by the city.



   (E)   The city may require dedication of privately-owned stormwater
facilities, which discharge to the city stormwater system. This shall be at
the approval of the Stormwater Board and Common Council.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.67  REGIONAL FACILITIES MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   The objective of a regional stormwater management facility,
pond or other device, is to address the stormwater management concerns in a
given watershed with greater economy and efficiency than possible through
individual facilities. The intended result is fewer stormwater management
facilities to maintain in the affected watershed while sustaining efficiency.



   (B)   The city encourages regional stormwater quantity and/or
quality management practices, serving 25 to 250 acres of tributary area,
which may be consistently and efficiently managed and maintained. These types
of practices will be encouraged in order to replace or reduce the
implementation of on-site stormwater quantity and/or quality management
practices, as determined to be appropriate by the city.



   (C)   Where a regional stormwater management facility has been
established by one or more local governments, or by an authority operating on
behalf of one or more local governments, a development or property may
participate in said program in lieu of runoff control required by this
subchapter. This may be permitted; provided that:



      (1)   Runoff from the development drains to an approved
existing or proposed public regional stormwater management facility that will
be operational within one year;



      (2)   Participation in the form of contribution of funds,
contribution of land, contribution of stormwater management facility
construction work, or a combination of these, the total value of which shall
be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the city;



      (3)   The city finds that the stormwater quality management
plans are in compliance with all other applicable requirements and articles;
and



      (4)   Each fiscal or in-kind contribution from a development
owner participating in a regional stormwater quality management facility
shall be used for acquisition, design, construction or maintenance of one or
more such facilities in the same watershed in which the development is
located.



   (D)   Detention facilities may, and are encouraged to, be designed
to serve multiple purposes. For example, runoff may be detained under
wet-weather conditions, but also serve as common or recreational areas during
dry-weather conditions. Where multi-purpose facilities are provided, or where
flat grades or poorly draining soils are encountered, provisions for adequate
low-flow storm water management system may be required. Where the
retention/detention facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond or
stormwater quality management practice with a permanent pool, water budget
calculations shall be performed and submitted to demonstrate that an adequate
pool is expected during dry summer months.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.68  STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN PERMIT CLOSURE.



   (A)   The SWQMP requirements established in §§ 56.20 through 56.33
of this chapter shall be amended to include permit closure requirements for
the post-construction SWPPP. It shall be considered open and active until a
time when the city accepts the site conditions, as-built requirements are
completed and a long-term operation and maintenance agreement has been
accepted.



   (B)   Acceptance of site conditions shall be made by the city
through inspection. If any of the following items are deemed to be
insufficient, not appropriate and/or inconsistent with the post-construction
SWPPP or objectives stated in this subchapter, then approval will not be
granted.



   (C)   The permitee shall submit a written request for permit closure.



   (D)   The city shall have 21 normal business days to perform an
inspection and respond to the request. If the city does not respond within
the 21 normal business days, then the request shall be automatic approval.



   (E)   As-built requirements.



      (1)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
recording of the final plat or final release of bond, the as-built condition
(including: invert elevations, size, shape and location) of critical storm
water management features must be identified and approved.



      (2)   The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and
topographic information of all detention, retention and water quality
practices shall be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the State
of Indiana. This information shall be provided to the city, in the form of an
as-built drawing or other electronic form accepted by the city. The as-built
certification shall indicate if final conditions are consistent with, or
exceed, the SWQMP provisions.



      (3)   If it is determined that information provided in the
as-built drawing, certification, inspection or survey of the site does not
meet or exceed the SWQMP provisions, the city reserves the right to withhold
certification of occupancy or final bond. Furthermore, other enforcement
mechanisms may be applied to the permittee or persons making certifying
statements.



   (F)   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements shall include a
maintenance plan for all stormwater quality BMPs in new development or
redevelopment that require more than general maintenance (e.g., periodic
mowing).



      (1)   The plan will be developed to ensure that the stormwater
quality BMP(s) is (are) kept functional. The maintenance agreement will
specify minimum operation and maintenance requirements and intervals to be
performed by the property owner.



      (2)   The plan shall address schedules for inspections and
techniques for operation and maintenance including vegetation clearing or
mowing and removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment pollutants and other
forms of pollution.



      (3)   The agreement shall be noted on the final plat with the
appropriate notation on the particular lot(s).



      (4)   The agreement shall be included with property ownership
title documents and shall be binding on the owner, its administrators,
executors, assigns, heirs and any other successors in interest.



      (5)   The format for the long-term operational and maintenance
agreement shall be provided through example by the city, through guidance
documents.



      (6)   Stormwater detention and retention maintenance. Care
must be taken to ensure that any required facilities do not become nuisances
or health hazards. Detention and retention facilities should be designed to
require minimal maintenance and maintenance expectations must be clearly
stated in the long-term operation and maintenance agreement.



      (7)   When a stormwater quality BMP serves more than one
parcel, an owners' association or binding contract for the purpose of
operation and maintenance is required. The owners' association shall be
responsible for operation and maintenance as directed by this subchapter.



   (G)   Single entity ownership. Where the permanent stormwater runoff
control facilities are designed to manage runoff from property in a single
entity ownership, the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater control
facilities shall be with the single entity owner.



      (1)   A SINGLE ENTITY shall be defined as an association,
public or private corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate or any other
legal entity allowed to own real estate exclusive of an individual lot owner.



      (2)   The stated responsibilities of the entity shall be
documented in the long-term operation and maintenance agreement. Terms
including owning, operating and maintaining the facilities shall be submitted
with plans in application for a SWQMP for an adequacy determination. Approval
of a SWQMP shall be conditioned upon the approval of these terms. These terms
shall be in writing, shall be in recordable form, and shall, in addition to
any other terms deemed necessary by the city, contain a provision permitting
inspection at any reasonable time by the city of all facilities deemed
critical in the public welfare.



      (3)   Upon approval of the stormwater quality BMPs by the
city, the facility owner(s) shall demonstrate the ability to guarantee and
apply the financial resources necessary for long-term maintenance
requirements. The funding mechanism shall be in a form approved by the city.
The city will only approve funding mechanism(s) for long-term maintenance
responsibilities that can be demonstrated to be permanent or transferable to
another entity with equivalent longevity.



      (4)   In the event that proposed funding is through an owners'
association, then it must be demonstrated that the association may not
dissolve unless long-term operation and maintenance activities are accepted
by another entity with equivalent longevity and adequate funding.
Furthermore, the owners association's responsibility must be stated in the
association's declaration, covenants or by-laws, as appropriate.



      (5)   Unless made specifically clear in the preliminary stages
of the site design and construction plan review procedure, it will be assumed
that all stormwater detention, retention, treatment or storage facilities
and/or devices shall be owned, operated and maintained by a single entity as
defined above.



   (H)   Where the city has accepted an offer of dedication of the
permanent stormwater quality BMPs, the city shall be responsible for
operation and maintenance.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.69  OVERSIGHT INSPECTIONS AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Owner-performed inspections and maintenance.



      (1)   Owner-performed inspections (self inspections) shall be
performed by a qualified professional.



      (2)   Inspection and maintenance shall be performed at all
stormwater quality BMPs on at least an annual basis and as otherwise
determined in the long-term operation and maintenance agreement.



      (3)   All inspections shall be documented in written form and
be made available to the city or submitted at the time interval specified in
the approved long-term operation and maintenance agreement.



      (4)   Inspections shall be performed consistent with a visual
maintenance checklist approved by the city if not defined in the long-term
operation and maintenance agreement.



      (5)   Documentation of owner performed inspections and
inspection findings shall be kept on site, if appropriate facilities are
available.



      (6)   Documentation of owner performed inspections and
inspection findings shall be made available within seven calendar days of a
request by the city or designated representative. Failure to timely submit
documentation, as requested, will be assumed to indicate that inspections
were not performed and may result in corresponding enforcement procedures.



   (B)   Oversight inspections.



      (1)   The city, or the city's designated representative, has
the authority to periodically inspect the stormwater quality BMPs. The city
may make inspections of the site at its discretion and shall either approve
the condition of the BMP or shall notify the permittee wherein the condition
fails to comply with the long-term operation and maintenance agreement.



      (2)   The city or its designated representative's inspections
and findings will be presented and reviewed with the permittee at the time of
inspection (as available to site personnel) and be available in the city
public records within seven normal business days.



      (3)   The city or its designated representative may identify
any repairs, sediment/debris removal or replacement of all or portions of the
stormwater quality BMP(s) necessary to comply with the objectives of this
subchapter, long-term maintenance agreement.



      (4)   The city or its designated representative may develop
and require the implementation of an action plan to prevent the premature BMP
failure that exceeds the long-term operation and maintenance agreement
provisions, but are necessary to prevent stormwater pollution from leaving
the site; this may coincide with revisions to the long-term operation and
maintenance agreement.



   (C)   Qualified professional registration and certification.



      (1)   A qualified professional is required to perform routine
inspections and direct and/or supervise maintenance activities to ensure that
the long-term operation and maintenance agreement provisions are being
implemented properly.



      (2)   All qualified professionals performing inspections or
overseeing maintenance activities under this subchapter shall be registered
with the city prior to execution of those actions. All applicants shall file
an application with the city. Applicants shall demonstrate knowledge of:



         (a)   Stormwater quality treatment practices;



         (b)   Operational standards;



         (c)   Cause and failure indicators; and



         (d)   Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct
failures.



      (3)   Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the
following will be considered for registration:



         (a)   Professional engineer license in good standing in
the State of Indiana with demonstrated experience in stormwater quality
treatment management practices;



         (b)   Certified Professional in Stormwater Quality
Control (CPSQC) in good standing;



         (c)   Similar certification of any other similar program
in the State of Indiana or in the United States so long as that program
requires the applicant to pass a written test; and



         (d)   Documentation demonstrating the above will be
required by the city before registration is granted.



      (4)   Suspension and revocation. The city may suspend or
revoke the registration of a qualified professional for activities not
consistent with the policies and procedures identified in this subchapter.
This may include registration suspension for submittal of false or misleading
information or for repeated incompetence or negligent actions. The city shall
issue a written warning and evaluate subsequent actions before suspending or
revoking the registration;



      (5)   Appeals.



         (a)   The city shall give written notice to a qualified
professional whose registration is subject to an action for suspension or
revocation.



         (b)   The city shall provide the qualified professional
an opportunity at an informal meeting with the city to demonstrate why no
action is warranted.



         (c)   Any qualified professional whose registration is
revoked or suspended may appeal that decision to the city's Stormwater Board.



      (6)   Reinstatement. A qualified professional whose
registration has been suspended or revoked may apply for reinstatement upon
completing the requirements established in this section after a period of at
least one year.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.70  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Enforcement and penalties shall be governed according to §
56.50 of this chapter.



   (B)   At the Stormwater Board's discretion, it may withhold any
future permits, inspection requests, appeals or other plan approvals from
person(s) that have unresolved enforcement matters.



   (C)   The city may require the posting of a maintenance bond to
secure the structural integrity of said facilities as well as the functioning
of the facilities in accordance with the approved post-construction SWPPP for
a term of 24 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. A cash
contribution can be used as the financial assurance in lieu of a maintenance
bond although the contribution shall be equivalent to the amount that would
be estimated for the maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall be
calculated as 20% of the estimated construction cost and may be reduced to
10% after 12 months if there are no concerns by the city.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.71  APPEALS.



   (A)   The Stormwater Board shall be charged with addressing appeals
to violations and related matters of this subchapter.



   (B)   In order to have an appeal considered, the applicant shall
submit a written request. The Board shall have the authority to grant appeals
to violations of this subchapter or overwrite decisions made by the city
provided they are consistent with the objectives and policies of this
subchapter. The Board does not have the authority to permit actions by the
applicant that are based in lack of proper planning or implementation of site
development as defined in this subchapter and other measures applied to the
city.



   (C)   The Board will be made available to review accepted request(s)
for appeals on an as-needed basis. The decisions of the Board are final and
conclusive, but may be reviewed through the appropriate court actions. The
Board shall make its findings within five business days after the appeal
hearing.



   (D)   Upon issuance of a decision, citation or notice of violation
of this subchapter, it shall be conclusive and final unless the accused
violator submits a written notice of appeal to the city within ten normal
business days of the violation notice being served. If the city does not
issue a decision within ten normal business days of the written notice of
appeal then the violation is considered upheld. If the city does not reverse
the decision, the aggrieved party may appeal to the Stormwater Board, by
filing a written request for hearing within ten normal business days of the
city's decision on the appeal. The request for hearing shall state the
specific reasons why the decision of the city is alleged to be in error, and
shall be accompanied by a cost bond in the amount of $500 with sufficient
surety to secure the costs of the appeal, including the cost of court
reporters, transcripts, plan reviews and other costs.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 56.72  COMPATIBILITY AND SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Should any section, division, clause or provision of this
subchapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of
the subchapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid, each section, clause and provision being
declared severable.



   (B)   If any provisions of this subchapter and any other provisions
of law impose overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain any
restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is
more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern.



   (C)   Provisions in § 56.70 of this chapter are hereby declared to
be severable. If any provisions in § 56.70 and any other provisions of law
impose overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain any restrictions
covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more
restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern.



(Ord. G-06-12, passed 4-20-2006)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC RULES





         72.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         73.   BICYCLES AND MOPEDS





         74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         75.   PARKING SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Scope



   70.02   Definitions



   70.03   Emergency and experimental regulations



   70.04   Towing of vehicles



Motor Vehicle Inspections



   70.15   Fee



   70.16   Disposition of collected funds



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.25   Official devices



   70.26   Authority of Traffic Commission



   70.27   Erection of signs



   70.28   Unlawful to deface signals



Administration and Enforcement



   70.40   Traffic Division of Police Department; duties



   70.41   Traffic Commission



   70.42   Procedure upon arrest



   70.43   Records of traffic violations



   70.44   Police to investigate accidents and receive accident reports



   70.45   Traffic Division to keep and use driver file



   70.46   Annual traffic safety report



   70.47   Municipal prosecutor



   70.48   Fines to be paid into city's Promotional Fund



   70.49   Service and handling fee



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  SCOPE.



   (A)   Title VII shall be known as the "New Albany Traffic Code" or
as the "Traffic Code".



   (B)   The provisions of the Traffic Code are intended to apply to
all traffic and to all operators not specifically excepted.



   (C)   All provisions relative to the operation, parking or movement
of vehicles or animals, and to the movement of pedestrians, apply on all the
public ways of the city, except as specifically limited.



   (D)   The provisions of the Traffic Code shall, in no way, limit,
alter or otherwise affect the civil or criminal responsibility of any person
under the state statutes.



§ 70.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Whenever words and phrases used in this title are not defined in any
traffic ordinance of the city, the definitions herein shall be deemed to
apply to the words or phrases. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are
not defined in any ordinance of the city, but are defined in the state's
vehicle laws, the definitions shall be deemed to apply to the words or
phrases. For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or
Police Department and all ambulances.



   CROSSWALK. The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation of curb and property lines, at intersections or any other
portion of roadway indicated by markings for pedestrian crossing.



   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curblines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or more
streets which join one another at an angle, whether or not one of the streets
crosses the other.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS. All signals given and all signs,
markings and devices other than signals not inconsistent with this title
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating
traffic.



   OPERATOR. Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.



   PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a roadway, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of
the public.



   ROADWAY. The portion of a street between the regularly-established
curblines or improved and intended to be used for vehicular traffic.



   SAFETY ZONE. A space within a roadway officially set apart for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and marked or indicated as such.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curblines and the
adjacent property lines.



   STREET. Every way set apart for public travel, except footpaths.



   STREETCAR. Every device traveling exclusively upon rails, except trains
or cars propelled by steam.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars
and other conveyances using any street for the purpose of travel.



   TRAFFIC AUTHORITY. The city's Traffic Commission.



   TRAFFIC DIVISION. The Traffic Division of the Metropolitan Police
Department of the city.



   VEHICLE. Every device by which any person or property is or may be
transported upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.03  EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The city's Traffic Commission is empowered to make regulations
necessary to make effective the provision of the traffic ordinances of the
city and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions.



   (B)   The city's Traffic Commission may make temporary rules
regulating traffic or intersection control devices under actual conditions of
traffic. No such experimental rule regulating traffic shall remain in effect
for more than 30 days.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.04  TOWING OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   Effective October 1, 2005, the City of New Albany shall assess
a fee of $35 for each vehicle ordered to be towed by the New Albany Police
Department, except those vehicles that must be towed as a result of
circumstances beyond the control of the vehicle owner (i.e., vehicular
accident for which the owner/driver bears no fault).



   (B)   Effective October 1, 2005, the Police Department shall collect
this $35 fee prior to releasing any towed vehicle to the owner and shall
forward the collected fees to the Office of the Controller for the City of
New Albany a minimum of once per month.



   (C)   The tow-in companies to be used must provide proper insurance
information, will be called on a rotation basis and must be located in Floyd
County.



(Ord. G-05-50, passed 10-3-2005)



MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTIONS



§ 70.15  FEE.



   In accordance with state law, an inspection fee of $5 per vehicle shall
be charged for each inspection made by the city's Police Department of a
motor vehicle, semitrailer or recreational vehicle other than a new motor
vehicle, semitrailer or recreational vehicle sold by a dealer licensed in the
State of Indiana or a motor vehicle transferred or assigned on a certificate
of title issued by the Department.



(Ord. G-88-121, passed 6-16-1988)



§ 70.16  DISPOSITION OF COLLECTED FUNDS.



   (A)   The revenue from the inspection fee shall be deposited in a
Special Vehicle Inspection Fund as set forth in § 32.018.



   (B)   The money collected from the inspections must be appropriated
for law enforcement purposes.



(Ord. G-88-121, passed 6-16-1988)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.25  OFFICIAL DEVICES.



   All traffic-control devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the state's Highway Commission or resolutions
adopted by the Common Council. All traffic-control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title shall be official
traffic-control devices.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.26  AUTHORITY OF TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   The city's Traffic Commission is authorized:



      (1)   To designate and maintain by appropriate devices
markings or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at
intersections where, in its opinion, there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing a roadway and at such other places as it may deem
necessary;



      (2)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and
at such places as it may deem necessary, for the protection of pedestrians;



      (3)   To mark lines for traffic on street pavements at such
places as it may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic ordinances of
the city;



      (4)   To determine those intersections at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make right, left or "U" turns and shall place proper signs
at the intersections;



      (5)   To place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled;



      (6)   To temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon any street
where a person is seriously ill if requested to do so by a registered
physician. The temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all territory within a
radius of 200 feet of the building occupied by the person named in the
request of the physician. The temporary zones of quiet and any other zones of
quiet declared by any ordinance of the city shall be designated by placing at
a conspicuous place in the street, a sign or marking bearing the words "quiet
zone"; and



      (7)   To determine the location of passenger zones and freight
loading zones, and shall place and maintain appropriate signs, markings or
lines indicating the same and stating the hours during which, and the times
when, the provisions of this chapter are applicable.



   (B)   The city's Traffic Commission is authorized and directed to
establish bus stops, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common
carrier and motor vehicles on the public streets for the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, taxicab stand or other
stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.



   (C)   The city's Traffic Commission is authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon that side of the street adjacent to any school
property when the parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.



   (D)   The city's Traffic Commission shall determine upon what
streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or designate any such
streets.



   (E)   The city's Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to erect
signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway
does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of the street as indicated by the
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.



   (F)   The city's Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to
determine and designate by proper signs, distances not exceeding 100 feet at
places where the stopping or parking of any vehicle would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.27  ERECTION OF SIGNS.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a
through street, it shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission to place and
maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting the through street
or that portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance of
the city.



   (B)   The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to determine and
designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than
through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more
entrances to any such stop intersection, shall erect a stop sign at every
such place where a stop is required, or in the event the Traffic Commission
determines that reduced speed rather than a stop is adequate for safe
operation of any such intersection, it shall erect signs upon the approach to
the intersection, giving notice of the speed.



   (C)   Every stop sign shall bear the word "stop" in letters of not
less than six inches in height, shall be provided with reflector button or,
if not, then shall be self-illuminated at night. Every stop sign shall be
located as near as practicable at the proper line of the street at the
entrance to which the stop must be made, or at the nearest line of the
crosswalk thereat or, if not, at a limit line to be indicated by the Traffic
Commission.



   (D)   Whenever, by any ordinance of the city, a one-way street is
described or any time-limit parking is imposed, it shall be the duty of the
Traffic Commission to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.28  UNLAWFUL TO DEFACE SIGNALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move,
obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936)  Penalty, see § 70.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 70.40  TRAFFIC DIVISION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is established in the Police Department of the city a
Traffic Division to be under the control of the Chief of Police and the
Traffic Commission.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such aid as
may be rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce the
traffic regulations of the city, make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents and cooperate with the city's Traffic Engineer and any
and all other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws
and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and carry out
the duties specially imposed upon the Division by this chapter and the
traffic ordinances of the city.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division and all police
officers of the city to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all
laws of the state applicable to street traffic within the city. Provided,
however, that in the event of any emergency or to expedite traffic or
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police and Fire Departments may direct
traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the
traffic ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.41  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is established a Traffic Commission to serve without
compensation consisting of the city's Traffic Engineer, Chief of Police, a
member to be chosen by the Common Council, the Mayor, the City Engineer and
the City Attorney. The Mayor shall be the Chairperson of the Commission.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission, and to this
end it shall have authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal,
to coordinate traffic activities, to carry on educational activities, to
carry on educational activities in traffic matters, to supervise the
preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints having
to do with traffic matters and to recommend to the Common Council of the city
ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and
enforcement of traffic regulations.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.42  PROCEDURE UPON ARREST.



   (A)   Except when authorized or directed under state law immediately
to take a person arrested for a violation of any of the traffic laws or
ordinances before a magistrate, any police officer upon making an arrest for
violation of the state traffic laws or traffic ordinances of the city shall
take the violator's name, address, operator's license number and the
registration number of the motor vehicle involved, and issue to him or her in
writing, on a form to be provided by the city, a notice to answer the charge
against him or her within 72 hours thereafter, at a place specified in the
notice. The officer shall thereupon, and after the violator has given his or
her written promise to answer as specified in the notice, release the person
from custody. The arresting officer shall send one copy of the notice to the
Traffic Division and one copy to the city's Court.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is found parked or stopped without a
driver, in violation of any of the regulations imposed by ordinance of the
city or laws of the state, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its
registration number and any other information which he or she may then and
there discover, and shall affix to the vehicle in a conspicuous place a
notice in writing, on a form to be provided by the city, for the driver to
answer to the charge against him or her within 72 hours thereafter during the
hours and at the place specified in the notice. The officer shall send one
copy of the notice to the Traffic Division and one copy to the Court.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.43  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Secretary of the Traffic Division shall keep records of
violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the laws of the state
with which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final
disposition of all such alleged offenses. The record shall be so arranged as
to show types of violation and the total of each and the record shall
accumulate until a five-year period is covered, and from that time on, the
records shall be maintained complete for the most recent five-year period.



   (B)   All records and reports shall be available for use and study
by the city's Traffic Engineer.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.44  POLICE TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS AND RECEIVE ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to investigate
traffic accidents and arrest and obtain prosecution of those persons guilty
of violations of law causing or contributing to the accidents.



   (B)   The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of
filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them
shall be filed alphabetically by location. The reports shall be available for
use and information of the city's Traffic Engineer.



   (C)   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become
numerous, the Traffic Division shall cooperate with the city's Traffic
Engineer and the Traffic Commission and conduct studies of the accidents and
determine remedial measures.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.45  TRAFFIC DIVISION TO KEEP AND USE DRIVER FILE.



   (A)   The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable record of all
traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints in which the
same shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.



   (B)   The Division shall study the case of all drivers charged with
frequent or serious violation of the traffic laws or ordinances, or
frequently involved in traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall
attempt to discover the reasons therefor. They shall take whatever steps are
lawful and reasonable to prevent the same or have the license of the person
suspended or revoked.



   (C)   The records shall accumulate until a five-year period is
covered and, thereafter, the records shall be maintained complete for the
most recent five-year period.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.46  ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.



   The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report to contain
information on traffic matters in the city as follows:



   (A)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed
or injured and other pertinent accident data; and



   (B)   The number of traffic accidents investigated, the number of
drivers with bad records interrogated and other pertinent data in the safety
activities of the police.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 70.47  MUNICIPAL PROSECUTOR.



   The City Attorney is authorized to appoint one or more assistant city
attorneys who shall serve as municipal prosecutors in the courts of the
county for the purpose of prosecuting any violation of this title. There
shall be no salary paid to the municipal prosecutors from the city's General
Fund.



(Ord. G-85-49, passed 1-7-1985)



§ 70.48  FINES TO BE PAID INTO CITY'S PROMOTIONAL FUND.



   All fines paid for violations of the traffic code and that part of
court costs authorized to be paid to the city and received by the Controller
shall be deposited in a new fund created therefor, entitled "City Promotional
Fund". The monies deposited in the Fund shall be subject to appropriation by
the Common Council for reimbursement to the General Fund for the cost of
implementing, establishing and administering this section. The reimbursement
shall include, but not be limited to, the following expenses: Traffic
engineering studies; street signs; docket books and records for the City
Clerk's office. After reimbursement for the expenses, the money shall be
appropriated from time to time for the betterment of the city and local
government. The Fund shall be a nonreverting fund and money shall remain in
the Fund from year to year until appropriation by the Council.



(Ord. G-85-49, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. G-85-103, passed 10-7-1985; Ord.
G-86-145, passed 7-7-1986)



§ 70.49  SERVICE AND HANDLING FEE.



   The Clerk of the Court is authorized to charge a service and handling
fee of $1 for each violation of this code processed by the Clerk's office.
The sum shall be added to the court costs for each violation.



(Ord. G-85-49, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. G-85-103, passed 10-7-1985; Ord.
G-86-145, passed 7-7-1986)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates any provision of this title for which
another penalty has not been provided shall be fined a minimum of $5 and not
more than the maximum of $500.



   (B)   The Judge of the County Court is authorized to waive any
minimum fee or penalty provided in this chapter if, in his or her discretion,
the Judge believes the waiver to be fair and in the interests of justice.



   (C)   Any person found in violation of § 71.07 shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $1, nor more than $25.



   (D)   A violation of § 71.25 shall be subject to a fine of no more
than $500 for a first offense and no more than $1,000 for each subsequent
offense.



   (E)   Speeding fines.



      (1)   Any violation of § 71.45 shall be subject to the
following fines:



 


Miles Over Posted Speed Limit

 

Fine



1 - 15
 
$25 plus court costs (as set and amended by the Courts and the State of
Indiana


15 - 20
 
$50 plus court costs (as set and amended by the Courts and the State of
Indiana)


21 - 25
 
$75 plus court costs (as set and amended by the Courts and the State of
Indiana)


Over 25
 
$100 plus court costs (as set and amended by the Courts and the State of
Indiana)



 



      (2)   Any conviction associated with the above-referenced
sections shall be reported to the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles.



      (3)   All fees and charges collected under the provisions set
forth, except when the same have been paid into the court, shall be deposited
in the non-reverting fund.



   (F)   Moving violation fines.



      (1)   Any violation of § 71.20 (Failure to Obey Signs) and §
71.21 (Failure to Obey Traffic Signals) shall be subject to the following
fines:  $50 plus court costs as set and amended by the State of Indiana and
the Courts.



      (2)   Any conviction associated with the above-referenced
sections shall be reported to the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles.



      (3)   All fees and charges collected under the provisions set
forth, except when the same have been paid into the court, shall be deposited
in the non-reverting fund.



   (G)   City Attorney/Municipal Diversion Program.



      (1)   The fees and costs associated with the Municipal
Diversion Program shall be as follows:



 


Initial User Fee

 
$50


Monthly User Fee
 
$10


Plus:
 
Court costs as set and amended by the State of Indiana and the Courts



 



      (2)   All fees and charges collected under the provisions set
forth, except when the same have been paid into the court, shall be deposited
in the non-reverting fund.



(Ord. G-85-49, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. G-91-302, passed 11-4-1991; Ord.
G-93-174, passed 11-18-1993; Ord. G-10-04, passed 2-1-2010)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   General Provisions



   71.01   Police and Fire Departments to regulate traffic in emergency



   71.02   Board of Works to maintain official traffic signage



   71.03   Erecting unofficial signs and the like prohibited



   71.04   Application of regulations to pushcarts, bicycles, animals



   71.05   Attaching to a vehicle; riding on portion not intended for
passengers



   71.06   Prohibition of skateboards, coasters or roller skates in
certain areas



   Operation Generally



   71.20   Unlawful to disobey official signs and markings



   71.21   Traffic-control signal legend



   71.22   Compliance with orders of police or fire required



   71.23   Obstructing traffic



   71.24   Motorized vehicles prohibited on floodwalls



   71.25   Following emergency vehicles



   71.26   Yield to the right upon approach of emergency vehicle



   71.27   Breaking into funeral procession



   71.28   Driving on sidewalk area



   71.29   Driving overloaded vehicle



   71.30   Towing vehicles



   Speed Regulations



   71.45   Speed limits



   71.46   Speed limits in alleys



   71.47   Adoption of I.C. 9-21-5



   GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.01  POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS REGULATE TRAFFIC IN EMERGENCY.



   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Departments may direct
traffic as conditions require.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 71.02  BOARD OF WORKS TO MAINTAIN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNAGE.



   The Board of Works is authorized to establish, designate, and maintain
all official traffic devices, lines, markings, or symbols on the surface of
any roadway, public right-of-way, or alleys.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 71.03  ERECTING UNOFFICIAL SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   Any person who erects or maintain any unofficial signs, signals or
devices which attempt to direct traffic or which interferes with the
effectiveness of an official sign shall be subject to the fine stated in §
70.99.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS TO BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to bicycles or animals
driven or ridden upon the streets.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 71.05  ATTACHING TO A VEHICLE; RIDING ON PORTION NOT INTENDED FOR
PASSENGERS.



   (A)   Any person who clings to any moving vehicle while on a
bicycle, motorcycle, sled or roller skates shall be subject to the penalty
described in § 70.99.



   (B)   Any person who rides on any vehicle upon any portion of the
vehicle not intended for use of passengers shall be subject to the penalty
described in § 70.99. This section does not apply to an employee in
discharge of his or her duty or within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.06  PROHIBITION OF SKATEBOARDS, COASTERS, OR ROLLER SKATES IN CERTAIN
AREAS.



   (A)   The Board of Works shall determine and erect the appropriate
signage limiting the operation of a skateboard, coaster or roller skates
within the city limits.



   (B)   Any person who violates signage indicating that no operation
of a skateboard, coaster or roller skates shall occur within a designated
area shall be subject to the penalty described in § 70.99.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



   OPERATION GENERALLY



§ 71.20  UNLAWFUL TO DISOBEY OFFICIAL SIGNS AND MARKINGS.



   Any person who operates a vehicle in violation of any official sign or
signal shall be subject to the penalty described in § 70.99 unless such
violation occurred at the direction of a police or fire officer.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 71.21  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   When appropriate traffic control signals are installed at an
intersection, the operator of a vehicle entering the intersection shall obey
the signal displayed as the driver approaches the intersection except when
directed by an officer to do otherwise.  The operator of a vehicle entering
an intersection controlled by a flashing signal shall obey the signal
displayed as the driver approaches the intersection. Failure to obey the
signal shall be subject to fines as stated in § 70.99(F).



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.22  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS OF POLICE OR FIRE REQUIRED.



   Any person who refuses or fails to comply with any lawful order, signal
or direction of a police officer shall be subject to the penalty described in
§ 70.99.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.23  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   Any person who stops or parks their vehicle in a traffic lane or in any
manner which would obstruct the normal flow of traffic shall be subject to
the penalty described in § 70.99, unless directed to do so by a police or
fire officer.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.24  MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON FLOODWALLS.



   (A)   Any person who operates any type of motor vehicle on any
floodwall which is under the control of the New Albany Flood Control District
shall be subject to the penalty described in § 70.99.



   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section to use an official
public roadway, or for any official to do so in any manner for the purpose of
inspection or repair.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.25  FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   Any person who operates a vehicle closer than 200 feet behind any
emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency shall be subject to
the penalty described in § 70.99.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.26  YIELD TO THE RIGHT UPON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE.



   Any person who fails to drive as near as possible, parallel to the
right-hand curb or edge of the street, clear of any intersection and to
remain in such position until the emergency vehicle has passed shall be
subject to the penalty described in § 70.99 unless otherwise directed by a
police or fire officer.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.27  BREAKING INTO FUNERAL PROCESSION.



   Any person who drives between the vehicles in a funeral procession or
other authorized procession while they are in motion shall be subject to the
penalty described in § 70.99, provided the vehicles are conspicuously
designated. The processions shall have the right-of-way over traffic signals.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.28  DRIVING ON SIDEWALK AREA.



   Any person who drives or parks any motor vehicle on or within any
sidewalk area shall be subject to the penalty described in § 70.99, unless
directed to do so by a police or fire officer.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.29  DRIVING OVERLOADED VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle when the vehicle is so loaded,
or when there are in the front the number of persons as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides, or to interfere with his or her control
of the driving mechanism.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)    Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.30  TOWING VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful to tow a vehicle on a street when the vehicles are
operated at a distance of one another of more than ten feet.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



   SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 71.45  SPEED LIMITS.



   Any person who operates a motor vehicle within the city's jurisdiction
in excess of the posted speed limits shall be subject to the penalty
described in § 70.99.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.46  SPEED LIMITS IN ALLEYS.



   Any person who operates a motor vehicle on or along any alley located
in the city at a speed in excess of 15 (15) miles per hour shall be subject
to the penalty described  in § 70.99.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.47  ADOPTION OF I.C. 9-21-5.



   The City of New Albany hereby adopts I.C. 9-21-5 by reference.



(Ord. G-10-38, passed 12-8-2010)



 



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



Parking Generally



   72.01   Owner's responsibility for illegal parking



   72.02   Manner of parking



   72.03   Parking within an intersection



   72.04   Parking on a crosswalk



   72.05   Parking from curblines and property lines



   72.06   Parking in front of fire hydrant



   72.07   Parking when prohibited for temporary reasons



   72.08   Parking at bus or taxicab stop



   72.09   Parking in railway or interurban depot



   72.10   Parking display cars on street prohibited



   72.11   Parking when loading or unloading passengers



   72.12   Parking to display merchandise; selling from vehicles



   72.13   Parking to wash, grease or repair vehicle



   72.14   Parking of vehicles that are not self-propelled



   72.15   Overnight parking



   72.16   Parking when loading materials



   72.17   Parking in alleys



   72.18   Prohibited parking areas



   72.19   Downtown parking



   72.20   Individual resident-only permit parking areas



Leased Parking Lots



   72.31   Leased parking lots established in Downtown Business District



   72.32   Leasing a parking space



   72.33   Increase of parking permit fees



   72.34   Parking without permit; fines



   72.35   Money collected to be put in special fund



Disabled Parking



   72.55   Definitions



   72.56   Parking allowances



   72.57   Parking prohibited



   72.58   Unauthorized use of special parking permit



   72.59   Designation of special parking spaces



   72.60   Unauthorized use of disabled persons' parking spaces in
parking facilities



Administration and Enforcement



   72.70   Police to patrol districts with time-limit parking



   72.71   Parking signs



   72.72   Loading and unloading permits



   72.73   Reserved



   72.74   Dispositions of fines and forfeitures



 



   72.99   Penalty



PARKING GENERALLY



§ 72.01  OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR ILLEGAL PARKING.



   No person shall knowingly allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his or her name to stand or park or occupy more than one
designated and marked parking space in any street in the city in violation of
any ordinances of the city relating to the standing or parking of vehicles.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. G-17-16,
passed 11-6-2017)  Penalty, see § 37.02



§ 72.02  MANNER OF PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator to park a vehicle other than
parallel with the curb and headed in the direction of traffic. The curb side
wheels shall be within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway on any streets or
parts of streets, except as designated.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.03  PARKING WITHIN AN INTERSECTION.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator to park a vehicle within an
intersection.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.04  PARKING ON A CROSSWALK.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator to park a vehicle on a crosswalk.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.05  PARKING FROM CURBLINES AND PROPERTY LINES.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator to park a vehicle within 15 feet
from the intersection of curblines, or, if none, within 15 feet of the
intersection of property lines, except alleys.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.06  PARKING IN FRONT OF FIRE HYDRANT.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator to park a vehicle within ten feet
of a fire hydrant.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.07  PARKING WHEN PROHIBITED FOR TEMPORARY REASONS.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator to park a vehicle at any place
where an official sign prohibits parking for temporary emergency reasons.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.08  PARKING AT BUS OR TAXICAB STOP.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a bus or taxicab upon any
street in the Business or Commercial Districts at any place other than at a
bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not
prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping the vehicle
in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place, for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.



   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a
bus, in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, where any such
stand or stop has been officially designated and appropriately marked, except
that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers,
when the stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab about to enter
or leave the zone.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.09  PARKING IN RAILWAY OR INTERURBAN DEPOT.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator to park a vehicle within 20 feet
of the centerline of any railway or interurban depot.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.10  PARKING DISPLAY CARS ON STREET PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for a dealer to park cars displayed for sale on
any street, alley or sidewalk within the limits of the city.



(Ord. 4074, passed 11-12-1936; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.11  PARKING WHEN LOADING OR UNLOADING PASSENGERS.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose except
the expeditious loading and unloading of passengers in any place marked as a
passenger zone, during hours when the regulations applicable to the passenger
zone are effective and not longer than for a period of three minutes.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.12  PARKING TO DISPLAY MERCHANDISE; SELLING FROM VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway
within the business or commercial district for the purpose of selling,
exhibiting for sale, displaying or advertising goods, wares, merchandise,
produce or commercial articles of any kind or character at retail. Persons
selling produce or wares grown or produced by themselves may display, sell or
exhibit for sale the produce or wares between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. on each day, except Sundays and legal holidays, on the lower plaza
on Market Street between State Street and W. First Street.



   (B)   No person shall sell goods, food stuffs or merchandise of any
kind from a vehicle within the city without having a permit to do so. Permits
may be issued for a term of one year by the Board of Public Works and Safety
to any person desiring to sell from a vehicle that circulates about the city,
upon payment of a fee of $10. Permits may be revoked by the Board for
violation of its terms and conditions.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-65-214, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. G-09-15,
passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see § 37.02



§ 72.13  PARKING TO WASH, GREASE OR REPAIR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway
within the business or commercial district for the purpose of washing,
greasing or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by
emergency.



   (B)   No person shall do or make any repairs to any vehicle on any
of the streets or street rights-of-way within the city, except in case of an
actual emergency.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-65-214, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. G-09-15,
passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see § 37.02



§ 72.14  PARKING OF VEHICLES THAT ARE NOT SELF-PROPELLED.



   No person shall park any boat, boat trailer, trailer of any kind or any
other vehicle that is not self-propelled upon any of the streets, alleys or
rights-of-way within the city.



(Ord. G-65-214, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty,
see § 37.02



§ 72.15  OVERNIGHT PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful to leave any motor vehicle parked on the public
streets of the city for a period in excess of 24 hours or to park any motor
vehicle which is held for sale or one which is not in running condition on
the public streets of the city in excess of 24 hours.



(Ord. 4573, passed 8-27-1956; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.16  PARKING WHEN LOADING MATERIALS.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or for
any length of time other than the expeditious unloading and delivery, or
pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone during
hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 15 minutes.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.17  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in the Business or
Commercial District in such a manner as to block the free flow of traffic
through the alley.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.18  PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
of the following places:



         (a)   On a sidewalk;



         (b)   In front of, or otherwise blocking access to, a
public or private drive;



         (c)   Within an intersection;



         (d)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



         (e)   On a crosswalk;



         (f)   On a tree lawn, the space between the street curb
and the sidewalk; and



         (g)   Front yard, side yard, rear yard or courtyard
other than a designated driveway.



      (2)   The following exceptions apply:



         (a)   When necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic;



         (b)   When providing for the passage of an emergency
vehicle, in compliance with the law; and



         (c)   At the direction of a police officer or traffic
control device.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to park any of the following
vehicles on any public street or public right-of-way in the city:



         (a)   Truck tractors, road tractors, truck trailers,
semi-trailers or any other commercial vehicle; and



         (b)   Any vehicle with declared gross weight over 26,000
pounds or exceeding 25 feet in length.



      (2)   This division shall not prevent the parking or standing
of the above described vehicles in the areas zoned for the loading or
unloading of passengers, freight or merchandise.



   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to leave, park or stand any of
the following vehicles on any public street or any public right-of-way, in
any area of the city zoned as a residential district or where the primary use
is residential: mobile homes, motor homes, travel trailers, boat trailers,
stock trailers or any other type of trailer.



      (2)   The following exceptions apply:



         (a)   Recreational vehicles owned by an out-of-town
guest of a residential property owner may be parked in front of that
owner’s property for a period not to exceed five days, providing the
parking does not impair the regular flow of traffic or does not violate any
other ordinance.



         (b)   A property owner may park a trailer (not a
semi-trailer) in front of property owned by such person for a period not to
exceed 24 hours for a maximum of 72 hours in a year, providing that such
parking does not impair the regular flow of traffic.



         (c)   This section shall not apply to street
construction, maintenance and repair equipment used by public service utility
companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities and to
motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at customary bus stops.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, a DRIVEWAY shall be defined
as a private road giving access from a public way to a building on abutting
grounds.



   (E)   Only authorized and constructed curb cuts and driveways
permitted by the city shall be used for ingress and egress. Driving, parking
or stopping across the curb, tree lawn or sidewalk is not permitted.



   (F)   The Police Department shall enforce this section.



(Ord. G-01-24, passed 6-4-2001; Ord. G-02-25, passed 7-18-2002; Ord. G-09-15,
passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see § 37.02



§ 72.19  DOWNTOWN PARKING.



   (A)   Any person who lives in the defined are of East Elm Street to
East Market Street and E. 3rd Street to Scribner Drive shall be entitled to
obtain a downtown residence parking permit after paying the sum of $150 per
vehicle to the City Clerk and meeting the requirements as set forth herein.



   (B)   Each residence is entitled to one permit per vehicle and a
maximum of two permits.  No parking permits will be granted for vehicles to
residences in excess of two vehicles.  The permits are good for one year
(January 1 to December 31) and shall be prorated for the period of months
remaining in any year in which the permit is granted.  The permit must be
displayed and affixed in the upper left hand (driver’s side) corner of the
vehicle.



   (C)   The applicant must provide a copy of a valid lease, rental
agreement or real estate contract for the property and/or deed to the
property along with a copy of the vehicle registration for the vehicles to
obtain a permit.



   (D)   The applicant shall notify the City Clerk’s Office upon
changing vehicles and register the new vehicle with the City Clerk’s Office.



   (E)   The applicant shall return the original permit to the
Clerk’s Officer upon application for a new permit for the new vehicle.



   (F)   Failure to display the permit shall subject vehicles to normal
parking requirements for downtown.



(Ord. G-09-20, passed 5-21-2009)



§ 72.20  INDIVIDUAL RESIDENT-ONLY PERMIT PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Fees. The Board of Works shall establish and collect an annual
uniform fee which shall be required for each resident only parking space. Any
resident of the city may apply to receive a resident only parking permit
subject to the terms and conditions of this section. The fee collected upon
application for a resident only parking permit shall initially be $250 for
the first year, and $100 for each subsequent year. The year shall run from
January 1 through December 31, and any person who obtains a pass shall pay an
amount prorated to the month of the date of the issuance. The fee may be
waived upon a majority vote of the Board of Works in the case of any
individual showing a special need or hardship. All fees collected shall first
go to the expenses of the resident parking only program, then to the
nonreverting fund.



   (B)   Markings. A resident only parking area shall be 20 feet in
length and shall be marked by a sign and paint marks on the curbing or street
at each end of the resident only parking space placed by the City of New
Albany Street Department. The Board of Works may modify these marking
requirements with a majority approval.



   (C)   Notice of violation. It shall be the responsibility of the
holder of the permit to notify the Police Department of any violation of
their resident-only parking space, and for the Police Department to respond
accordingly.



   (D)   Any residence which has off street parking shall not be
eligible to obtain a residential parking permit. There shall be a limit of
one residential parking permit per street address no matter how many people
live there or how many units may be at that same address. Any exceptions to
this rule are only to be made with a majority approval of the Board of Works.



(Ord. G-10-31, passed 10-21-2010)  Penalty, see § 72.99



LEASED PARKING LOTS



§ 72.31  LEASED PARKING LOTS ESTABLISHED IN DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   Within the Business District of downtown New Albany there are currently
three parking lots with spaces to be leased. The locations of the lots are as
follows:



   (A)   Caboose Lot, located at the corner of West Market Street and
West 1st Street;



   (B)   Farmers Market Lot, located at the corner of East Market
Street and Bank Street; and



   (C)   Harvest Homecoming Lot, located in the 400 block of Pearl
Street.



(Ord. A-04-53, passed 9-10-2004)



§ 72.32  LEASING A PARKING SPACE.



   (A)   The spaces within the parking lots shall be leased on a
monthly basis for a fee of $10 per month.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall collect parking fees and provide each
lessee with a parking permit to be displayed in his or her vehicle.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the lessee to renew and
display the parking permit in order to avoid penalty.



(Ord. A-04-53, passed 9-10-2004)



§ 72.33  INCREASE OF PARKING PERMIT FEES.



   Should it be necessary to increase the monthly parking permit fee, the
increase shall be recommended by the Board of Public Works and Safety and
approved by the Common Council.



(Ord. A-04-53, passed 9-10-2004)



§ 72.34  PARKING WITHOUT A PERMIT; FINES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to park in a
leased space without a permit; and to do so is declared to be a misdemeanor,
and the owner of the vehicle shall be subject to a fine of $20.



   (B)   After seven days, the owner will have to pay the sum of $30.



   (C)   After 30 days, the owner will have to pay the sum of $40 to
avoid prosecution.



(Ord. A-04-53, passed 9-10-2004; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty,
see § 37.02



§ 72.35  MONEY COLLECTED TO BE PUT IN SPECIAL FUND.



   (A)   All parking permit fee and fines, when collected by the City
Clerk, shall be deposited with the City Controller, to the credit of the
city, but in a special fund, which shall be disbursed and paid out only under
the orders and directions of the Board of Public Works and Safety, and for
the following purposes only:



      (1)   The printing cost of parking permits;



      (2)   The cost of maintenance, operation and repair of leased
parking lots;



      (3)   Incidental costs and expenses in the operation of the
parking lots, including the cost of clerks, parking enforcement officers,
bookkeeping and necessary computer and/or database upgrades;



      (4)   The cost of traffic signal devices used in the
municipality;



      (5)   The cost of repairing and maintaining any of the public
ways, curbs and sidewalks surrounding leased parking lots and all public ways
connected with them in the municipality;



      (6)   The cost of acquiring, by lease or purchase, suitable
land for off-street parking facilities to be operated or leased by the
municipality; and



      (7)   The cost of providing approved school crossing
protective facilities, including the cost of purchase, maintenance,
operation, repair and all other incidental costs.



   (B)   (1)   All monies remaining in the city treasury to the
credit of the fund shall not revert to the general funds of the city.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Common
Council from transferring, by ordinance, at the end of the calendar year, the
balance in the special fund to the general funds of the city.



(Ord. A-04-53, passed 9-10-2004)



DISABLED PARKING



§ 72.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISABLED PERSON. A person confined to a wheelchair; a person who uses
braces or crutches; a person who, because of an arthritic, spastic, pulmonary
or cardiac condition, walks with difficulty or insecurity; a person who
suffers from faulty coordination or palsy; a person who is so impaired that,
functioning in a public area, he or she is insecure or exposed to danger; and
a person whose mobility, flexibility, coordination and perceptiveness are
significantly reduced by aging or by temporary disability.



   PARKING FACILITY. A facility or combination of facilities for motor
vehicle parking which contains parking spaces for the public. This shall
include a privately-owned area which is normally used for parking and which
is accessible to the public. This does not include a parking facility which
charges a fee for parking spaces. Parking spaces within this subchapter shall
be those parking facilities reserved for the physically disabled persons
pursuant to I.C. 5-16-9-2.



   PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON. Any person who has been issued a placard or
special registration plate or decal for a motor vehicle by the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles under I.C. 9-18.5-8, or this subchapter.



(Ord. G-79-775, passed 11-12-1979; Ord. G-84-18, passed 7-3-1984)



§ 72.56  PARKING ALLOWANCES.



   A motor vehicle bearing a license plate issued to a disabled veteran; a
license plate issued to a disabled person; or a special parking permit for a
disabled person issued by the city when operated by a disabled person or when
transporting a disabled person, may be parked in a designated disabled
parking place, or when parked where any parking limit is imposed may be
parked for two hours in excess of the parking limit. The motor vehicle may be
parked in a loading zone for that period of time necessary to permit entrance
or exit of the disabled person from the building or entrance or exit of a
disabled person from the parked vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than
30 minutes.



(Ord. G-79-775, passed 11-12-1979; Ord. G-80-787, passed 3-3-1980; Ord.
G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see § 37.02



§ 72.57  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   Parking is prohibited in a “no stopping” or “no parking” zone
or where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating a fire lane or to
accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon or evening hours. No
motor vehicle is to be parked in such a manner as to constitute a traffic
hazard.



(Ord. G-79-775, passed 11-12-1979; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty,
see § 37.02



§ 72.58  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SPECIAL PARKING PERMIT.



   (A)   No person shall make any false statement in an application for
a special parking permit.



   (B)   No person shall make, issue or knowingly use any imitation or
counterfeit of a special parking permit for the disabled.



   (C)   No person shall display or cause or permit to be displayed on
any vehicle the permit knowing it to be fictitious or issued for another
person.



   (D)   No unauthorized person shall knowingly possess a special
parking permit for the disabled.



(Ord. G-79-775, passed 11-12-1979; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty,
see § 37.02



§ 72.59  DESIGNATION OF SPECIAL PARKING SPACES.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety is given authority by this
subchapter to designate special parking places in the city for disabled
persons. The Board shall have the right to change these parking spaces from
time to time without amendment of this subchapter.



(Ord. G-79-775, passed 11-12-1979)



§ 72.60  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF DISABLED PERSONS' PARKING SPACES IN PARKING
FACILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle,
motorcycle, moped, bicycle or other vehicle of any nature which does not have
displayed a disabled person’s decal or registration plate as set forth
above in a parking space reserved in a parking facility or designated special
parking place for a disabled person’s vehicle.



   (B)   If any vehicle is parked unlawfully in violation of the
provisions of this section and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or the person in whose name the vehicle is registered
shall be held prima facie responsible for the violation.



(Ord. G-84-18, passed 7-3-1984; Ord. G-87-205, passed 10-5-1987; Ord.
G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see § 37.02



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.70  POLICE TO PATROL DISTRICTS WITH TIME-LIMIT PARKING.



   It shall be the duty of the Metropolitan Police Commissioners to
appoint or have appointed one or more members of the Police Department to
patrol the districts within the business or commercial districts as herein
designated in this title for time-limit parking.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941)



§ 72.71  PARKING SIGNS.



   (A)   Spaces shall be marked by signs, lines, or in any other
suitable ways indicating the purpose for which the manner of the time when,
and the hours during which, parking is permitted, restricted or prohibited.
Parking in violation of the signs, lines or other suitable ways shall
constitute a violation of this division.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect and maintain on any street or curb or sidewalk any sign or printed
matter of any kind, forbidding the parking of vehicles on any city street,
unless or until permission is granted for the erection of signs or printed
matter by the city’s Traffic Commission.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. G-09-15, passed 5-4-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 37.02



§ 72.72  LOADING AND UNLOADING PERMITS.



   The city's Traffic Commission is authorized to issue a permit to any
owner of a vehicle used to transport merchandise or material. The permit
shall be renewable annually and shall state therein the terms and conditions
thereof, allowing the driver of the vehicle the privilege of loading and
unloading while the vehicle is backed against the curb, if, in its opinion,
the privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct of the owner's business
and will not seriously interfere with traffic.



(Ord. 4139, passed 11-27-1939)



§ 72.73  RESERVED.



§ 72.74  DISPOSITIONS OF FINES AND FORFEITURES.



   (A)   All fees and charges collected under the provisions of this
division, parking, except when the same have been paid into the court, shall
be paid into the City Clerk and deposited in the Non-Reverting Fund.



   (B)   Failure, refusal or negligence on the part of any officer or
employee receiving or having custody of any such monies, either before or
after a deposit in the General Fund, to comply with the foregoing 
provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office, and shall
be grounds for removal therefrom.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. 4229, passed 12-5-1942; Ord. G-09-15,
passed 5-4-2009)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   See penalty schedule in § 37.02.



   (B)   Any motor vehicle found in violation of § 72.15 may be towed
by order of the Police Department and stored at the owner’s expense.



   (C)   (1)   Any person who fails to pay parking violation fees as
shown in § 37.02 shall be subject to the following.



         (a)   Any vehicle shall be towed away, if an owner fails
to pay two unpaid parking violations.



         (b)   Any vehicle towed for violation of parking
regulations shall be subject to the towing fee and storage fee as outlined in
§ 90.02.



      (2)   Any owner whose vehicle has been towed may, within seven
days of the towing, request in writing to the City Clerk a hearing before the
Board of Public Works and Safety. If the towing is found by the Board to have
been unjustified, the owner may recover only the charges for reclaiming the
impounded vehicle, and not the payment of delinquent parking tickets.



      (3)   Any person requesting a hearing before the Board of
Public Works and Safety may, within ten days after the Board’s decision,
take an appeal to the County Circuit or Superior Court. The appeal shall only
effect the amount of towing and storing charges assessed hereunder.



   (D)   (1)   Violators of § 72.18(A) will be fined $50.



      (2)   Violators of § 72.18(B) or (C) will be fined $75.



      (3)   Each day of violation of § 72.18 shall constitute a
separate offense.

   (E)   (1)   Any vehicle which is parked in a resident only
parking area without permission of the owner of the permit shall be towed at
the expense of the operator or owner of the vehicle. The vehicle shall not be
released from impound until the towing and any storage fees have been paid.



      (2)   In addition to the penalty in division (E)(1) of this
section, any person who violates § 72.20 shall be fined $25.



(Ord. 4188, passed 7-18-1941; Ord. 4573, passed 8-27-1956; Ord. G-65-214,
passed 8-2-1965; Ord. G-79-775, passed 11-12-1979; Ord. G-80-787, passed
3-3-1980; Ord. G-84-18, passed 7-3-1984; Ord. G-97-174, passed 3-20-1997;
Ord. G-97-225, passed 12-18-1997; Ord. G-98-271, passed 9-28-1998; Ord.
G-01-01, passed 1-4-2001; Ord. G-01-24, passed 6-4-2001; Ord. G-09-15, passed
5-4-2009; Ord. G-10-31, passed 10-21-2010)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES AND MOPEDS



Section



Operation of Bicycles and Motorized Bicycles



   73.01   Operation of bicycles



   73.02   Emerging from alley; yielding right-of-way



   73.03   Riding on sidewalks



   73.04   Reckless operation



   73.05   Maintaining safe bicycle speed and following signals



   73.06   Operating under influence of alcohol or drugs



   73.07   Bicycle to be in safe condition



Mopeds



   73.35   Definition



   73.36   Equipment requirements



   73.37   Operating regulations



   73.38   Parental responsibility



   73.39   Impoundment



Enforcement



   73.50   Authority to inspect bicycles



   73.51   Failure to comply with regulations



 



   73.99   Penalty



OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES



§ 73.01  OPERATION OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a street shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle. Every person riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to a pedestrian.



   (B)   A violation of any traffic law by an operator of a bicycle
shall be ticketed using the same procedure as is used for motor vehicle
infractions, except that any violation committed while operating a bicycle
shall not affect the status of the violator's motor vehicle operator's
license. When a citation is issued to a bicycle operator, the fact that the
violation involves a bicycle shall be clearly indicated on the citation.



   (C)   Whenever there is a violation of traffic law by a bicycle
operator or a violation by a motorist that endangers a bicycle operator, the
court may permit demonstration of successful completion of a court approved
cycling knowledge course or test in lieu of or in addition to a fine or other
penalty.



   (D)   No person 14 years of age or older shall operate a bicycle on
the sidewalks located within the geographical incorporated boundary limits of
the City of New Albany ("city").



   (F)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such
bicycle, except as provided herein.



      (1)   A bicycle shall not be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. Riders of "tandem
bicycles" all must be able to comfortably reach the pedals of the bicycle.



      (2)   A passenger shall ride only upon a permanent and regular
seat attached to the bicycle, or to a trailer towed by the bicycle.



      (3)   An adult may carry a child as a passenger, provided that
the child meets all of the following conditions:



         (a)   Is over the age of one;



         (b)   Weighs less than 40 pounds or is less than 40
inches in height;



         (c)   Is properly seated in a permanent and attached
child seat or in a trailer attached to the bicycle, provided that the
seat/trailer is equipped with a harness to hold the child securely to the
seat, and protection is provided against the child's feet or hands hitting
the spokes of the wheels;



         (d)   Is able to maintain an erect, seated position on
the bicycle;



         (e)   Is wearing an appropriately-sized helmet that is
secured to the head by straps while the bicycle is being operated, or is in
an enclosed bicycle trailer that protects the passenger's head from impact in
an accident; and



         (f)   Does not remain in the child seat or trailer when
the bicycle operator is not in immediate control of the bicycle.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty,
see § 73.99



§ 73.02  EMERGING FROM ALLEY; YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alley or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on
such sidewalk area and upon entering the street shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles approaching on the street. Any operator found to be in
violation of this section shall be subject to the penalty in § 73.99.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty,
see § 73.99



§ 73.03  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, it shall
be legal to operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk when sidewalks are available
and are not congested with pedestrian traffic. If the sidewalk is congested
with pedestrian traffic, any bicycle operator using the sidewalk shall walk
the bicycle.



   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in a business
district or upon or along which signs have been erected by authority of the
Board of Works prohibiting such bicycle riding.



   (C)   A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or
across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right of way to
any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian. This audible signal may be given by the voice or by a bell
or other warning device capable of giving an audible signal and shall be
given at such a distance and in such a manner as not to startle person or
persons being overtaken and passed.



   (D)   A person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk, before
overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white cane or guided by a
dog, shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot, if necessary for safety.



   (E)   A person shall not operate a bicycle from a sidewalk so as to
suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and move into the path of a
vehicle that is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.



   (F)   No person shall operate a bicycle on a sidewalk at a speed
greater than an ordinary walk when approaching or entering a crosswalk or
approaching or crossing a driveway if a vehicle is approaching the crosswalk
or driveway. This paragraph does not require reduced speeds for bicycles when
other vehicles are not present.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty,
see § 73.99



§ 73.04  RECKLESS OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle:



      (1)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of
pedestrians and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to
endanger the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of
the streets or sidewalks or any other public or private property;



      (2)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over
such bicycle;



      (3)   By trick riding or in a weaving or zigzag course unless
such irregular course is necessary for safe operation in compliance with law.



   (B)   Any operator found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalty in § 73.99.



(Ord. 4120, passed 3-6-1939; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty, see
§ 73.99



§ 73.05  MAINTAINING SAFE BICYCLE SPEED AND FOLLOWING SIGNALS.



   The operator of any bicycle or motorized bicycle shall be subject to
the following:



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer;



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected that no right or left or
"U" turns are permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians;



   (C)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians
and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the
life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets
or sidewalks or any other public or private property;



   (D)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such
bicycle;



   (E)   By trick riding or in a weaving or zigzag course unless such
irregular course is necessary for safe operation in compliance with law; and



   (F)   Any operator found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalty in § 73.99.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty,
see § 73.99



§ 73.06  OPERATING UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.



   Any person who operates a bicycle while under the influence of alcohol
or drugs, or while physically or mentally unfit to safely operate the same
shall be subject to the penalties in § 73.99.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty,
see § 73.99



§ 73.07  BICYCLE TO BE IN SAFE CONDITION.



   Any person who operates a bicycle which is not in safe mechanical
condition shall be subject to the penalties of § 73.99.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty,
see § 73.99



MOPEDS



§ 73.35  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOPED. Either a motorized bicycle whose frame design may include one or
more horizontal crossbars supporting a fuel tank so long as it also has
pedals, or a motorized bicycle with a step-through type frame which may or
may not have pedals rated no more than two brake horsepower, a cylinder
capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters, an automatic transmission not
requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is
engaged, and capable of a maximum speed of not more than 25 mph.



(Ord. G-90-210, passed 2-15-1990)



§ 73.36  EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   No moped shall be operated on the city streets unless it is equipped
with:



   (A)   At least one and not more than two headlamps;



   (B)   One red light visible from the rear of the moped, which when
lighted, or a red reflector, which upon illumination, is visible for at least
500 feet;



   (C)   At least one white reflector on each side of both the front
and rear wheel and which, upon illumination, is visible by approaching
vehicles from a distance of at least 100 feet;



   (D)   A horn or other device capable of making an abrupt sound
sufficiently loud to be heard under all ordinary traffic conditions;



   (E)   An exhaust system, where applicable, incorporating a muffler
or other mechanical device for the purpose of reducing engine noise. The
system shall be securely attached and located so as not to interfere with the
operation of the moped. Shielding shall be provided to prevent inadvertent
bodily contact with the exhaust system during normal operation. No
modification of the system shall be made which would effectively defeat the
purposes of this provision; and



   (F)   An orange fluorescent flag attached to the top of a pole which
is not less than four feet in length, the four feet to be measured beginning
at the bottom of the seat of the moped.



(Ord. G-90-210, passed 2-15-1990)



§ 73.37  OPERATING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Every person shall, before operating a moped upon a city
street located within the geographical boundaries of the city, wear a helmet
at all times while operating the moped.



   (B)   No operator of any moped shall carry another person except
where the vehicle has been originally designed to carry one passenger.



   (C)   No operator of any moped on a city street shall drive the
vehicle abreast of any operator of any other vehicle while in the same lane
as that vehicle.



   (D)   No operator of any moped shall drive the vehicle upon or
within any public park or public school real property within the geographical
boundaries of the city unless a designated path or roadway exists therein as
determined and posted by the appropriate authority or public body entitled
under law to exercise control in the area, or unless general vehicular
operation is otherwise permitted.



   (E)   No operator of any moped shall drive the vehicle upon any
sidewalk within the geographical boundaries of the city.



   (F)   All operators of mopeds on city streets shall use the
appropriate hand signals when stopping and turning.



   (G)   The operator of a moped on any city street shall operate the
vehicle in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of
pedestrians and other vehicles upon the street.



   (H)   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a moped owned or
controlled by him or her to be driven by any person who has no legal right to
drive it.



(Ord. G-90-210, passed 2-15-1990)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.38  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of any minor under the age of 18
years shall not authorize nor permit the minor to violate any provision of
this subchapter under circumstances where the parent or guardian knew or
should have known of the violation.



(Ord. G-90-210, passed 2-15-1990)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.39  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Whenever any moped is operated by a minor, in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the moped may be seized by any authorized member
of the Police Department and impounded. The moped so impounded shall be
surrendered to the parent or legal guardian after payment of any assessed
fines and towing charges, if applicable. The remedy of impoundment shall be
in addition to the penalties provided in § 73.99.



(Ord. G-90-210, passed 2-15-1990)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 73.50  AUTHORITY TO INSPECT BICYCLES.



   Any member of the Police Department is authorized to enforce any
section of this chapter and to inspect a bicycle on a public way to insure
its safe operating condition.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)



§ 73.51  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS.



   Any person who is found to be in violation of the duties required by
this chapter shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in § 73.99.



(Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)  Penalty,
see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter not otherwise
specified herein below shall be fined $25 per offense.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 73.35 through 73.39
shall be fined $50 per offense.



(Ord. 4120, passed 3-6-1939; Ord. G-64-180, passed 11-9-1964; Ord. G-90-210,
passed 2-15-1990; Ord. G-11-36, passed 11-17-2011)



 



 



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   State speed laws applicable. The state motor vehicle
laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon the streets
within the city, except as this chapter provides otherwise. Speed limits
established in this chapter are based upon engineering and traffic
investigations as required by I.C. 9-21-5 et seq. When appropriate signs are
erected, these speed limits are the maximum speeds at which a vehicle may be
driven. No person shall drive a vehicle at a greater speed than that posted.



      (2)   Increased or decreased state speed limits. It has been
determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that
the speed permitted by state law upon streets or parts of streets described
in divisions (B) and (C) below is greater or less, as specified in the
schedules, than it is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist
on the streets. When appropriate signs are erected, the speed limits
designated in the schedules hereafter are the maximum speeds at which a
vehicle may be driven. No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater
than that posted.



      (3)   Review of speed limits. The Board of Public Works and
Safety is given authority by this chapter to periodically review the posted
speed limits set forth hereunder and shall further be given authority to make
appropriate changes in the posted speed limits, provided the changes shall be
based upon engineering and traffic investigations as required by state
statute. The Board shall certify revisions or additions to the City Clerk.
The Clerk shall maintain on file this chapter and any certification by the
Board and the speed limits therein shall constitute the maximum legal speed
limits upon the local streets and highways within the city.



      (4)   Speed limit on streets not listed. All other local
streets, not state or federal highways, alleys or otherwise listed shall be
30 mph.



   (B)   Schedules.



      (1)   Twenty mph, when children present.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Beehler
 
Thomas
 
Silver
 
Board*
 
8-12-1986


Bono Road
 
Green Street
 
Graybrook Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Cherry Street
 
W. 7th Street
 
500 feet west of Old Vincennes Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Daisy Lane
 
Franklin Drive
 
Green Valley Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ekin Avenue
 
Silver
 
Jay
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


E. Elm Street
 
E. 7th Street
 
E. 10th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Elm Street
 
E. 15th Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Green Valley Road
 
Daisy Lane
 
Bono Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Locust Avenue
 
Silver
 
Hazelwood
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


E. Oak Street
 
E. 10th Street
 
E. 13th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ormond
 
Roanoke
 
Charlestown
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Pearl Street
 
Union Street
 
Graybrook
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Roanoke Avenue
 
McDonald Lane
 
Scheller Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Roanoke Avenue
 
Center Street
 
Ormond Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Scheller Court
 
Knob View
 
Scheller Lane
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Scheller Lane
 
Charlestown
 
Scheller Court
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Silver Street
 
Locust
 
Alley between Lake and Williard
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Silver Street
 
E. Oak Street
 
Locust Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Spring Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
E. 15th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Spring Street
 
E. 10th Street
 
E. 7th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


State Street
 
Monroe Avenue
 
Green Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 8th Street
 
E. Spring Street
 
Oak Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


*Editor's note:


   Wherever the word "Board" appears in this traffic schedule, it denotes
action by the Board of Public Works and Safety at the meeting held on the
date indicated




 



      (2)   Twenty-five mph, when children present.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Corydon Pike
 
Camp Avenue
 
500 west of Camp Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mt. Tabor Road
 
Grant Line Road
 
W. Oakwood Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Scheller Lane
 
Charlestown Road
 
Scheller Court
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Slate Run Road
 
Meadow Lane
 
Old Ford Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985



 



      (3)   Twenty-five mph.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Althea
 
Jolissaint
 
Ann
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Bank Street
 
E. Main Street
 
Culbertson Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Beeler Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
E. 8th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Capt. Frank Road
 
State Street
 
1,000' south of Olive Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Culbertson Avenue
 
Vincennes Street
 
Silver Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Culbertson Avenue
 
Silver Street
 
E. Elm Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Daisy Lane
 
Stover Drive
 
Grant Line Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Elm Street
 
State Street
 
E. 5th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. Elm Street
 
W. Second Street
 
State Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Fawcell Hill
 
Capt. Frank
 
Terminus
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Graybrook Lane
 
2,000 south of Daisy Lane
 
Bono Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Knob View
 
McDonald Lane
 
Terminus
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Lafayette
 
Charlestown
 
Savannah
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


E. Market Street
 
State Street
 
E. 9th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. Market Street
 
W. 2nd Street
 
State Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Oak Street
 
E. 5th Street
 
State Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Oak Street
 
State Street
 
W. 2nd Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


McDonald Lane
 
Grantline Road
 
Charleston Road
 
Board
 
3-29-1988


Market Street (900 block)
 
 
Vincennes Street (1600 block)
 
Board
 
2-9-1988


Old Ford Road
 
Charlestown Road
 
Slate Run Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oxford
 
McDonald Lane
 
McDonald Lane
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Park Avenue
 
Ann
 
Jolissaint
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Pearl Street
 
300 north of Oak Street
 
E. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Rosview
 
Daisy east of Schell
 
Daisy west of Graybrook
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Savannah
 
Lafayette
 
Klerner
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


E. 7th
 
Shelby
 
E. Main
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Sherwood
 
Klerner
 
Norwood
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Spring
 
W. 8th
 
Knob
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


E. Spring Street
 
E. 8th Street
 
State Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


State Street
 
Spring Street
 
Cherry Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 3rd
 
E. Oak
 
E. Main
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Water Street
 
5,000 west of 18th Street
 
W. 10th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 2nd Street
 
Oak Street
 
Cherry Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 4th Street
 
W. Main Street
 
Culbertson Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 4th Street
 
W. Spring Street
 
W. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985




 



      (4)   Thirty mph.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Beehler (20 mph when children are present)
 
Thomas
 
Silver
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Cherry
 
Adams Avenue
 
Old Vincennes
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


East Spring Street
 
15th Street
 
10th Street
 
Board
 
7-19-1988


Ekin Avenue (20 mph when children are present)
 
Silver
 
Jay
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Locust Avenue (20 mph when children are present)
 
Silver
 
Hazelwood
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Market
 
East
 
Beharrell
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Ormond (20 mph when children are present)
 
Roanoke
 
Charlestown
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Scheller Court (20 mph when children are present)
 
Knob View
 
Scheller Lane
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


Scheller Lane (20 mph when children are present)
 
Charlestown
 
Scheller Court
 
Board
 
8-12-1986


W. Spring
 
W. 5th
 
W. 7th
 
Board
 
8-12-1986




 



      (5)   Thirty-five mph.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Capt. Frank Road
 
1,000 feet south of Olive Street
 
Valley View Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Capt. Frank Road
 
Valley View Road
 
500' east of Oakland Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Floyd Street
 
Jackson Street
 
W. 10th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Graybrook Lane
 
Daisy Lane
 
2,000' south of Daisy Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hausfeldt (Hosfelt) Lane
 
Green Valley Road
 
Grant Line Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Industrial Blvd.
 
Progress Boulevard
 
Park Place
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Klerner Lane
 
Rainbow Drive
 
Mt. Tabor Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Klerner Lane
 
Mt. Tabor Road
 
Charlestown Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lynwood Court
 
Charlestown Road
 
Brookwood Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Main Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
Silver Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mt. Tabor Road
 
Klerner Lane
 
Grant Line Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mt. Tabor Road
 
Grant Line Road
 
Green Valley Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Progress Blvd.
 
Mt. Tabor Road (Hosfelt) Lane
 
Hausfeldt
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Scheller Lane
 
Charlestown Road
 
Scheller Court
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Silver Street
 
Locust Street
 
Charlestown Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Slate Run Road
 
Silver Street
 
Charlestown Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. Spring Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
E. 8th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


State Street
 
West Street
 
Daisy Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Valley View Road
 
Cherry Street
 
Capt. Frank Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985




 



      (6)   Forty mph.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Corydon Pike
 
West city limits
 
S.R. 111
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Old Vincennes Road
 
Cherry Street
 
1,400' north of Cherry Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


State Street
 
Daisy Lane
 
City limits
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985



 



      (7)   Forty-five mph.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Glen Mill Road
 
Green Valley Road
 
N. Pine View Court
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985



 



   (C)   Schedule for courts, cul-de-sacs and short sections.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Abbie Dell Avenue
 
Charlestown Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Adams Avenue
 
West Street
 
State Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Aebersold Court
 
Silver Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Aebersold Drive
 
Silver Street
 
Aebersold Court
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Alan Drive
 
Schell Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Alice Avenue
 
Garretson Lane
 
Elmer Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Alice Street
 
Adams Street
 
Knob Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ann Drive
 
Coyle Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ann Street
 
Althea Avenue
 
Monon Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Aredia Avenue
 
Maryland Avenue
 
Monon Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Arnold Court
 
Corydon Pike
 
Eagle Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Audubon Drive
 
Charlestown Road
 
Audubon Drive N.
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ayers Street
 
W. Elm Street
 
W. Spring Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Beechgrove Avenue
 
Silver Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Bell Lane
 
Mt. Tabor Rd
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Blair Street
 
State Street
 
Walnut Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Briarwood Road
 
Klerner Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Bohannon Lane N.
 
Green Valley Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Bohannon Lane S.
 
Green Valley Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Broadway Street
 
Center Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Brook Street
 
Center Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Brookridge
 
Schell Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Bulldog Blvd.
 
Thomas Street
 
Shelby Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Burton Avenue
 
DePauw Avenue
 
Locust Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Butler Street
 
E. Main Street
 
Dewey Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Bryn Mawr Court
 
Old Ford Road
 
Charlestown Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Cannon Street
 
Center Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Capital Drive
 
Quality Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Carlton
 
Silver Street
 
Indiana Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Catherine Place
 
Beeler Street
 
Ekin Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Cavel Street
 
E. Main Street
 
E. Market Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Cedar Bough
 
Beeler Street
 
Ekin Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Cedar Street
 
Cherry Street
 
W. 9th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Center Street
 
Thomas Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Chanda Lane
 
Broeker Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Charles Street
 
Chartres Street
 
Beeler Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Church Street
 
W. 9th Street
 
W. 10th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Clifford Street
 
Cliffwood Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Clifton Avenue
 
Slate Run Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Colonial Drive
 
Charlestown Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Colonial Drive
 
Old Ford Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Commerce Street
 
W. 8th Street
 
W. 5th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Conservative Street
 
Green Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Conti Street
 
Floyd Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Coyle Drive
 
Daisy Lane
 
State St
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Culbertson Avenue
 
Slate Run Road
 
E. Elm Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Dent Avenue
 
Highland Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Dewey Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
E. 18th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Division Street
 
E. 16th Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Doebrook Cir.
 
Doebrook Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Earnings Way
 
Hausfeldt (Hosfelt) Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Eastwood Avenue
 
Slate Run Road
 
Maple Court
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Easy Street
 
E. Market Street
 
E. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Edgewood Lane
 
Klerner Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ellen Court
 
Green Valley Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Elliot
 
Nelson Avenue
 
Virginia Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Elm Street E.
 
Beharrell Avenue
 
Virginia Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Elm Street W.
 
W. 8th Street
 
W. 6th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Elmer Avenue
 
Near Alice Avenue
 
Near Hoover Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Elmview Drive
 
Old Ford Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Elmwood Avenue
 
Grant Line Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Estella Avenue
 
Camp Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Fair Street
 
Althea Avenue
 
Monon Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Fairway
 
Country Club Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ferry Street
 
Floyd Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ferry Street
 
S.R. 111
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Finchleigh Drive
 
Greenbriar Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Flower
 
State Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Frederick Avenue
 
McDonald Avenue
 
Korb Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Georgianna Drive
 
Budd Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Glenview Hts. Road
 
Glen Mill Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Glenwood Court
 
Beharrell Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Glenwood Pk.
 
Beharrell Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Grable Court
 
Miller Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Grand Avenue
 
Hillcrest Avenue
 
Alley
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Grant Street
 
E. 14th Street
 
E. 15th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Green Hill Court
 
Mills Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Green Street
 
Division Street
 
E. Market Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Greenaway
 
Cedar Bough
 
E. 11th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Greenwood Court
 
Oakwood Court
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hand Avenue
 
Maryland Avenue
 
Beechwood Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Harbrook Court
 
Murr Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Harriet Court
 
Slate Run Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Harris Court
 
Daisy Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hazelwood Avenue
 
Beeler Street
 
Locust Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hedden Court
 
Charlestown Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hedden Pk.
 
Charlestown Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hillview Drive
 
Klerner Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hollee Drive
 
Klerner Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Hoover
 
Garretson Lane
 
Elmer Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Houston
 
Roanoke Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Humphrey
 
Indiana Avenue
 
McDonald Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Jackson Street
 
E. 8th Street
 
Beeler Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Jacques Lane
 
Grant Line Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Jay Street
 
Beeler Street
 
Ekin Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Kannapple Lane
 
State Street
 
Green Valley Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Kaywood Drive
 
W. of Woodbourne
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Kent Drive
 
Schell Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


King Street
 
E. 16th Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Knable Lane
 
State Street
 
Green Valley Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lafayette Street
 
W. Market Street
 
W. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lake Street
 
Silver Street
 
Indiana Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lancaster Cir.
 
Lancaster Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lancaster Drive
 
Mt. Tabor Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lilly Lane
 
Charlestown Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lincoln Avenue
 
Charlestown Road
 
Lopp Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lindberg Court
 
Hazelwood
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Linden Street
 
E. Market Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lindsley Street
 
E. 6th Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lochwood Blvd.
 
Slate Run Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lone Oak Drive
 
Broeker Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Long Court
 
Schell Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Louisa Drive
 
Klerner Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lynn Court
 
Coes Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Lyon Lane
 
Korb Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mann Drive
 
Fairmont Avenue
 
Shrader Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Maple Court
 
Eastwood Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Maple Lane
 
Adams Street
 
Knob Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Maple Lane
 
Eastwood Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Marianne Drive
 
Budd Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Market Street W.
 
W. 9th Street
 
W. 7th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Martin Drive
 
Bono Road
 
Green Valley Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mary Ann
 
Korb Avenue
 
Rose Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mary Lee Drive
 
Old Ford Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Maryland Avenue
 
Hand Avenue
 
South Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Maze Drive
 
Budd Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


McDonald Street
 
Center Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Meadow Lane
 
Slate Run Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Millerwood Court
 
Charlestown Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mills Road
 
Green Valley Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mona Vista Court
 
Slate Run Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Monroe Avenue
 
Pearl Street
 
State Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Mosier Avenue
 
Hildreth Street
 
W. 2nd Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Moulton
 
Dennison Street
 
Naghel Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Myrtle Avenue
 
DePauw Avenue
 
Locust Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Naghle Street
 
Albany Street
 
Moulton Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Nassau Lane
 
Oxford Drive
 
McDonald Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Nelson Avenue
 
Grant Line Road
 
Elliot
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oak Street E.
 
Beharrell Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oak Street E.
 
Silver Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oakland Court
 
Greenleaf Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oakwood Court
 
Ashwood Court
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oakwood Drive E.
 
Mt. Tabor Road
 
Pennwood Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oakwood Drive W.
 
Mt. Tabor Road
 
Pennwood Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ohio Street
 
W. 6th Street
 
Alley west of W. 9th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Oriole Drive
 
Korb Avenue
 
Coes Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Palmer Court
 
Palmer Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Parkway Drive
 
Colonial Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Pine Creek Cir.
 
Rainbow Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Pine Street
 
W. 9th Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Pineview Court N.
 
Glen Mill Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Player Place
 
Country Club Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Poplar Street
 
S.R. 111
 
Jackson Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Poydras Street
 
Floyd Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Profit Court
 
Quality Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Quality Avenue
 
Earnings Way
 
Capital Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Riddle Avenue
 
W. of Highland Avenue
 
E. of Highland Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Ridgeway Avenue
 
Highland Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Robin Court
 
Twin Oaks Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Roosevelt Avenue
 
Charlestown Road
 
Lopp Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Rosalind
 
Highland Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Rose Drive
 
Korb Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Sanderson
 
McDonald Avenue
 
Korb Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Scott Road
 
McDonald Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Scott Street
 
S.R. 111
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Shady Drive
 
Camp Street
 
Estelia Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Shelby Street
 
E. 8th Street
 
Culbertson Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Shelby Street
 
E. 15th Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Shirley Street
 
West Street
 
Nagel Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Silver Slate Drive
 
Slate Run Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Silver Slope Drive
 
Corydon Pike
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Sleepy Lane
 
Grant Line Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Soergel Avenue
 
Slate Run Road
 
Garretson Lane
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Sprigler Avenue
 
Korb Avenue
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Spring Avenue
 
Beharrell Avenue
 
Virginia Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Spring Street W.
 
W. 8th Street
 
W. 7th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Stone Circle
 
Green Valley Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Stone Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
Easy Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Strack Lane
 
Grant Line Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Summit Avenue
 
Coes Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Summit Avenue
 
Slate Run Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Tabor Court
 
Mt. Tabor Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Terrace Court
 
Slate Run Road
 
E. Elm Drive
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Troy Street
 
Vincennes Street
 
E. 18th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Tyler Drive
 
Schell Lane
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Union Street
 
Pearl Street
 
State Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Valley View Court
 
Wilson Street
 
Wilson Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Village Drive
 
Hamlet Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Virginia Avenue
 
E. Elm Street
 
Spring Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Virginia Avenue
 
Grant Line Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Virginia Court
 
West Street
 
Albany Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Wahoo Drive N.
 
Cherokee Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Washington Place
 
W. Spring Street
 
W. Market Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Willow Avenue
 
Silver Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Willow Drive
 
Colonial Drive
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Wood Avenue
 
Silver Street
 
Indiana Avenue
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Woodlawn
 
Charlestown Road
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Wren Road
 
Larkwood Drive
 
W. Robin Road
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


Young Street
 
Alley east of W. 9th Street
 
Alley west of W. 9th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 4th Street
 
Culbertson Avenue
 
E. 6th Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 5th Street
 
W. 6th Street
 
Terminus
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 6th Street
 
E. 4th Street
 
Lindsley Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 6th Street
 
E. Elm Street
 
E. Market Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 6th Street
 
Ohio Street
 
Commerce Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 6th Street
 
W. Elm Street
 
W. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 8th Street
 
Cherry Street
 
South of Commerce Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 8th Street
 
W. Elm Street
 
W. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 9th Street
 
Cherry Street
 
Young Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 9th Street
 
Pine Street
 
W. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


W. 10th Street
 
Church Street
 
W. Main Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 16th Street
 
Division Street
 
E. Market Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985


E. 16th Street
 
E. Main Street
 
Dewey Street
 
G-85-56
 
2-4-1985




 



Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   No parking



   II.   Limited parking



   III.   Restricted parking



   IV.   Angle parking



   V.   Parking on paved surfaces prohibited



   VI.   Loading zones



   VII.   Public carrier stops and stands



   VIII.   Emergency lane parking



Cross-reference:



   Parking during street cleaning, see § 99.01



SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING.



   There shall be no parking on the following named streets:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Ord.No.
 
Date




Alley
 
Between Pearl Street and Bank Street
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Alley
 
Between Elm Street and Main Street
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Alley
 
Running between and parallel to Bank Street and E. 3rd Street from Elm Street
to Main Street
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Alley
 
Intersecting Locust Street between Charles St. and Jackson Street
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Black Street
 
From Pearl Street to State Street
 
Both
 
4514
 
6-7-1954


Coval Street
 
Between Market Street and Main Street
 
East
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Charlestown Avenue
 
From Vincennes Street to a point 60 feet south of Vincennes Street
 
East
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Cherry Street
 
From State Street to the Old Vincennes Road
 
South
 
G-61-107
 
4-4-1961


Culbertson Avenue
 
From E. 4th Street to E. 7th Street and the present one-way traffic westward
on such Culbertson Avenue between such E. 4th Street and E. 8th Street shall
be changed to two-way traffic, thereby permitting the parking of motor
vehicles on both sides of Culbertson Avenue between E. 7th Street and E. 8th
Street
 
North
 
G-61-113
 
10-2-1961


G-61-120


E. 5th Street
 
In the space extending from the north curb line of Spring Street to a point
60 feet of the curb line
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


E. 10th Street
 
Between Oak Street and Culbertson Avenue
 
East
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Grantline Road
 
From E. 8th Street to Vincennes Street
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Lewis Street
 
Between State Street and Vine Street
 
South
 
G-63-140
 
6-5-1963


Pearl Street
 
From Main Street to the New Albany floodwall right-of-way
 
Both
 
4514
 
6-7-1954


Pearl Street
 
Within the space of 32 feet on the west side of Pearl Street extending from
one driveway south of post office northward 32 feet
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Rasmussen Court alley
 
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


State Street
 
Between a point 127 feet north of the north curb line of Oak Street and a
point 187 feet north of the curb line
 
East
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Vincennes Street
 
From the south line on Main Street southward to K and I Railroad property
 
East
 
G-61-1 13
 
6-5-1961


W. Spring Street
 
Between W. 1st Street and W. 2nd Street
 
South
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


W. 1st Street
 
Between Spring Street and W. Market Street
 
West
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


W. 2nd Street
 
Between W. Spring Street and W. Market Street
 
East
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


6th Street
 
Between Spring Street and Elm Street
 
West
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


15th Street
 
From Spring Street to Ekin Avenue
 
West
 
4074
 
11-12-1936




 



Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE II. LIMITED PARKING.



   (A)   Ten minute parking. On the following streets vehicles may
park, but for a period of no longer than ten minutes:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


On the post office block
 
From an alley on Spring Street to within 32 feet of the driveway on Pearl
Street
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936



 



   (B)   Half-hour parking. There is established a half-hour parking
zone in which no person, firm or corporation shall park a vehicle between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and national
holidays, for a period of more than one-half hour. The zones shall be as
follows:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


W. Spring Street
 
Between W. 1st Street and W. 2nd Street
 
North
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


W. 2nd Street
 
Between W. Spring Street and W. Market Street
 
West
 
 



 



   (C)   One hour parking.



      (1)   There is established a one-hour parking zone in which no
person, firm or corporation shall park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and national holidays, for a
period of more than one hour. The zones shall be as follows:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


W. Market Street
 
Between W. 2nd Street and W. 3rd Street
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


W. Spring Street
 
Between W. 2nd Street and W. 3rd Street
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


W. 1st Street
 
Between W. Spring Street and W. Elm Street
 
G-61-117
 

7-10-1961



W. 1st Street
 
Between W. Market Street and W. Main Street
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


W. 2nd Street
 
Between W. Spring Street and W. Elm Street
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961


W. 2nd Street
 
Between W. Market Street and W. Main Street
 
G-61-117
 
7-10-1961



 



      (2)   On the following named streets there shall be a limit to
parking for one hour:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Bank Street
 
From Main Street to the floodwall
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Elm Street
 
From State Street to Bank Street
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Oak Street
 
From Pearl Street to State Street
 
North
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Pearl Street
 
From Elm Street to Oak Street
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Silver Street
 
Between Spring Street and Division Street
 
West
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


State Street
 
From Main Street southward to floodwall
 
Both
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961



 



   (D)   Two-hour parking.



      (1)   There is established a two-hour parking zone. No person,
firm or corporation shall park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on any weekday for a period of more than two hours. The zone shall
consist of the following streets:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Bank Street
 
From Spring Street to Elm Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


Bank Street
 
From Main Street to west side of New Albany floodwall right-of-way
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


E. Main Street
 
From Bank Street to E. 4th Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


Elm Street
 
From State Street to E. 3rd Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


Market Street
 
From E. 3rd Street to E. 4th Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


Spring Street
 
From E. 3rd Street to E. 4th Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


State Street
 
From Main Street to New Albany floodwall right-of-way
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


Third Street
 
From Elm Street to Main Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


W. Main Street
 
From State Street to W. 2nd Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


W. Market Street
 
From 1st Street to 2nd Street
 
4515
 
6-7-1954


W. 1st Street
 
From Spring Street to the New Albany floodwall right-of-way
 
4515
 
6-7-1954




 



      (2)   There is established a two-hour parking meter zone on
the following named streets:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Market Street
 
Between Pearl Street and E. 3rd Street
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961



 



Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE III. RESTRICTED PARKING.



   Parking during church services only.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


E. 5th Street
 
Between Market Street and Spring Street
 
West
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961



 



Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE IV. ANGLE PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park other than
at an angle of 45 degrees on the following named streets:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Bank Street
 
From Main Street to Oak Street
 
East
 
4074
 

11-12-1936



Main Street
 
From Pearl Street to W. 5th Street
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Main Street
 
From 14th Street to 15th Street
 
South
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Market Street
 
From Bank Street to W. 1st Street
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


Pearl Street
 
From Elm Street to Spring Street
 
East
 
4074
 
11-12-1936


State Street
 
From Main Street to Oak Street
 
Both
 
4074
 
11-12-1936



 



Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE V. PARKING ON PAVED SURFACES PROHIBITED.



   Parking shall be prohibited on the paved surfaces of the following
streets:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Daisy Lane
 
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Green Valley Road
 
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


McDonald Lane
 
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Roselawn
 
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Schell Lane
 
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


State Run Road
 
From Silver Street to Charlestown Road
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961



 



Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE VI. LOADING ZONES.



   The following areas are designated as loading zones:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Time Limit
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Vincennes Street
 
Between Locust Street and a point 125 feet south thereof permitted
 
East
 
Between hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


W. Market Street
 
In front of the John T. Vie Company
 
 
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961



 



SCHEDULE VII. PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.



   The following locations are designated as public carrier stops and
stands:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Purpose
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


State Street
 
Between points 287 feet and 341 feet north of the north curb line of Oak
Street
 
Taxi stand only
 
East
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Vincennes Street
 
Between a point 159.4 feet south of the south curb line of Rear Market Street
and a point 218 feet south of such Rear Market Street
 
Bus stop for the Greyhound buslines
 
East
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961


Vincennes Street
 
From Locust Street to a point 125 feet south buses only
 
Parking for school
 
East
 
G-61-113
 
6-5-1961



 



SCHEDULE VIII. EMERGENCY LANE PARKING.



   The following locations shall be designated as emergency lane parking
areas:



 

Description
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Ayr-Way Store Complex on State Street Emergency lane of varying widths around
the entire perimeter of the building. Five-minute standing limit, provided
driver or operator of the vehicle remains with the vehicle.
 
G-79-756
 
8-6-1979


Kroger-Super X Complex. Emergency lane of varying widths around the entire
perimeter of the building. Five-minute standing limit, provided that the
driver or operator of the vehicle remains with the vehicle.
 
G-81-874
 
2-2-1981


New Albany Mall and Colonial Manor Shopping Center. Emergency lane 20 feet
wide around the entire perimeter of the parking lot of each shopping center
in front of each existing or proposed commercial building located in the
shopping centers.
 
G-78-692
 
5-8-1978



 



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES





         91.   ANIMALS





         92.   EMERGENCIES; 911 SYSTEM





         93.   RESERVED





         94.   FIRE PREVENTION; SMOKE DETECTORS





         95.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS





         96.   NOISE CONTROL





         97.   NUISANCES





         98.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         99.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         100.   TREES, SHRUBS AND GROUNDCOVERS





         101.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY




CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Adoption of state procedures and fees by reference



   90.02   Fees



Removal of Abandoned Vehicles



   90.05   Definitions



   90.06   Applicability



   90.07   Responsibility of owner



   90.08   Discovery of possession by person other than vehicle owner



   90.09   Notice to Bureau of vehicle discovered in possession of
person other than owner



   90.10   Inability to determine ownership; declaring vehicle abandoned



   90.11   Release to owner or lien holder of stored vehicle



   90.12   Release; contents; notice by towing operations



   90.13   Failure of owner or lien holder to appear, declaring vehicle
abandoned



   90.14   Notice tag prepared by police officer



   90.15   Preparation of report; photographs



   90.16   Disposition of vehicle of less than $1,000 in value



   90.17   Duties of tagging officer, towing and storage of vehicle or
parts



   90.18   Vehicle abandoned on rental property; notification procedures



   90.19   Towing vehicle from rental property



   90.20   Towing operator required to notify public agency and state's
Bureau of Motor Vehicles



   90.21   Vehicle abandoned on private property; notification and
disposition procedures



   90.22   Abandoned vehicle report; forwarding to state's Bureau of
Motor Vehicles



   90.23   Search by Bureau for owner or lien holder; notice to owner
or lien holder



   90.24   Means of vehicle identification not available; disposal of
vehicle without notice



   90.25   Public sale by Bureau; notice



   90.26   Purchasers at public sale; bill of sale; fees;
roadworthiness of vehicle



   90.27   Payment of removal, storage and disposition costs; cost
limits



   90.28   Sale proceeds credited against removal, storage and
disposition costs



   90.29   Sales by Bureau; transfer to Motor Vehicle Highway Fund



   90.30   Establishment of procedures and Abandoned Vehicle Fund



   90.31   Removal of abandoned vehicles; establishment of procedures



   90.32   Exempt from liability



   90.33   Registration required



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  ADOPTION OF STATE PROCEDURES AND FEES BY REFERENCE.



   The city adopts and incorporates the procedures and fees set forth
under I.C. 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32 and the city is authorized to remove
and dispose of abandoned vehicles, as defined thereon.



(Ord. G-86-124, passed 2-4-1986)



§ 90.02  FEES.



   (A)   The charges allowed for towing (removal of) any vehicle
impounded by the Police Department shall not exceed $110, unless extenuating
circumstances exist, such as the requirement for additional equipment needed
for the removal, the time involved in the removal is greater than that
required for normal towing or the vehicle to be removed has more than two
axles. The amount charged by a towing company, when extenuating circumstances
exist, shall not exceed what would be reasonable under any given circumstance.



   (B)   The Police Department shall charge a $20 per day storage fee
for vehicles stored in a municipal impound lot, unless the vehicle being
stored has more than two axles. For vehicles with more than two axles, the
Police Department shall charge a $30 per day storage fee.



(Ord. G-85-85, passed 8-6-1985; Ord. G-86-124, passed 2-4-1986; Ord. G-01-02,
passed 1-4-2001; Ord. G-01-38, passed 10-18-2001; Ord. G-09-18, passed
5-4-2009)



REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES



§ 90.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;



      (2)   A vehicle left on public property without being removed
for 24 hours;



      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as
to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on a public right-of-way;



      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without
the consent of the owner or person in control of that property for more than
48 hours;



      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission or
differential has been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property;



      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or
public agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance
other than this subchapter if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or
redeemed by the owner or the owner’s agent within 20 days of the
vehicle’s removal; and/or



      (7)   A vehicle that is at least three model years old,
mechanically inoperable and is left on private property continuously in a
location visible from public property for more than 20 days.  For purposes
of this section, a vehicle covered by a tarpaulin or other plastic, vinyl,
rubber, cloth, or textile covering is considered to be visible.



(I.C. 9-13-2-1)



Statutory reference:



   I.C. 9-13-2-1 has been amended to include “(8) A vehicle (a) that was
repaired or stored at the request of the owner; (b) that has not been claimed
by the owner; and (c) for which the reasonable value of the charges
associated with the repair or storage remain unpaid more than 30 days after
the date on which the repair work was completed or the vehicle is first
stored.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A vehicle properly licensed and registered under I.C.
9-18-12 as an ANTIQUE VEHICLE.



   OFFICER. A regular member of the Police Department, any civilian
officer employed by the Police Department or a designated member of the
Building Commissioner’s Office.



   PUBLIC AGENCY. The public agency given the responsibility for the
removal, storage and disposal of abandoned vehicles shall mean the City of
New Albany, Indiana, and its departments, employees, appointees and elected
officials.



(I.C. 9-22-1-3)



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998; Ord. G-04-39, passed 8-2-2004)



§ 90.06  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter does not apply to the following:



   (A)   A vehicle adapted for racing. A VEHICLE ADAPTED FOR RACING is
a vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted for operation on
privately-owned raceways, and registered as outlined in this chapter at §
90.33 and any other provisions of this chapter:



      (1)   Vehicles adapted for racing shall not be parked on a
street, alley or public right-of-way, or on grounds visible from the street,
alley, public right-of-way or adjacent residential property;



      (2)   A vehicle with stickers, numbers or advertising shall
not make that vehicle specifically adapted for racing or operation on a
raceway; and



      (3)   The officer shall determine whether a vehicle is
specifically adapted for operation on a privately-owned raceway.



   (B)   A vehicle stored on a vehicle sale lot;



   (C)   A vehicle stored as property of a member of the armed services
of the United States who is on active duty assignment;



   (D)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an
automobile scrapyard;



   (E)   An antique vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18-12
(before its expiration), a historic vehicle licensed under I.C. 9-18.5-34 or
a military vehicle registered under I.C. 9-18.1-8; and



   (F)   A golf cart.



(I.C. 9-22-1-1)



Statutory reference:



   I.C. 9-22-1-1 has been amended to exclude off-road vehicles.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998; Ord. G-04-39, passed 8-2-2004)



§ 90.07  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   The person who owns an abandoned vehicle or parts of a vehicle is
responsible for the abandonment and liable for all of the costs incidental to
the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle or parts of a vehicle under
this subchapter.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.08  DISCOVERY OF POSSESSION BY PERSON OTHER THAN VEHICLE OWNER.



   When an officer discovers a vehicle in the possession of a person other
than the person who owns the vehicle and the person cannot establish the
right to possession of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be taken to and stored
in a suitable place.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.09  NOTICE TO BUREAU OF VEHICLE DISCOVERED IN POSSESSION OF PERSON
OTHER THAN OWNER.



   The Bureau shall be notified within 72 hours of the location and
description of a vehicle described in § 90.08 of this subchapter. Upon
receipt of notification, the Bureau shall cause a search to be made to
determine and notify the person who owns the vehicle under § 90.23 of this
subchapter.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.10  INABILITY TO DETERMINE OWNERSHIP; DECLARING VEHICLE ABANDONED.



   If the person who owns a vehicle cannot be determined by a search under
§ 90.23 of this subchapter, the Bureau shall declare the vehicle abandoned
and provide for the disposal under this subchapter.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.11  RELEASE TO OWNER OR LIEN HOLDER OF STORED VEHICLE.



   If a properly identified person who owns or holds a lien on a vehicle
appears at the site of storage before disposal of the vehicle or parts and
pays all costs incurred against the vehicle or parts at that time, the
vehicle or parts shall be released.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.12  RELEASE; CONTENTS; NOTICE BY TOWING OPERATIONS.



   The release must state the name, signature and address of the person
who owns or holds a lien on the vehicle, a description of the vehicle or
parts, costs and date of release. A towing operator shall notify the Bureau
of all releases under § 90.11 of this subchapter.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.13  FAILURE OF OWNER OR LIEN HOLDER TO APPEAR, DECLARING VEHICLE
ABANDONED.



   If a person who owns or holds a lien under § 90.11 of this subchapter
does not appear and pay all costs, the Bureau shall declare the vehicle
abandoned and provide for disposal under this subchapter.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.14  NOTICE TAG PREPARED BY POLICE OFFICER.



   An officer who finds or is notified of a vehicle or parts of a vehicle
believed to be abandoned shall attach, in a prominent place, a notice tag
containing the following information:



   (A)   The date, time, officer's name, public agency and address and
telephone number to contact for information;



   (B)   The vehicle or parts of a vehicle are considered abandoned;



   (C)   The vehicle or parts of a vehicle will be removed after 72
hours;



   (D)   The person who owns the vehicle will be held responsible for
all costs incidental to the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle; and



   (E)   The person who owns the vehicle or parts of a vehicle may
avoid costs by removal of the vehicle within 72 hours.



(I.C. 9-22-1-11)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.15  PREPARATION OF REPORT; PHOTOGRAPHS.



   If a vehicle or a part tagged pursuant to this section herein is not
removed within the 72-hour period, the officer shall prepare a written
abandoned vehicle report of the vehicle or parts, including information on
the condition and missing parts. Photographs may be taken to describe the
condition of the vehicle or parts.



(I.C. 9-22-1-12)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.16  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE OF LESS THAN $1,000 IN VALUE.



   If the vehicle is a junk vehicle and the market value of an abandoned
vehicle or parts is less than $1,000, the towing service shall immediately
transfer the vehicle to a storage yard. A copy of the abandoned vehicle
report and photographs, if applicable, relating to the abandoned vehicle
shall be provided to the storage yard.  The towing service or storage yard
may dispose of the abandoned vehicle not less than 30 days after the date on
which the towing service removed the abandoned vehicle. The public agency or
storage yard disposing of the vehicle shall retain the original records and
photographs for at least two years.  If the vehicle is demolished, a copy of
the abandoned vehicle report shall be forwarded to the state’s Bureau of
Motor Vehicles by the automobile scrap yard after the vehicle has been
demolished.



(I.C. 9-22-1-13)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.17  DUTIES OF TAGGING OFFICER, TOWING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLE OR PARTS.



   (A)   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of the
abandoned vehicle or parts is at least $1,000, the officer, before placing a
notice tag on the vehicle or parts, shall make a reasonable effort to
ascertain the person who owns the vehicle or parts or who may be in control
of the vehicle or parts.



   (B)   After 72 hours, the officer shall require the vehicle or parts
to be towed to a storage yard or towing service.



(I.C. 9-22-1-14)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.18  VEHICLE ABANDONED ON RENTAL PROPERTY; NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   A person who finds a vehicle believed to be abandoned on
private property that the person owns or controls, including rental property,
may:



      (1)   Obtain the assistance of an officer under I.C. 9-22-1-18
to have the vehicle removed; or



      (2)   Personally arrange for the removal of the vehicle by
complying with §§ 90.18(B) and 90.19(A) of this subchapter.



   (B)   If the person wishes to personally arrange for the removal of
the vehicle, the person shall attach, in a prominent place, a notice tag
containing the following information:



      (1)   The date, time, name and address of the person who owns
or controls the private property and a telephone number to contact for
information;



      (2)   The vehicle is considered abandoned;



      (3)   The vehicle will be removed after 72 hours;



      (4)   The person who owns the vehicle will be held responsible
for all costs incidental to the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle;
and



      (5)   The person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by
removal of the vehicle within 72 hours.



(I.C. 9-22-1-15)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.19  TOWING VEHICLE FROM RENTAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   If, after 72 hours, the person who owns the vehicle believed
to be abandoned on private property that the person owns or controls,
including rental property, has not removed the vehicle from the private
property, the person who owns or controls the private property may have the
vehicle towed from the private property. The towing operator shall do the
following:



      (1)   Contact the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to obtain the name
and address of the person who owns the vehicle; and



      (2)   Send, by certified mail, a copy of the information
contained in the notice required under § 90.18(B) of this subchapter to the
person who owns the vehicle. The notice required by this division must be
mailed to the person who owns the vehicle according to the records of the
Bureau not later than five business days after receipt of the information in
division (A)(2) from the Bureau.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) herein, in an emergency
situation, a vehicle may be removed immediately. As used in this division,
EMERGENCY SITUATION means that the presence of the abandoned vehicle
interferes physically with the conduct of normal business operations of the
person who owns or controls the private property, or poses a threat to the
safety or security of person or property, or both.



(I.C. 9-22-1-16)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.20  TOWING OPERATOR REQUIRED TO NOTIFY PUBLIC AGENCY AND STATE'S
BUREAU OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   A towing operator who tows a vehicle under § 90.19 herein shall give
notice to the public agency and the state's Bureau of Motor Vehicles that the
abandoned vehicle is in the possession of the towing operator.



(I.C. 9-22-1-17)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.21  VEHICLE ABANDONED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; NOTIFICATION AND
DISPOSITION PROCEDURES.



   Upon complaint of a person who owns or controls private property that a
vehicle has been left on the property for at least 48 hours without the
consent of the person who owns or controls the property, an officer shall
follow the procedures set forth in §§ 90.14 through 90.17 of this
subchapter.



(I.C. 9-22-1-18)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.22  ABANDONED VEHICLE REPORT; FORWARDING TO STATE'S BUREAU OF MOTOR
VEHICLES.



   (A)   Within 72 hours after the removal of an abandoned vehicle to a
storage yard or towing service under §§ 90.16, 90.17, 90.19 or 90.31 herein
or I.C. 9-22-6, the public agency or towing service shall conduct a search of
national data bases, including a data base of vehicle identification numbers,
to attempt to obtain the last state of record of the vehicle in order to
attempt to ascertain the name and address of the person who owns or holds a
lien on the vehicle.



   (B)   A public agency or towing service that obtains the name and
address of the owner of or lienholder on a vehicle shall, not later than 72
hours afer obtaining the name and address, notify the person who owns or
holds a lien on the vehicle of the following:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the public
agency or towing service;



      (2)   That storage charges are being accrued and the vehicle
is subject to sale if the vehicle is not claimed and the charges are not paid;



      (3)   The earliest possible date and location of the public
sale or auction.



The notice must be made by certified mail or a certificate of mailing or by
means of an electronic service approved by the state’s Bureau of Motor
Vehicles.  A public agency or towing service that fails to notify the owner
of or lienholder on the vehicle as set forth in this division may not collect
additional storage costs incurred after the date of receipt of the name and
address obtained



(I.C. 9-22-1-19(a), (b))  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.23  SEARCH BY BUREAU FOR OWNER OR LIEN HOLDER; NOTICE TO OWNER OR LIEN
HOLDER.



   Upon receipt of an abandoned vehicle report under § 90.20 of this
subchapter, the Bureau shall do the following:



   (A)   Conduct a reasonable search through the national Automobile
Theft Bureau and the state's Police Department to determine whether the
vehicle or parts have been reported as stolen;



   (B)   Conduct a reasonable search of the Bureau records to determine
the person who owns the vehicle or parts or the person who holds the lien of
record; and



   (C)   If a reasonable search discloses the name and address of the
person who owns or holds a lien on the vehicle, mail a written notice, by
first class mail to:



      (1)   The person who owns the vehicle, with a copy to each
person who holds a lien on the vehicle if the Bureau disposes of the vehicle;
or



      (2)   The public agency, if the public agency disposes of the
vehicle, indicating that the vehicle or parts have been impounded at a
certain location and must be removed within 20 days after the date of mailing
of the notice and advising that the vehicle or parts will be disposed of
after that time. The notice must advise the person who owns or holds a lien
on the vehicle that all costs incurred in removing and storing the vehicle or
parts are the person's legal responsibility.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.24  MEANS OF VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NOT AVAILABLE; DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE
WITHOUT NOTICE.



   If a vehicle or parts are in such a condition that the Vehicle
Identification Number (VIN) or other means of identification are not
available to determine the person who owns or holds a lien on the vehicle,
the vehicle may be disposed of without notice.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.25  PUBLIC SALE BY BUREAU; NOTICE.



   (A)   This section applies to the Bureau.



   (B)   If the person who owns or hold a lien upon a vehicle does not
appear within 20 days after the mailing of a notice under § 90.23 of this
subchapter, the Bureau shall sell the vehicle or parts to the highest bidder
at a public sale. Notice of the sale shall be given under I.C. 5-3-1, except
only one newspaper insertion one week before the public sale is required.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.26  PURCHASERS AT PUBLIC SALE; BILL OF SALE; FEES; ROADWORTHINESS OF
VEHICLE.



   A person who purchases a vehicle under § 90.25 shall be furnished a
bill of sale for each abandoned vehicle sold by the Bureau or public agency
upon paying the fee for a bill of sale under state law. A person who
purchases a vehicle under § 90.25 must:



   (A)   Present evidence from a law enforcement agency that the
vehicle purchased is roadworthy, if applicable; and



   (B)   Pay the appropriate fee under state law, to obtain a
certificate of title under I.C. 9-17 for the vehicle.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.27  PAYMENT OF REMOVAL, STORAGE AND DISPOSITION COSTS; COST LIMITS.



   The costs for removal and storage of an abandoned vehicle or parts not
claimed by the person who owns or holds a lien on a vehicle shall be paid
from the Abandoned Vehicle Account established by I.C. 9-22-1-24 and §
90.30. The charge payable by the person who owns the vehicle or parts or the
lien holder for the removal and storage of a vehicle or parts may not exceed
the limits established in § 90.30.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.28  SALE PROCEEDS CREDITED AGAINST REMOVAL, STORAGE AND DISPOSITION
COSTS.



   The proceeds of sales of an abandoned vehicle or parts under § 90.25
shall be credited against the costs of the removal, storage and disposal of
the vehicle.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.29  SALES BY BUREAU; TRANSFER TO MOTOR VEHICLE HIGHWAY FUND.



   This section applies to sales of abandoned vehicles by the Bureau.



   (A)   The proceeds from the sale of abandoned vehicles or parts
shall be deposited in the Abandoned Vehicle Fund to be established by the
Bureau after allocation for towing and storage charges.



   (B)   At the end of a state fiscal year, money deposited by the
Bureau in excess of $37,000 shall be transferred from the Abandoned Vehicle
Fund to the Motor Vehicle Highway Fund.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.30  ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES AND ABANDONED VEHICLE FUND.



   The city hereby establishes certain procedures to carry out this
subchapter, including the following.



   (A)   The charges allowed for towing (removal) and storage of any
vehicle impounded by the Police Department shall not exceed $65 (unless
extenuating circumstances exist as outlined in § 90.02) and a $10 per day
storage fee for vehicles and/or vehicle parts, unless the vehicle being
stored has more than two axles, in which case, a $20 per day storage fee
shall be charged. These charges shall be filed with the state's Bureau of
Motor Vehicles.



   (B)   The means of disposition of vehicles shall be pursuant to §
90.25.



   (C)   The Common Council directs that an Abandoned Vehicle Fund be
established for the purposes of this subchapter.



   (D)   The proceeds in the Abandoned Vehicle Fund shall be used first
for the operating expenses and capital expenditures of the tow-in lot. These
expenses may include but are not limited to: contractual services, mailing
costs, rent, insurance, equipment, and utilities. If these expenses are met,
then the Abandoned Vehicle Fund may also be used to defray fuel costs of the
Police Department and Fire Departments by additional appropriation.



(I.C. 9-22-1-30)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998; Ord. G-01-02, passed
1-4-2001; Ord. G-01-38, passed 10-18-2001; Ord. G-11-41, passed 12-15-2011)



§ 90.31  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES; ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES.



   (A)   To facilitate the removal of abandoned vehicles or parts, a
public agency may employ personnel, acquire equipment, property and
facilities and enter into towing contracts for the removal, storage and
disposition of abandoned vehicles and parts.



(I.C. 9-22-1-31)



   (B)   A fee of $25 is established and shall be paid to the city by
the independent tow-in operators which would allow the disposition of junk
vehicles towed in and not feasible for sale at auction.



(Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998; Ord. G-06-13, passed 5-1-2006)



§ 90.32  EXEMPT FROM LIABILITY.



   The following are not liable for loss or damage to a vehicle or parts
occurring during the removal, storage or disposition of a vehicle or parts
under this subchapter:



   (A)   A person who owns, leases or occupies property from which an
abandoned vehicle or parts are removed;



   (B)   A public agency;



   (C)   A towing service;



   (D)   An automobile scrapyard; and/or



   (E)   A storage yard.



(I.C. 9-22-1-32)  (Ord. G-98-263, passed 9-18-1998)



§ 90.33  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   All vehicles adapted for racing shall be registered annually with the
City Clerk, on forms supplied by the City Clerk, and pay an annual
registration fee of $25.



(Ord. G-04-39, passed 8-2-2004)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



   91.00   Definitions for use in this chapter




General Provisions




   91.01   Permitting animals to run at-large



   91.02   Authority to kill animals



   91.03   Interference with enforcement prohibited



   91.04   Keeping livestock and poultry



   91.05   Exhibitions or parades of animals



   91.06   Animals as prizes or inducements



   91.07   Animals which are a public nuisance



   91.08   Cruel treatment or neglect of animals prohibited



   91.09   Animal fighting and exhibition fighting prohibited



   91.10   Provision of necessities



   91.11   Restraint; restraint by tether; and collar specifications



   91.12   Sexual acts with animals



   91.13   Abandonment



   91.14   Keeping animal's areas of habitation clean



   91.15   Animals afflicted with contagious disease



   91.16   Rabies quarantine of animals



   91.17   Allowing animals to remain in parked vehicles



   91.18   Spay/neuter program established at animal shelter



Animal Registration and Rabies Vaccination



   91.19   Dogs and cats to be registered and licensed



   91.20   Exotic animals to be registered



   91.21   Dogs, cats, and ferrets over three months to be inoculated
impoundment



Impoundment and Redemption



   91.22   Impoundment authorized



   91.23   Removal of animal in immediate danger



   91.24   Animal shelter to record data on impounded animals



   91.25   Animal shelter to give notice to owner



   91.26   Impounding fee; bond



   91.27   Redemption of impounded animal



Euthanasia and Disposal



   91.28   Euthanasia and disposal of privately owned animals



Dangerous Animals



   91.35   Definitions



   91.36   Duties of owners of dangerous animals



Enforcement



   91.38   Enforcement



   91.39   Powers of animal control officers



   91.40   Custodial liability



   91.41   Destruction of impounded animals



   91.42   Powers of the animal control authority



   91.43   Meetings with animal control authority



   91.44   Resolutions and settlements



   91.45   Judicial enforcement



   91.46   Savings clause



   91.47   Repeal or amend



 



   91.98   Fee schedule



   91.99   Issuance of citations; violation notices



§ 91.00 DEFINITIONS FOR USE IN THIS CHAPTER.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT.  To deposit, leave, drop off, or otherwise dispose of any
live domestic animal on any public or private property, or leaving an animal
for a period in excess of 24 hours, without the animal's owner or the owners
designated caretaker providing reasonable care as defined in this chapter and
checking on the animal's condition.



   ALTERED ANIMAL.  Any animal that has been spayed or neutered.



   ANIMAL.  An organism of the kingdom animalia, distinguished from
plants by such characteristics as the poser of locomotion and
nonphotosynthetic metabolism, excluding humans to which this chapter does not
apply.



   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The city/county animal control authority
and its governing board established by an interlocal cooperation agreement
between the county and the city on May 20, 1999, pursuant to the provisions
of I.C. 36-1-7 et seq. for the operation of the New Albany/Floyd County
Animal Control and Shelter, which interlocal agreement is ratified, affirmed,
and incorporated herein by reference.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person designated by the animal control
authority to enforce the terms and provisions of this chapter, or any law
enforcement officer of the state.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  For the purposes of this chapter, the term animal
shelter shall refer to the New Albany/Floyd County Animal Control and Shelter.



   APPROVED RABIES VACCINE.  Any vaccine for protecting an animal from
contracting rabies approved as effective by the state Board of Animal Health
(BOAH) and by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians,
Inc. (NASPHV) in the most current version of the annual Compendium of Animal
Rabies Prevention and Control.



   ATTACK.  Any aggressive contact with a human being or another animal
that could result in death or injury.



   BITE. Any injury caused by the tearing, puncturing, or cutting of the
skin caused by teeth or fangs.



   CAT.  Any domestic feline.



   CRUELTY.  Any act prohibited by § 91.08 through 91.13 of this chapter.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which, unprovoked, commits an attack upon,
harms, or kills a person or another animal.  A DANGEROUS ANIMAL shall also
include any mammal for which there is no approved rabies vaccine.



   DOG.  Any domestic canine.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal whose physiology has been determined
and/or manipulated through selective breeding; any of various animals that
have been tamed and made fit for a human environment; any mammal, whether or
not its physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective
breeding, which can be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies
vaccine. DOMESTIC ANIMALS shall include but not be limited to dogs, cats,
birds, rabbits, guinea pigs, rats, mice, hamsters, gerbils, ferrets,
chinchillas, fish, reptiles, livestock, equine, and poultry.



   ENCLOSURES.



      (1)   ENCLOSURES FOR ALL ANIMALS.



A fence or structure of sufficient height and construction to prevent the
animal from leaving the owner's property.  The fence or structure must be in
good repair and must be constructed in such a way as to prevent the animal
from leaving the owner's property.  The enclosure may be required to contain
proper shelter and a shaded area.  Gates and doors must fit properly and
must be locked or secured by a latch that prevents the animal from opening
the gate or door.  Enclosures for poultry must contain proper shelter and a
shaded area.



      (2)   ENCLOSURES FOR DOGS.



         (a)   A fence or structure of sufficient height and
construction to prevent the animal from leaving the owner's property.  The
fence or structure must be in good repair and must be constructed in such a
way as to prevent the animal from leaving the owner's property.  The
enclosure must contain proper shelter and a shaded area.  Gates and doors
must fit properly and must be locked or secured by a latch that prevents the
animal from opening the gate or door.



         (b)   Property enclosed by a buried wire which produces
a signal received by a device attached to a collar worn by the animal and
prevents the animal from leaving the property of the owner will be considered
a proper enclosure, provided that the device and signal are working and the
animal does not leave the property unrestrained.  The enclosure must contain
proper shelter from the weather and a shaded area.  This type of enclosure
is not acceptable for an unaltered animal, an animal declared a public
nuisance, or a dangerous animal.



      (3)   ENCLOSURES FOR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.  A covered fence or
fabricated structure at least six feet in height, installed beneath ground
level or in concrete or pavement, to prevent digging under it, and with a
gravel or concrete floor, sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, sit,
and turn around in a natural position, and which allows for adequate exercise
for the size/breed being kept.  Enclosures shall be designed to prevent the
entry of children or unauthorized persons.  Enclosures shall be securely
locked with a combination or key lock which has been designed to prevent
accidental or malicious opening of the enclosure.  Enclosures must contain
proper shelter and a shaded area and be properly ventilated.  The owner's
residence, other's existing residence, or storage building are not
appropriate enclosures for a dangerous animal, unless approved by the animal
shelter.  Any structure may be subject to approval by the city building
department, and it is the responsibility of the owner to comply with building
codes if required.



   EQUINE.  A horse or other member of the horse family, including but
not limited to horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, fillies, ponies,
miniature horses, donkeys, mules, jacks, and jennies.



   EXOTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal that is not normally considered to be a
domesticated animal as defined in this chapter.  Any animal required to have
a state and/or federal permit to harbor.  This includes but is not limited
to nonhuman primates; venomous cold-blooded reptiles; poisonous animals;
constrictor snakes three feet or longer; crocodilians five feet or longer;
wild or exotic cats such as cheetahs, lions, panthers, leopards, and tigers
(excluding feral cats); wolves; bears; sharks; poisonous spiders and insects;
elephants; camels; wild animals such as but not limited to skunks, raccoons,
coyotes, weasels, opossum, foxes, minks, muskrats, squirrels, and beavers.



   HARBORING.  The actions of any person that permit any animal to lodge
or to be fed within his/her home, store, enclosure, yard, or place of
business or any premises which the person owns, or in which the person
resides, or over which the person has possession or control.  An animal
shall be presumed HARBORED if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive
days.



   HUNTING.  The pursuit of any wild animal or bird licensed and
regulated under I.C. 14-22-11-1 or any successor provision to that statute. 
A HUNTER is a person engaged in hunting and is in possession of a valid state
hunting license.



   IMPOUNDED.  Taken into custody of an animal control officer and/or
taken to the animal shelter.



   LEAD or LEASH.  A devise used for humanely restraining an animal.



   LIVESTOCK.  Any animal raised for or used in agriculture, including
but not limited to sheep, rams, ewes, lambs, bulls, cows, steers, heifers,
calves, swine, boars, sows, piglets, goats, bucks, does, kids, llamas,
alpaca, buffalo, deer, elks, ostriches, emus, or any other animals that are
privately owned and raised in a confined area for breeding stock, food,
fiber, and/or other products.



   MICROCHIP.  A passive transponder which can be implanted into an
animal and which is a component of a radio frequency identification (RFID)
system. [Note: The microchip in use in the county and surrounding communities
is a 125 mz microchip, and it is the standard being adopted throughout the
nation. Whenever a microchip is referred to or required under this chapter,
nothing other than a 125 mz microchip will satisfy this section.]



   NEGLECT.  Any reckless or negligent act or omission which results in a
domestic or exotic animal not receiving adequate shelter, food, water, or in
a domestic or exotic animal not receiving necessary veterinary care, or in a
domestic or exotic animal housed in unhealthy living conditions.



   NUISANCE.  Any act of an animal or its owner that irritates, perturbs,
or damages rights and privileges common to the enjoyment of public or private
property or indirectly injures or threatens the safety of a member of the
general public.  By way of examples and not of limitation, the commissions
of the following acts or actions by an animal or by its owner or possessor
may hereby be declared a nuisance:



      (1)   Allowing or permitting an animal to habitually bark,
whine, howl, mew, crow, or cackle in an excessive or continual fashion or
make other noise in such a manner so as to result in a serious annoyance or
interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises.



      (2)   Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property
of any person other than its owner or caretaker, including but not limited to
getting into or turning garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers,
plants, or other real or personal property, or leaving fecal material on the
property of another person,



      (3)   Allowing or permitting an animal to molest, chase, snap
at, attack, or attempt to attack passers-by, vehicles, or other domestic
animals.



      (4)   Allowing or permitting an animal to habitually or
continually roam or be found on property of other than its owners or
caretakers, or trespassing school grounds, parks, or the property of any
person.



      (5)   Allowing or permitting an animal to be housed or
restrained within reach of a public street, road, sidewalk, or access and, in
the discretion of the animal control officer, poses a threat to the genera]
public safety, health, and/or welfare of the general public.



      (6)   Allowing or permitting an area to be maintained in an
unsanitary condition by the accumulation of animals and/or animal waste so as
to be offensive to sight or smell.



   OWNER.  Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having control or
custody of animals within the jurisdiction of this chapter, provided that in
the event that a minor person shall be determined the owner of the animal,
the parent or guardian of such minor person shall be responsible to ensure
compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and shall be liable
for any non-compliance herewith.



   POULTRY.  All domesticated fowl, including but not limited to
chickens, ducks, guinea fowl, turkeys, geese, peacocks.



   QUARANTINE.  Humane confinement of an animal in a building which
prevents the animal coming into contact with any animal or human being other
than the owner or caretaker.



   RESTRAINT.  Includes but not limited to confined to the premises of
the owner or, if off of the premises of the owner, under restraint by means
of a lead or leash and under the control of a responsible person.



   REASONABLE CARE.  That degree of care which a reasonable and prudent
person would, under the same or similar circumstances, render to an animal to
prevent injury, to care for an existing injury, or to prevent death.



   RUNNING AT-LARGE.  Any domestic or exotic animal, not located on the
real property of its owner, shall be deemed RUNNING AT-LARGE if it is not
under restraint as defined in this chapter.



   SCRATCH.  Any injury caused by the tearing, puncturing, or cutting of
the skin caused by nails or claws.



   SERVICE ANIMAL.  Any animal that is individually trained to perform
tasks for a person with a disability, such as but not limited to guiding
people who are blind, alerting people who are deaf, people in wheelchairs,
alerting and protecting an individual who is having a seizure, or performing
other special tasks. SERVICE ANIMALS are working animals.  Any animal
employed as a therapy and/or companionship animal shall not be considered as
a service animal.



   SEVERE ATTACK.  An unprovoked attack in an aggressive manner upon a
human, in which the victim suffered a bite or was shaken violently or which
caused serious physical trauma or death.



   SHELTER.  A structure designed specifically to shelter an animal, with
a roof and three sides free of leaks or openings, to the wind and
precipitation, and a fourth side allowing access that is protected from the
elements.  The SHELTER shall provide reasonable protection from inclement
weather and extreme temperatures.  The structure shall be physically located
in a dry area allowing the animal access outside the structure to dry ground
that is mud free.  It shall be cleaned and maintained regularly so as to
prevent the accumulation of waste, debris, and offensive odors.



   STRAY.  Any animal found on public or private property and not under
restraint as defined in this chapter.  Any abandoned animal not under
restraint as defined in this chapter.



   TETHER.  A restraint fastened humanely to an animal so as to keep it
within certain bounds and limited freedom.  TETHERS shall be made of a
chain, cable, or similar material.  TETHERS must not be made of rope, twine,
cord, or similar material that can easily be cut or chewed through.



   UNALTERED ANIMAL.  Any animal that has not been spayed or neutered.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  PERMITTING ANIMALS TO RUN AT-LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any animal of any kind to run
at-large.  All animals shall be kept under restraint at ail times, as
defined in this chapter, and any deviation or violation thereof is strictly
prohibited.



   (B)   The foregoing provisions shall not apply:



      (1)   If the owner is engaged in hunting, and the animal in
question has been trained to assist in hunting, and the animal's activities
are being supervised by the hunter;



      (2)   In any section of a public park designated as a leash
free zone.



   (C)   Dangerous animals are not allowed to be in any area designated
as a leash free zone.



   (D)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.02  AUTHORITY TO KILL ANIMALS.



   Animal control officers are authorized to kill any animal of any kind
when it is necessary to do so for the protection of any person or property.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.03 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall in any manner interfere with, hinder, molest,
or abuse any officer or individual duly authorized to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.



   (B)   No person shall in any manner seek to release or remove any
animal in the custody of the animal shelter or from any humane trap
identified as the property of the animal shelter.



   (C)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  KEEPING LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY.



   No person shall keep livestock and poultry within city limits.  This
section shall not apply to pot bellied pigs, female chickens, and equine. 
Any person or entity who violates this section shall be subject to the
penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  EXHIBITIONS OR PARADES OF ANIMALS.



   Any exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the
eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Board
of Public Works.  Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  ANIMALS AS PRIZES OR INDUCEMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful to give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or
bird as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contract, game, or other
competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such
vertebrate as an incentive to enter in any business agreement in which the
offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.  The animal shelter and its
offsite locations will be exempted from this section. Any person or entity
who violates this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  ANIMAL WHICH IS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   No owner shall allow an animal to be a nuisance as defined in this
chapter.  This includes but is not limited to any of the following
activities: excessive, continuous, or habitual barking or howling; molesting
of passers-by; chasing of vehicles; attacking of other animals; trespassing
on public or private property; or damaging property of another.  Any person
or entity who violates this section shall be subject to the penalty provided
in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  CRUEL TREATMENT OR NEGLECT OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, CRUELTY means any act prohibited
by this section.  No person shall cause infliction of pain or any form of
bodily injury or death to an animal by:



      (1)   Striking, beating, dropping, throwing, kicking,
dragging, choking, or by the use of an object or weapon;



      (2)   Means of caustic, flammable, chemical, boiling, or
heated substances; causing suffering; or any form of bodily injury or death
by suffocation or drowning;



      (3)   Failing to provide adequate food, water, and shelter.



      (4)   Failing to detect the need for or withholding veterinary
care, including care and maintenance of skin and coat, or creating or
allowing unhealthy living conditions whether by intentionally or by severe
omission.



   (B)   No person shall engage, participate, or be present in any acts
or actions as defined as cruelty in this chapter.  No person shall cruelly
treat or torment any animal.



   (C)   In the event there is a reasonable cause to suspect that an
animal is being a victim of cruelty or neglect, custody of such animal may be
taken by an animal control officer and impounded at the animal shelter.  If
claimed by its owner within the time limit as defined in this chapter, the
animal may be held as evidence and confined in a humane manner.  Upon a
court finding that the animal has been a victim of cruelty, the animal shall
become the property of the animal shelter.  Any owner or caretaker shall be
responsible for all fees as defined in this chapter.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, cruelty of an animal shall
also be defined as a failure by a person to adhere to the remedies and
requisites ordered by an animal control officer to comply with the
requirements and provisions of any sections of this chapter.



   (E)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  ANIMAL FIGHTING AND EXHIBITION FIGHTING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight, or
other combat between animals. In the event there is a reasonable cause to
suspect that an animal is involved in a dogfight, cockfight, or other combat,
custody of such animal and all animals of the same species on the same
property may be taken by an animal control officer and impounded at the
animal shelter.  The animal may be held as evidence and confined in a humane
manner.  Upon finding by a court that the animal was involved in a dogfight,
cockfight, or other combat between animals, the animal shall become the
property of the animal shelter.



   (B)   No person shall own, possess, keep, train, exercise, breed, or
raise any dog or other carnivore, bird, or animal with the intent that such
dog or other carnivore, bird, or animal be utilized, sold, given, or leased
for fighting and/or engaged in an exhibition of fighting.  In the event that
a person owns, possesses, keeps, trains, exercises, breeds, or raises any dog
or other carnivore, bird, or animal and/or engages in an exhibition of
fighting or selling, leasing, or giving such animals for fighting, such
person shall be liable for citation for violation of this chapter.



   (C)   No person shall be present at any dogfight, cockfight, animal
fighting, or combat between animals.  In the event that a person is present
at a dogfight, cockfight, animal fighting, or combat between animals, such
person shall be liable for citation for violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Any person who is found present at a dogfight, cockfight, or
combat between animals, and/or any person who is in possession of an animal
that may be used in an animal fight, may be charged with intent to engage in
an exhibition of fighting in violation of this chapter.  Any animal shall be
seized and impounded as defined in this chapter if found on the premises or
in the immediate area of the dogfight, cockfight, or combat between animals.



   (E)   No person may own, possess, keep, or utilize any animal
fighting paraphernalia with the intent to train, condition, and/or fight any
animal.



   (F)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.10  PROVISION OF NECESSITIES.



   (A)   Any owner or caregiver shall provide his/her animal with a
good and adequate amount of wholesome food to maintain a healthful level of
nutrition.  Any owner or caregiver shall provide and maintain a constant and
reachable supply of fresh and clean water at all times for his/her animal.



   (B)   All animals shall be provided with adequate shelter and
protection from the weather at all times.  It shall be the discretion of
animal control officers to determine what constitutes adequate shelter and
protection from the weather.  Shelters shall be constructed to protect the
animal from precipitation and of a material that provides protection from
extreme temperatures.  In addition to the shelter, a shaded area shall also
be provided by means of other structures, trees, tarps, or awnings. 
Insulating or appropriate bedding materials, such as straw, chipped wood,
wood shavings, or other materials that dry quickly shall be provided during
inclement weather. Shelters must be cleaned and maintained regularly so as to
promote proper health for the animals being kept.



   (C)   Any owner or caregiver shall provide to his/her animal proper,
humane, medical, and veterinary care and treatments when sick, diseased, or
injured or for the purpose of preventing suffering.



   (D)   Any owner or caregiver of an animal shall maintain an
appropriate environment with clean and healthful living area for any animal
being kept, which area shall be free of accumulated waste and debris so that
the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without coming in contact with
any such waste or debris.  All living areas shall be constructed and
maintained to promote drainage of rainwater to prevent the accumulation of
mud and/or water.



   (E)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.11  RESTRAINT; RESTRAINT BY TETHER; AND COLLAR SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   RESTRAINT shall mean but is not limited to confined to the
premises of the owner or, if off of the premises of the owner, under
restraint by means of a lead or leash and/or pet crate or carrier and under
the control of a responsible person.



   (B)   Any tethering system employed in place of a fence or enclosure
shall not allow the animal to leave the owner's property.  The tether must
not be made of a rope, twine, cord or similar material that can easily be cut
or chewed through.  Any tethering system shall not be acceptable for any
animal declared dangerous.



   (C)   Tethers must be attached to a properly fitting collar or
harness worn by the animal.  No animal shall be tethered by any material
that is directly attached to the animal's neck or body.  All tethering
devices must have a swivel device on the anchor and collar or harness end to
prevent tangling.



   (D)   All collars and harnesses used for the purpose of tethering an
animal must be made of nylon, leather, or other durable and non-metallic
material.  A chain, choke, pinch collar, or head halter shall not be
utilized for tethering purposes.  The use of properly fitted head halters
shall not apply to equine and livestock.



   (E)   All collars or harnesses must be fit regularly to avoid
causing injury or becoming embedded into the animal's body.



   (F)   No tether shall weigh more than 1/8 of the animals' body
weight.



   (G)   No dog shall be tethered that has not been spayed or neutered.



   (H)   Any dog that is tethered must have access to shelter and a
shaded area at all times.



   (I)   If one or more animals at a residence have required a response
from an animal control officer to untangle tethers more than two times in a
12-month period, it shall be a violation of this section and the animals may
be impounded.



   (J)   In addition to the requirements above, under this definition,
RESTRAINT FOR EQUINES, LIVESTOCK and POULTRY shall mean as follows:



      (1)   All equine and livestock shall be confined by a fence or
enclosure in good repair sufficient to prevent the animal from leaving the
owner's property.  Equine and livestock found on property but not restrained
by a fence in good repair may be impounded at the owner's expense and the
owner charged with a violation of this chapter.



      (2)   All livestock weighing more than 40 pounds must be kept
on tracts or lots of at least .5 acres or more per animal.



      (3)   Equines must be kept on an individual tract or lot of at
least one acre or more per animal.



      (4)   All poultry shall be kept in an enclosure of sufficient
height and construction to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure and
provide a safe environment from predators.  Poultry may not be tethered. 
The enclosure must be in good repair. Poultry found on property but not
restrained by an enclosure may be impounded at the owner's expense and the
owner charged with a violation of this chapter. All poultry must be provided
with access to shelter and a shaded area.



   (K)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  SEXUAL ACTS WITH ANIMALS.



   No person shall engage or cause to allow any other person to engage in
a sexual act with any animal.  Any person or entity who violates this
section shall be subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.13  ABANDONMENT.



   (A)   No person shall abandon any animal. Abandonment consists of
leaving an animal for a period in excess of 24 hours without providing and
checking on the animal's condition, or failure to contact animal control if a
request to contact is left on the property where the animal is.  No owner
shall leave an animal by a roadside or other area or leave such animal on
either public or private property, without the property owner's consent.  In
the event that an animal is found so abandoned, such animal may be taken by
an animal control officer and impounded at the animal shelter, and there
confined in a humane manner.  Such animal, if taken from private property,
shall be kept for not less than the prescribed period in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 91.24.  When a caregiver is mandated by the owner
of such and the animal is so abandoned, the caregiver may be subject to a
citation for violation of this section and all fees as defined in this
chapter.



   (B)   An animal control officer is authorized to impound such animal
if the animal control officer deems that the condition of the animal requires
immediate care or veterinary treatment and/or upon finding reasonable
suspicion of abandonment and/or believes such animal needs to be removed for
humane reasons.  The animal control officer is authorized to go on and about
private property to investigate any allegations or suspicions of
abandonment.  Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.14  KEEPING ANIMAL'S AREAS OF HABITATION CLEAN.



   (A)   No person shall cause or allow any area where an animal is or
may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome, but shall keep the area clean,
sanitary, and free from all refuse and rodents.  Such area shall be cleaned
at least once every 48 hours.  It shall be unlawful to permit any decaying
food, excreta, or any refuse of any kind to remain in such areas.  Refuse
from such areas shall, when swept or collected, be kept in containers until
disposed of in accordance with the ordinances of the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or caregiver of an animal
to permit or allow such animal to excrete manure or feces on school grounds,
parks, or other public property, or on any private property other than that
of the owner or person in charge or control of such animal without the
permission of the owner of said property, or on any streets, sidewalk, or
highways, unless the owner or person in control of such animal immediately
removes all manure or feces deposited by such animal and disposes of same in
a sanitary manner.  This may not apply to persons accompanied by a service
animal used for their assistance.



   (C)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.15  ANIMALS AFFLICTED WITH CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.



   No domestic or exotic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious
disease shall be allowed to run at-large or be exposed in any public place
within the city whereby the health of man or animal may be affected; nor
shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner, except for the purposes of transporting directly to obtain veterinary
assistance, or by the order of the chief of the police department in the
civil city, or the county sheriff within the unincorporated areas of the
county, or an animal control officer.  Any person or entity who violates
this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this
chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.16 RABIES QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any animal which has caused injury and/or death to a human by
means of a bite and/or scratch shall be quarantined.  The quarantine shall
be consistent with the practices, rules, and regulations of the county health
department and the state Board of Animal Health.



   (B)   Any owner who fails to properly quarantine his/her animal is
subject to citation for violation of this chapter, and the animal may be
impounded at the animal shelter or a licensed animal clinic or animal
hospital for the reminder of its quarantine period.  The owner shall be
responsible for all applicable fees as set forth in § 91.98 during the
quarantine period if held at the animal shelter.



   (C)   Any animal whose owner is unavailable or incapable of
quarantining the animal is subject to the animal being taken by an animal
control officer and quarantined at the animal shelter or a licensed animal
clinic or animal hospital for the quarantine period.



   (D)   Any owner of an animal which must be quarantined may elect to
board such animal at the animal shelter for the quarantine period, if space
is available, and must pay certain fees in accordance with § 91.98 of this
chapter.  Any owner of an animal which must be quarantined may elect to
surrender such animal to the animal shelter and must pay certain fees in
accordance with § 91.98 of this chapter.



   (E)   Any quarantined animal not reclaimed by an owner within 24
hours of the expiration of the prescribed period of quarantine shall be
humanely euthanized.



   (F)   Any human bitten and/or scratched by an animal, or any
physician or other medical professional or medical institution treating such
an injury, shall report the bite and/or scratch to the animal shelter and/or
the county health department within 24 hours.



   (G)   Any stray animal which bites and/or scratches a human shall be
quarantined at the animal shelter.



   (H)   Any dangerous animal that cannot be vaccinated against rabies
with an approved rabies vaccine, or any animal which has no established
rabies quarantine observation period, which bites and/or scratches a human,
is to be euthanized and its head shall be sent to the state Department of
Heath for examination all at the expense of its owner or harborer for
examination for rabies.



   (I)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.17  ALLOWING ANIMAL TO REMAIN IN PARKED VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful to leave an animal in a vehicle when the
conditions in that vehicle would pose a health hazard to the animal.  Animal
control officers are authorized to seize and rescue such animal under these
conditions.  Damages incurred to such vehicles during the seizure of such
animal shall be at the expense of the vehicle owner.  Any person or entity
who violates this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.18  SPAY/NEUTER PROGRAM ESTABLISHED AT ANIMAL SHELTER.



   This chapter adopts a spay/neuter program for the animal shelter on the
following terms:



   (A)   All persons wishing to adopt a dog or cat at the animal
shelter must pay a spay/neuter fee with their adoption fees.  All dogs and
cats adopted from the animal shelter must be surgically altered unless a
licensed veterinarian, in writing, states the animal is unfit for surgery.



   (B)   The animal shelter shall deposit all monies collected from
this spay/ neuter fee into the non-reverting fund for the spay/neuter program
with the City Controller and thereafter shall process all claims to maintain
the spay/neuter clinic at the animal shelter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



ANIMAL REGISTRATION AND RABIES VACCINATION



§ 91.19  DOGS AND CATS TO BE REGISTERED AND LICENSED.



   (A)   Any person owning, harboring, or having custody of a dog
and/or cat within city limits must obtain a license within 15 days of
obtaining the animal.  Licenses, except for lifetime licenses, shall be
valid for one year from date of issue.  Any person not eligible for a
license may not own a dog or a cat.



   (B)   Applications for licenses shall be made to the animal shelter.



   (C)   If the applicant withholds or falsifies any information on the
application, no license shall be issued.  Any license issued upon false or
withheld information shall be null and void.



   (D)   Application shall include species, gender, breed, name,
whether the animal has been neutered or spayed, a current rabies certificate,
if required, issued by a licensed veterinarian, and the name, telephone
number, and address of the owner/harborer, and information on whether the
applicant has been cited with a violation of this chapter or convicted of
cruelty to animals.



   (E)   No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall
be issued a license.  It shall be within the discretion of the animal
shelter whether to issue a license if there have been three or more
violations of this chapter within a 12-month period.



   (F)   Upon issuance of the license and payment of all fees, the
animal shelter shall issue to the applicant a durable tag stamped with an
identification number. The licensing agent shall maintain a record of the
identifying number of all tags issued.



   (G)   The animal shelter shall charge fees for animal licenses and
certain other charges pursuant to § 91.98 of this chapter.  The animal
shelter shall deposit all monies collected from this section into the
non-reverting fund for the Animal Control Runs Fund with the City
Controller.  The fees shall be collected by the animal shelter or by its
fiscal agent.  Any fee for registration may be waived by the animal shelter.



   (H)   The license fee shall be waived for certified service animals,
governmental police dogs, or other certified animals that are trained to
assist the physically handicapped.  These shall still be registered with the
animal shelter and must obtain a license as any other.



   (I)   The owner of any animal deemed by a veterinarian to be unfit
to undergo a spaying or neutering operation shall be, upon presentation of
written certification to that effect by a licensed veterinarian, charged the
fee for a spayed or neutered animal.



   (J)   No person shall use a license for any animal other than the
animal for which it was issued.



   (K)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.20  EXOTIC ANIMALS TO BE REGISTERED.



   All exotic animals as defined in this chapter shall be registered with
the animal shelter.  Registration shall include the name, address, and phone
number of the owner and a description of the animal to aid animal control
officers in finding the owners of any stray animal or during an emergency. 
Any fee for registration may be waived by the animal shelter.  Any person or
entity who violates this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in
§ 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.21  DOGS, CATS, AND FERRETS OVER THREE MONTHS TO BE INOCULATED.



   It shall be unlawful to own, possess, keep, or harbor any dog, cat, or
ferret over the age of three months within city limits, unless that animal
has been inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian and the
inoculation period has not expired.  No license tag shall be issued for any
animal over the age of three months, unless the applicant for the license
presents proof that the animal has been inoculated for rabies and the
inoculation period has not expired.  Any person or entity who violates this
section shall be subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION



§ 91.22  IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   Any animal which is found by an animal control officer to be
in violation of this chapter may be impounded and confined in a humane manner
until reclaimed by its owner or otherwise disposed of in accordance with this
chapter.



   (B)   Impounded animals, except those suffering from an injury or
physical condition which causes the animal to suffer, shall be kept and
maintained by the animal shelter for the following stated periods:



      (1)   Impounded animals:  not less than three days, not
including Saturdays, Sundays, and state recognized holidays.



      (2)   Quarantined animals: ten days from the date the bite
and/or scratch occurs.



   (C)   Animal control officers are authorized to go on or about
private property to seize an animal.  If an animal is seized, the animal
control officer shall issue a written notice of seizure and leave it with the
owner or affix it to the premises from which the animal was seized.



   (D)   Impounded domestic pets, other than feral cats, shall be kept
three days, unless reclaimed by their owners.  If the owner can be
identified by means of a license tag, collar ID, tattoo, microchip, rabies
tag, or other means physically attached to or upon the body of the animal,
the animal shelter shall immediately notify the owner by the most expedient
means available of the impoundment of the animal, and the animal will be held
for five days.  Animals not reclaimed by their owners within the established
time periods and those not placed in suitable new homes after such time may
be humanely euthanized. However, if an impounded animal has an injury or
physical or medical condition which causes the animal or other domestic
animals to suffer, the animal shelter may immediately humanely euthanize the
animal.  For the purposes of this chapter, the impoundment term shall
commence on the date of delivery of the animal to the place of impoundment
and not the date of notification of the owner.  An owner desiring to reclaim
an impounded animal shall comply with and pay such fees as provided by the
terms and provisions of this chapter.  If an animal has been impounded
because of cruelty and neglect, the animal shelter may refuse to release the
animal to its owner until the owner gives the animal shelter reasonable
assurances that the conditions that constitute cruelty or neglect have been
or will be corrected.  These assurances may be verified by an animal control
officer before releasing the animal back to the owner.  If an animal has
been impounded for any violation of this chapter and such animal was adopted
from the animal shelter or one of its offsite locations, the animal shelter
may refuse to release such animal to the owner.



   (E)   Animals not reclaimed by their owners within the applicable
time period may thereafter be placed in suitable homes or may be humanely
euthanized.  Unclaimed animals that have been placed under quarantine shall
be humanely euthanized.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.23  REMOVAL OF ANIMAL IN IMMEDIATE DANGER.



   Any animal observed by an animal control officer to be in immediate
danger may be removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable
means available.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.24  ANIMAL SHELTER TO RECORD DATA ON IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   Immediately after impounding any animal, the animal control officer
shall enter upon the records of the animal shelter the date of impounding, a
description of the animal impounded, and the location where the animal was
impounded.  A list of impounded animals shall be kept at the animal shelter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.25  ANIMAL SHELTER TO GIVE NOTICE TO OWNER.



   The animal shelter shall give notice to the owner of any animal wearing
its license tag issued by the animal shelter at the time of impoundment to
the address shown upon the license, and the owner of the impounded animal may
redeem the animal by paying all the costs and charges assessed that have
accrued up to the time of redemption.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.26  IMPOUNDING FEE; BOND.



   (A)   The animal shelter shall charge impounding fees, boarding
charges, and certain other fees pursuant to a schedule (see § 91.98)
approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the city.  The fees shall be
collected by the animal shelter or by its fiscal agent and deposited with the
City Controller.



   (B)   The owner of an animal that has been impounded under this
chapter and charged with a violation of this chapter may prevent disposition
of the animal by the animal shelter caring for the animal by posting, not
later than three days after the animal has been impounded, a bond with the
animal shelter in an amount sufficient to provide for the animal's care and
keeping for at least 30 days, beginning from the date the animal was
impounded.  The owner may renew a bond by posting a new bond, in an amount
sufficient to provide for the animal's care and keeping for at least an
additional 30 days, not later than five days after the expiration of the
period for which a previous bond was posted.  If a bond expires and is not
renewed, the animal shelter may determine disposition of the animal.  If the
owner of an animal impounded under this section is found guilty or signs an
agreement with conditions of an offense under this chapter, the owner shall
forfeit the bond to the animal shelter to reimburse the animal shelter for
the expense of the animal's care and keeping.  If the owner has paid a bond
under this chapter, the animal shelter may still euthanize the animal if a
veterinarian determines that the animal is suffering.



   (C)   If the owner requests, the court, or the animal control
authority, having jurisdiction of criminal charges filed under this chapter
or I.C. 15-5-12 shall hold a hearing to determine whether probable cause
exists to believe that a violation of this chapter or I.C. 15-5-12 has
occurred.  If the court determines that probable cause does not exist, the
court may order the animal returned to its owner, and the return of any bond
posted by its owner.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.27  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.



   (A)   The owner of an animal, or any person authorized in writing by
said owner of any animal, may redeem the animal by paying all the costs and
fines assessed that have accrued up to the time of making the redemption,
plus the license fee for the animal, if required.  Any animal not claimed by
an owner, in accordance with the time periods described in this chapter,
shall become the property of the animal shelter and may be disposed of in any
manner as is in accordance with law.



   (B)   An application for redemption must be filed by the owner, if
at all prior to the expiration of the impoundment term.  If the owner cannot
be identified, the animal shelter may request reasonable proof of ownership
as a condition for the release of the animal. For purposes of this section,
proof of ownership may include bills of sale, photos depicting the animal and
the owner, vet records with owners name, and/or similar evidence.  In the
event of the existence of a controversy pertaining to the ownership or right
of possession of an impounded animal, the animal shelter may refuse
redemption except upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   Any animal impounded, such animal may be released only upon
the application for redemption and after being fitted with a microchip to
facilitate future identification of the animal and owner.  Any animal
impounded two times within a 12-month period, such animal may be released
only upon application for redemption and conditioned upon the spay/neuter of
the animal.  The cost of either such procedures shall be paid by the owner
of the animal pursuant to § 91.98 of this chapter.  The animal shelter may
release any animal at its discretion without an application for a microchip
or spaying/neutering.



   (D)   Any animal deemed to be suffering, due to possible injury or
apparent disease, may be humanely euthanized before the holding period has
expired.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Prohibited methods of destruction, see I.C. 15-5-17-1



EUTHANASIA AND DISPOSAL



§ 91.28  EUTHANASIA AND DISPOSAL OF PRIVATELY OWNED ANIMALS.



   The animal shelter shall have the ability to charge the owner of any
animal certain fees to euthanize and dispose of said animal, in accordance
with § 91.98 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



DANGEROUS ANIMALS



§ 91.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.



      (1)   Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human
beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger
life by unprovoked assault or bite or scratch so as to cause serious bodily
harm; or



      (2)   Any animal that approaches a human being upon the
streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a vicious or terrorizing manner
or an attitude of aggression when unprovoked; or



      (3)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack unprovoked, or to cause injury to or otherwise endanger
the safety of a human being or domestic animal; or



      (4)   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury to, or otherwise
attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or
private property; or



      (5)   Any animal which scratches, inflicts injury, assaults,
or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on
public or private property; or



      (6)   Any animal which behaves in such a manner that the owner
thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal possesses a tendency
to attack, bite, or scratch a human being; or



      (7)   Any animal certified by a licensed or certified
aggression dog trainer, evaluator, or behaviorist, after observation thereof,
as posing a danger to human life if not kept in a manner required by this
chapter upon the basis of behavioral probability; or



      (8)   Any animal that cannot be vaccinated against rabies with
an approved rabies vaccine, and any animal which has no established rabies
quarantine observation period.



      (9)   Exceptions.  Any animal may not be deemed dangerous
solely because:



         (a)   It bites, scratches, attacks, or menaces:



            1.   Anyone assaulting its owner. This shall not
include any law enforcement officer attempting to subdue or affect the arrest
of or detain a suspect.



            2.   It has attacked or attempted to attack any
person or animal that has tormented or abused it.



         (b)   It is otherwise acting in defense of any attack
from a person or other animal upon its owner or any other person;



         (c)   It is defending its young and on its owners
property;



         (d)   Anyone entering the owner's property to commit
robbery, burglary, assault, or other crime or entering a secured building
without permission.  Simple trespassing by a person onto private property
may not be considered provocation for any attack.



         (e)   It is severely injured or incapacitated.



         (f)   Any animals which are employed by a police
department in the state or any animal which has been certified either
nationally or by the state for use in police work, provided that the animal
is owned and in the possession of the person who initially trained the animal
and for whom the certification was meant.



      (10)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



   ENCLOSURES/RESTRAINT FOR DANGEROUS ANIMAL.



      (1)   Enclosures for dangerous animals shall be a covered
fence or fabricated structure at least six feet in height, installed beneath
ground level or in concrete or pavement to prevent digging under it, and with
a gravel or concrete floor, sufficient size to allow the animal to stand,
sit, and turn around in a natural position, and which allows for adequate
exercise for the size/breed being kept.  Enclosures shall be designed to
prevent the entry of children or unauthorized persons.  Such enclosures
shall be securely locked with a combination or key lock which has been
designed to prevent accidental or malicious opening of the enclosure.  The
enclosure must contain proper shelter and a shaded area and be properly
ventilated.  The owners residence, other existing residence, or storage
building are not appropriate enclosures for a dangerous animal, unless
approved by an animal control officer.  Any structure may be subject to
approval by the city Building Department, and it is the responsibility of the
owner to comply with building codes if required.



      (2)   Restraint for a dangerous animal shall be:



         (a)   On the premises of the owner and confined in a
secure enclosure as previously defined; or



         (b)   If off the premises of the owner, the animal must
be accompanied by the owner, securely muzzled and restrained with a leather
or nylon lead or leash having the tensile strength to restrain the animal and
not to exceed six feet in length.  The lead or leash must be under the
control of a person over 18 years of age and physically able to restrain the
animal.  The muzzle shall be made in such a manner that will not cause
injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration but
shall prevent the animal from biting any human or other animal.



      (3)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.36  DUTY OF OWNERS OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone
having any animal in possession or custody, to exercise reasonable care and
to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people,
property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from the
owner's animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated
by mischievousness, playfulness, or ferocity.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal that resides
on rental property to notify the property owner if that animal has been
declared dangerous.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone
having any animal in his/her possession or custody, to ensure that the animal
is kept under control and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to
prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits
of its owner, possessor or custodian and that:



      (1)   It is securely and humanely enclosed within an enclosure
as described in this chapter, out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or
otherwise escape on its own; and such enclosure must be securely locked at
anytime the animal is left unattended; or



      (2)   In the event the animal is outside of its dwelling unit
and enclosure, the animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a
lead or leash and shall be under the direct control of its owner.



      (3)   Any animal placed under the dangerous animal section of
this chapter, the animal is to be spayed or neutered at the expense of the
owner.



      (4)   Any animal placed under the dangerous animal section of
this chapter, the animal is to be microchipped at the expense of the owner.



      (5)   Any animal declared a dangerous animal shall purchase
and maintain a current license for a dangerous animal.



      (6)   The owner of a dangerous animal shall display a sign on
his/her property or premises warning that there is a dangerous animal on the
premises.  The sign shall be visible and capable of being read from a public
right-of-way



      (7)   The owner shall immediately notify the animal shelter,
the city police department, or the county sheriff if a dangerous animal is
loose, and /or has attacked another animal or a human being, or has died.



      (8)   The animal may be impounded to make whatever inquiry is
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
and any animal control officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any
dangerous animal owner of which fails to comply with the provisions hereof,
subject to the right of such owner to contest the seizure or impoundment, as
provided in this chapter, in county court.  The animal will be retained by
the animal shelter during the pendency of any such proceeding if the owner
posts a bond pursuant to § 91.26 of this chapter, and the animal shelter
shall have the power to dispose of any such animal prior to the termination
of any court proceedings if no bond is posted or the bond is allowed to
lapse, in accordance with that section of this chapter.



      (9)   In the event that any animal previously placed under the
dangerous animal section of this chapter is found running at-large or in
violation of this chapter, the animal will be impounded by an animal control
officer and euthanized.



      (10)   Any owner of an animal declared as dangerous shall not
sell, transfer, give away, or use other forms of disposition of the animal
other than surrender the animal to the animal shelter.



      (11)   Any owner of an animal declared as dangerous shall
request authorization from the animal shelter to change the location of the
animal.  The new location, if authorized, shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter.



      (12)   In the event that the owner of the animal refuses to
surrender the animal to an animal control officer, the animal control officer
may request a warrant to seize the animal upon execution of the warrant.



   (D)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



ENFORCEMENT



§ 91.38  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be lawful for any animal control officer to canvass
any dwelling unit, business, organization, and institution for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with any section of this chapter and/or any state law
pertaining to animals.



   (B)   It shall be lawful for any animal control officer to go upon
private property to inspect the condition of any animal or investigate any
violation of this chapter and/or any state law pertaining to animals.



   (C)   It shall be lawful for any animal control officer to inspect
any dwelling unit, business, organization, and institution with the consent
of any owner or occupant, or by administrative or criminal search warrant,
for the purpose of an investigation of any violation of this chapter and/or
state law pertaining to animals.



   (D)   It shall be lawful for any animal control officer to go onto
private property to seize any animal with the consent of any owner,
caretaker, or occupant of the property; or pursuant to the sections of this
chapter; or with an order of a court of competent jurisdiction in this state;
or for any violation of this chapter and/or state law pertaining to animals
that causes an animal control officer to believe that the situation endangers
the health or well-being or is a life threatening condition for such animal,
or such animal needs to be removed for humane reasons and/or required
immediate care or veterinary treatment, or such animal poses a threat to
public health or safety.



   (E)   It shall be lawful for any animal that is found by an animal
control officer to be running at-large, stray, public nuisance, inhumanely or
cruelly treated, neglected, has bitten/scratched another animal or human
being, is being kept in conditions which violate this chapter, or is posing
imminent, serious threat to human beings or other domestic animals, may be
impounded at the animal shelter or any other place appropriate for the
holding of animals in a humane manner until released to the owner or agent. 
The animal shelter may refuse to release any animal to its owner until the
owner comes into compliance with this chapter.



   (F)   In addition to impoundment under this section, the owner may
face penalties pursuant to § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.39  POWERS OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.



   (A)   Animal control officers have the power to issue citations to
people accused of violating this chapter in accordance with its provisions
regarding enforcement procedures.



   (B)   Animal control officers have the power to enforce any state
laws or regulations regarding the use of animals in agriculture, cruelty to
animals, or animal disease prevention and care.  Any violation of state law
must be referred to the office of the county prosecutor.



   (C)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.40  CUSTODIAL LIABILITY.



   In the event that the owner of any domestic animal is a minor, the
custodian, parent, or guardian legally responsible for such minor shall be
liable for all violations of this chapter.  Any person or entity who
violates this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of
this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.41  DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   No animal shall be destroyed within three days of being
impounded unless necessary to prevent or stop an attack upon a person or
another animal, or for humane reasons related to sickness or injury of the
animal, or as otherwise provided by law.



   (B)   An impounded animal shall not be destroyed pending an owner's
appeal of a court order of destruction.  The animal control officer shall
have the burden of proving that the animal should be destroyed pursuant to
this chapter.



   (C)   Any person or entity who violates this section shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 91.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.42  POWERS OF ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The animal control authority was established by an interlocal
cooperation agreement between the county and the city on May 20, 1999,
pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-1-7 et seq., and all the terms and
conditions contained therein are affirmed and incorporated by reference
herein.



   (B)   (1)   The animal control authority may uphold or reverse a
decision made by an animal control officer declaring that an animal is a
public nuisance or dangerous animal as defined by this chapter.



         (a)   If such a decision is upheld the animal control
authority may place the owner of the animal on probation for a period of time
determined by the animal control authority, which is deemed in the best
interest of the animal and the community.



         (b)   The animal control authority may place
restrictions on the owner during the period of probation that are deemed in
the best interest of the animal and the community.



      (2)   Any and all appeals for permits or revocation of permits
within this chapter may come before the animal control authority for hearing.



      (3)   These hearings shall be recorded.  Transcripts of these
hearings may be made at the expense of any person seeking review of the
hearings.



      (4)   Appeals from the determinations of the animal control
authority may be sent to the court of appropriate jurisdiction in accordance
with and subject to the procedures and deadlines set out in the provisions of
the state administrative code regarding administrative appeals.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.43  MEETINGS WITH ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The animal control authority may, at its sole discretion, meet
with any person suspected of violating this chapter for the purpose of
informal negotiations to determine any penalties or establish a plan to
remedy violations.  People accused of violating this chapter may also
request a conference with the animal control authority to resolve any claim
of violation.  These negotiations shall be conducted informally for the
purpose of peaceful resolution of claimed violations of the chapter.



   (B)   Meetings conducted under this section shall be entitled to the
evidentiary privileges afforded to settlement negotiations under state law.



   (C)   Unless an agreement is arrived at, no representations made by
any party shall continue to bind that party should any official or judicial
proceeding be undertaken to enforce this chapter.



   (D)   Allegations of violations of state criminal law must be
referred to the county prosecutor.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.44  RESOLUTION AND SETTLEMENTS.



   (A)   The animal control authority and the accused person may enter
into a settlement agreement regarding the matters alleged in the report of
the animal control officer.  Such a settlement agreement may provide for:



      (1)   Remedial actions to be undertaken by the accused; and/or



      (2)   A time table by which such remedial actions must be
performed; and/or



      (3)   The waiver of fines, penalties, and other sanctions
available under this chapter.



   (B)   A settlement agreement entered into under this section must be
reduced to writing and signed by the person claimed to have violated the
ordinance or his/her representative, parent, or legal guardian; and the
animal control authority or its representative.



   (C)   A settlement entered into under this section is binding upon
all the parties and their heirs, successors, and assigns.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.45  JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   If no settlement agreement is reached, or any settlement
agreement is breached by the person responsible for the animal, or if the
animal control authority decides in its sole discretion that a settlement
conference would be unhelpful, or that a situation exists that requires
immediate action, the animal control officer may bring judicial proceedings
to enforce this chapter.



   (B)   Judicial proceedings shall be brought by the City Attorney or
his or her designee.



   (C)   Fines, judgments, and injunctive relief against violation of
this chapter may be sought in any such judicial proceedings, and any other
remedies available to the animal control authority in law or equity.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.46  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   This chapter and the various parts, sections, sentences, phrases, and
clauses hereof are hereby declared to be severable.  If any part, section,
sentence, phrase, or clause is judged unconstitutional or invalid, it is
hereby provided that the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected
thereby.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.47  REPEAL OR AMEND.



   This chapter repeals Chapter 91; G-94-195, passed 8-2-94; G-89-156,
passed 1-19-89; and G-96-162, passed 12-23-96 previously passed by the Common
Council of the civil city.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



§ 91.98  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   IMPOUND FEES FOR ANIMALS: (Deposited into General Fund)



 



First impound of an animal:
 
$10 impound, $7.50 per day boarding


Second impoundment of same animal:
 
$25 impound, $7.50 per day boarding


Third or subsequent impoundment:
 
$75 impound, $7.50 per day boarding


After hours impound of an animal:
 
$20 impound, $7.50 per day boarding


Animals held for court/township
 
$20 impound, $10per day boarding




First impound of horse/livestock:
 
$30 impound, $30 per day boarding


Second impound of horse/livestock:
 
$75 impound, $30 per day boarding


Third or subsequent impoundment of above:
 
$100 impound, $30 per day boarding




Animal for quarantine period held/processed:
 
$200 impound, $20 each additional day


Transportation of an animal:
 
$25, plus $15** for any tranquilizer needed



**   Deposited into Spay/Neuter Fund





 



   (B)   HEALTH CARE FEE FOR ANIMALS:  (Deposited into Spay/Neuter
Fund)



 

Health Care Package†:
 
$17.50


Impound adoption health care package‡:
 
$72.50


Microchipping of an animal:

(Microchips by appointment, only after ail fees are paid)
 
$25, plus $15 for any tranquilizer needed



†   Health Care Package for canines includes application of flea
preventative, wormer, distemper, parvo, bordetella




†   Health Care Package for felines includes application of flea
preventative, wormer, distemper, ear mite treatment




‡   Impound Adoption Health Care Fee includes microchip, spaying or
neutering, FIV or Heartworm test, and above canine or feline health care




 



   (C)   ANIMAL LICENCE/PERMITS:  (Deposited in Animal Control License
Fund)



 

$35
 
Unaltered animals ( valid for 1 year from date of issue)


$5
 
Altered animals (valid for 1 year from date of issue)


$100
 
Animals declared to be dangerous (valid for 1 year from date of issue)


$25
 
One time lifetime license for an altered and microchipped animal


$4.50
 
Duplicate license upon owner's certification that license is lost


$100
 
Permit for exhibitions or parades of animals (valid only for the event issued
for)



 



   (D)   ADOPTIONS:  (Deposited in General Fund and Spay/Neuter Fund)



 

Canines:
 
$80
 
$25*, $55**


Felines:
 
under 4 pounds, $60
 
$15*, $45**


over 4 pounds, $20
 
$10*, $10**



(All canine and feline adoptions include a Health Care Package † )




*   Deposited in General Fund




**   (Deposited Spay/Neuter Fund)




†   When requested an adoptable animal can be placed on a hold for 24
hours at a cost of $5 per animal.  This fee is not to be applied to the
adoption cost of the animal and will be considered a donation for this
service.




 



   (E)   “TAKE A CHANCE ON ME”:  Fee of $80, canines only.  Fee
refunded within 60 days of return.



   (F)   “TAKE ME OUT OF THE SHELTER”: Fee of $80, plus $10 per day
shall apply for canines only. The $80 is to be refunded within 60 days of
return but the per day fee not returned.



   (G)   ADOPTION GUARANTEE PROGRAM:  A $25 nonrefundable Health and
Temperament evaluation fee shall apply.  For the first 12 days: $75 if proof
of spayed/neutered and current on shots.  The fee is $100 if pet is
unaltered or has no shots.  Other types of animal adoption fees are to be
determined by Director.



   (H)   OWNER REQUESTED EUTHANASIA:  (Deposited in General Fund and
Spay/Neuter Fund)



 

Animals less than 20 lbs.
 
$35*, any tranquilizer $15**


Animals 20 lbs. to 50 lbs.
 
$50*, any tranquilizer $20**


Animals 50 lbs. or over
 
$65*, any tranquilizer $25**



*   Deposited into General Fund




** Deposited into Spay/Neuter Fund




 



   (I)   JUST DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL CARCASSES: (Deposited into General
Fund)



 

25lbs.or less:
 
$10


25lbs. to 50lbs.:
 
$20


50lbs. or above:
 
$30



   No animal carcass with a weight in excess of 25lbs, except that of a
canine, shall be accepted for disposal.




 



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS; VIOLATION NOTICES.



   (A)   In addition to, or in lieu of impounding an unrestrained or
stray animal or for any other violation of this chapter, any animal control
officer may issue a citation to the owner or caregiver of such animal
specifying the section or sections of this chapter so violated and
identifying the specific nature of the violation.  A person who receives a
citation has 24 hours to correct the violation, or he/she may be subject to
additional penalties or the animal may be subject to impoundment as provided
in this chapter.



   (B)   Upon complaint and execution by any citizen of a sworn
affidavit that said affiant has actual knowledge that any section of this
chapter has been violated, an animal control officer may constitute
reasonable suspicion for an investigation.



   (C)   A first offender in violation of any provision of §§ 91.01,
91.03 through 91.18, and/or 91.20 through 91.22 shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $200.  For any second or subsequent violation of any
provision of §§ 91.01, 91.03 through 91.18, and/or 91.20 through 91.22 a
person shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250.



   (D)   A first offender in violation of any provision of §§ 91.35
through 91.40 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250.  In the
event that any animal previously placed under §§ 91.35 through 91.40 is
found in violation of this chapter, the animal will be impounded by an animal
control officer and be euthanized.



   (E)   Fines and penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall
be collected, pursuant to § 91.98, approved by the Mayor and Common Council
of the city.  The fees shall be collected by the animal shelter or by its
fiscal agent and deposited with the City Controller and shall be retained in
the Non-Reverting Fund Animal Control Runs Fund, excepting fees collected
under §§ 91.08, 91.16, 91.18, 91.26, 91.27, 91.28, Adoption Fees, or
Adoption Guarantee Program Fees.



(Ord. G-13-11, passed 5-16-2013)



CHAPTER 92:  EMERGENCIES; 911 SYSTEM



Section



Civil Emergencies



   92.01   Statutory provisions applicable



   92.02   Proclamation by Mayor



Emergency Telephone System



   92.15   Fee



   92.16   Disposition of collected fees



   92.17   Delinquent fee report



 



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Posting of house numbers, see § 99.02



CIVIL EMERGENCIES



§ 92.01  STATUTORY PROVISIONS APPLICABLE.



   During a local disaster emergency, the provisions of I.C. 10-14-4-1
shall apply.



§ 92.02  PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.



   (A)   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Mayor.
It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days
except by or with the consent of the Common Council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster emergency
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly in
the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is
to activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local
or interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and to authorize the
furnishing of aid and assistance under them.



   (C)   No interjurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
disaster emergency, unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which
the agency functions. However, an interjurisdictional disaster agency shall
provide aid and services according to the agreement.



   (D)   If a local disaster emergency is declared under this section,
the city may not prohibit individuals engaged in employment necessary to
maintain a safe rail system, restore utility service, or provide any other
emergency public service from traveling on the highways within the city
during the local disaster emergency.



EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM



§ 92.15  FEE.



   (A)   In accordance with I.C. 36-8-16, an emergency telephone system
fee may be established to provide the funding for an "Enhanced Emergency
Telephone System" which utilizes the three digit number 911 to send automatic
number and location identification for reporting police, fire, medical or
other emergency situations.



   (B)   (1)   A monthly fee of $.27 per telephone access line will
be collected by the service supplier to pay for the lease, purchase or
maintenance of enhanced emergency telephone equipment, including necessary
computer hardware, software and data base provisioning; and the rates
associated with the service suppliers' enhanced emergency telephone system
network services.



      (2)   The fee will be determined by dividing the total monthly
system cost by the total number of telephone subscribers in the service area
to be covered.



   (C)   Each service supplier that collects the enhanced emergency
telephone system fee on behalf of the city is entitled to a 3% administrative
fee as compensation for collecting the fees. The remaining amount of the fee
collected during the calendar quarter shall be remitted to the fiscal officer
of the city within ten days after the last day of the quarter. At the same
time the collected fees are remitted, the service supplier shall provide a
fee collection report to the Fiscal Officer of the city on a form provided by
the Fiscal Officer.



(Ord. G-88-117, passed 6-6-1988)



§ 92.16  DISPOSITION OF COLLECTED FEES.



   The city's Fiscal Officer shall deposit the remitted fees in a separate
fund known as the "City of New Albany Emergency Telephone System Fund". The
city's Fiscal Officer may invest money in the Fund in the same manner that
other monies are invested, with the interest earned from the investment to be
deposited in that Fund.



(Ord. G-88-117, passed 6-6-1988)



§ 92.17  DELINQUENT FEE REPORT.



   During January of each year, each service supplier that is required to
collect the fee for the city shall provide a delinquent fee report to the
city's Fiscal Officer. The report shall list the name, address and amount due
for each service user who is two or more months delinquent in paying the fee.



(Ord. G-88-117, passed 6-6-1988)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $500.



(Ord. G-69-375, passed 10-6-1969)



CHAPTER 93:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION; SMOKE DETECTORS



Section



Fire Prevention Code



   94.01   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code by reference



   94.02   Bureau of Fire Prevention; establishment and duties



   94.03   Districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents
is prohibited



   94.04   Districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited



   94.05   Districts in which bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases
is restricted



Water Supply Distribution



   94.20   Submission of water distribution plans by certain
developments and buildings



   94.21   Submission of final plans by Fire Chief to Board with
recommendations



   94.22   Adoption of guidelines and amendments by Board



   94.23   Water supply distribution for firefighting



   94.24   Shopping centers, factories, schools and apartment complexes



Novelty Lighters



   94.30   Novelty lighter restrictions



Smoke Detectors



   94.40   Definitions



   94.41   Smoke detectors required



   94.42   Type and placement



   94.43   Providing, installing and maintaining smoke detectors



   94.44   Responsibility for enforcement



   94.45   Conflicting provisions



 



   94.99   Penalty



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 94.01  ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE BY REFERENCE.



   There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, recommended
by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1965 edition
thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code not less than three
copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Clerk of the city.
The same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the city.



(Ord. G-65-232, passed 11-1-1965)



§ 94.02  BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the city, which is established and
which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department.



   (B)   The Chief in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
appointed by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city on the basis of
examination to determine his or her qualifications. His or her appointment
shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service and he or she
shall not be removed from office except for cause after public trial.



   (C)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such
members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the Board of
Public Works and Safety the employment of technical inspectors, who, when the
authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine
their fitness for the position.



      (2)   The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers
of the Fire Department and appointments made after examination and acceptance
of the Pension Board of the Fire Department shall be for an indefinite term
with removal only for cause.



   (D)   (1)   A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
made annually and transmitted to the Mayor; it shall contain all proceedings
under this code, with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department may
wish to include therein.



      (2)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall also recommend
any amendments to the code which, in his or her judgment, shall be desirable.



   (E)   The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall investigate the causes of
fires within the limits of the city and make the reports as it deems
advisable to the Chief of the Fire Department. The Bureau shall also issue a
written notice to persons suspected of violating the provisions of this
chapter and give a copy of the notice to the City Attorney for appropriate
action in the city court.



(Ord. G-65-232, passed 11-1-1965)



§ 94.03  DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS IS
PROHIBITED.



   The limits referred to in the state's Fire Prevention Code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are established as
anywhere within the city limits.



(Ord. G-65-232, passed 11-1-1965)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE
ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The limits referred to in the State Fire Prevention Code, in
which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited, are hereby established as follows:



      All zones within the city with the single exception of zone I-2,
as now exist in conformity with Ord. Z-58-41, and the official zone map in §
6 thereof.



   (B)   The limits referred to in the State Fire Prevention Code, in
which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited,
are hereby established as follows:



      All zones within the city with the single exception of zone I-2,
as now exist in conformity with Ord. Z-58-41, and the official zone map.



(Ord. G-65-232, passed 11-1-1965)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  DISTRICTS IN WHICH BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES IS
RESTRICTED.



   The limits referred to in § 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby
established as follows:



      All zones within the city with the single exception of zone I-2,
as now exist in conformity with Ord. Z-58-41, and the official zone map.



(Ord. G-65-232, passed 11-1-1965)



WATER SUPPLY DISTRIBUTION



§ 94.20  SUBMISSION OF WATER DISTRIBUTION PLANS BY CERTAIN DEVELOPMENTS AND
BUILDINGS.



   (A)   No subdivision and/or mobile home court shall be developed
without the developer first submitting to the Chief of the Fire Department a
water distribution plan, meeting minimum fire protection standards.



   (B)   No shopping center, factory, school or apartment complex
containing 2,500 square feet or more floor area shall be constructed without
the developer of the project first submitting to the Chief of the Fire
Department a water distribution plan meeting minimum fire protection
standards.



(Ord. G-74-567, passed 12-2-1974)



§ 94.21  SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLANS BY FIRE CHIEF TO BOARD WITH
RECOMMENDATIONS.



   After a review by the Chief of the Fire Department of the preliminary
plans the final plans will be submitted to the Board of Public Works and
Safety of the city by the Chief with his or her recommendations.



(Ord. G-74-567, passed 12-2-1974)



§ 94.22  ADOPTION OF GUIDELINES AND AMENDMENTS BY BOARD.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall adopt such guidelines and
amendments thereto as it may desire to effectuate the purpose and intent of
this subchapter. The National Fire Protection Code shall be used by the Board
as a guideline in approving any development as outlined in § 94.45.



(Ord. G-74-567, passed 12-2-1974)



§ 94.23  WATER SUPPLY DISTRIBUTION FOR FIREFIGHTING.



   (A)   All subdivisions and/or mobile home villages shall be
provided, by the subdivider, with a complete water distribution system from
an approved public water distribution system. The residential subdivision
property is considered to be one- and two-family dwellings. The water
distribution system shall provide fire hydrants at intervals of not more than
750 feet on six-inch or larger mains unless a different spacing is expressly
approved by the Plan Commissioners because of special land use or density
consideration. All fire hydrants and water mains shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer following the guidelines indicated herein,
and follow standards of the AWWA (American Water Works Association).
Exceptions may be made by the Commissioners in areas where rural water
corporations may supply water.



   (B)   Rental fees of fire hydrants and/or water supply systems shall
be the sole responsibility of the subdivider until such time as the city
shall accept the subdivision.



   (C)   In determining water supply and fire hydrant requirements the
office of the Fire Chief shall review the developer's proposed plans of the
fire protection facilities and shall submit recommendations before approval
of the plans. Placing of hydrants requires a judgment and a feeling for the
needs of the Fire Department. Hydrant placement is based on the possibility
of a large fire occurring in the area.



   (D)   Special exceptions may be made in the best judgment of the
Plan Commissioners with approval of the Fire Chief.



   (E)   The size of water mains involves many variables. The following
guidelines shall be considered as minimum for localized distribution.



      (1)   Water mains shall not be less than six inches in
diameter. Where deemed necessary to provide an adequate water supply for fire
protection, water mains of a larger diameter may be required.



      (2)   The gridiron shall consist of mains at least six inches
in size, arranged so that the length between intersection mains does not
exceed 800 feet.



      (3)   Eight-inch pipe shall be used where dead-ends and poor
gridironing are likely to exist for a considerable period or where the layout
of the streets and topography are not well adapted to the following
arrangements. Where dead-ends are necessary, minimum main size should be
eight-inch if over 600 feet, ten-inch if over 2,500 feet. Where the gridiron
does not exceed 600 feet, a six-inch main is usually satisfactory; if wider,
eight-inch or larger mains are recommended.



      (4)   The distribution system shall be equipped with a
sufficient number of valves so located that no single accident, breakage or
repairs to the pipe system will necessitate the shut-down of a length of pipe
greater than 800 feet.



      (5)   Where it is necessary to meter the water supply for fire
protection, the meter shall be of the fire protection type and be of at least
six inches in size.



      (6)   Fire hydrants shall be spaced no further than 750 feet
apart in residential subdivisions.



      (7)   In a single-family dwelling area where 20 feet or more
separation is typical, a minimum supply of 1,000 GPM is desirable.



(Ord. G-74-567, passed 12-2-1974)



§ 94.24  SHOPPING CENTERS, FACTORIES, SCHOOLS AND APARTMENT COMPLEXES.



   (A)   No shopping center, factory, school or apartment building
complex with 2,500 square feet or more floor area shall be approved without
necessary water supply distribution and fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be
so located that no point of exterior building shall be in excess of 300 feet
from the fire hydrant. Hydrants shall be approximately 50 feet from building
and hydrants shall be so placed as to be accessible to Fire Department
(within 15 feet of pavement or hard surface road).



   (B)   Hydrant spacing depends on required fire flow. A high contents
fire loading and combustible construction requires closer spacing as well as
larger water mains. Size of undivided areas, exposure and protection by
sprinklers is to be considered. A hydrant within 300 feet is recommended for
each 500 GPM fire flow. Actual fire flows are calculated from test results to
a 20 PSI residual pressure.



   (C)   A minimum of 1,000 GPM @ 20 PSI residual is required for a
typical small modern noncombustible elementary school:  1,500 GPM to 2000
GPM for a larger school.



   (D)   For a typical eight-unit, two-story frame brick veneer
apartment building: 1,500 GPM would be minimum. If larger than 10,000 square
feet floor area or less than 50 feet clear space between buildings, larger
flows would be needed. In a nine to 20 unit typical frame brick veneer unit
2,000 GPM:  over 20 units, in excess of 2,500 GPM.



   (E)   A small commercial or industrial building with average type
fire loading basically unexposed by other properties requires a minimum of
1,500 GPM. Area is a major factor with these type properties and this
requirement increases significantly with size unless automatic sprinklers are
provided.



   (F)   The requirements for a factory is difficult to generalize due
to the wide range of contents combustibility; minimum 1,500 GPM.



   (G)   Areas of basements or cellars exceeding 2,500 square feet when
used as workshops or for the manufacture, repair, sale or storage of
combustible materials (but not including garages) shall be protected
throughout with approved automatic fire extinguishing equipment.



   (H)   The above fire flow figures are based on a residual pressure
of 20 PSI and are an area requirement rather than the amount necessary to be
flowed from a single hydrant.



(Ord. G-74-567, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. G-98-257, passed 8-20-1998; Ord.
G-99-328, passed 6-18-1999)



NOVELTY LIGHTERS



§ 94.30  NOVELTY LIGHTER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Prohibitions; inapplicability.



      (1)   The retail sale, offer of retail sale, gift of or
distribution of any novelty lighter within the territorial jurisdiction of
the city is subject to the following restrictions:



         (a)   Novelty lighters shall be at a minimum of 48
inches off the ground, floor or surface of the facility;



         (b)   In order to purchase any novelty lighter the
person must have a photographic identification; and



         (c)   Novelty lighters shall not be displayed or offered
for sale with children's toys.



      (2)   Any retail establishment which has a minimum age of 18
years of age for entrance into the facility is excluded from these
requirements.



   (B)   Definition.  NOVELTY LIGHTER.  A lighter that has
entertaining audio or visual effect, or that depicts, through the use of
logos, decals, art work, or by other means, or that resembles in physical
form or function articles commonly recognized as appealing to or intended for
use by children ten years of age or younger. This includes, but is not
limited to, lighters that depict or resemble cartoon characters, toys, guns,
watches, musical instruments, vehicles, toy animals, food or beverages or
that play musical notes or have flashing lights or other entertaining
features. A novelty lighter may operate on any fuel, including butane or
liquid fuel.



   (C)   Enforcement.  The provisions of this section shall be
enforced by the New Albany Fire Marshal, any police officer, any code
enforcement officer, and any other city official authorized to enforce any
provision of the New Albany Municipal Code.



   (D)   Violation; penalty.    Any person or entity violating any
provision of this section is guilty of an infraction and upon a conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine or penalty of $250 for each violation.
For the purpose of violation, each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense. Fifty percent of all fines collected under the provisions
of these restrictions shall be deposited into a non-reverting Fire Prevention
Fund for use by the Fire Department to educate the citizens of New Albany
regarding fire prevention and safety.



   (E)   Severability clause. The provisions of this section are
separable and, upon any finding that any provision of this section is
unenforceable, the remaining provisions shall be enforceable according to
their terms.



(Ord. G-08-20, passed 6-2-2008)



SMOKE DETECTORS



§ 94.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DWELLING. Any building which contains one or more dwelling units or any
rooming unit, rooms or area designated or used for sleeping purposes either
as a primary use or use on casual occasions. DWELLING shall include a rooming
house, hotels, motels, tourist homes, school dormitories and apartment
buildings.



   DWELLING UNIT. Any group of rooms, located within a building and
forming a single housekeeping unit with facilities which are used or designed
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.



   OWNER. Any person, who, alone, jointly or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have all or part of the legal title to any
dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof, or shall have all or part of the beneficial ownership of any
dwelling or dwelling unit and a right to present use and enjoyment thereof,
including a mortgage in possession; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit as owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian of
the estate or duly authorized agent of the owner. Any person representing the
actual owner shall be bound to comply with the owner's obligations under this
section.



   ROOMING UNIT. Any room which is designed or used for sleeping purposes.
A ROOMING UNIT may include a room in a rooming house, a hotel, a motel, a
tourist home, a school dormitory or an apartment building which may, or may
not have some additional facilities for eating or cooking contained therein.



(Ord. G-81-888, passed 4-6-1981)



§ 94.41  SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED.



   Subject to the exceptions and conditions for compliance as stated
herein, six months after the effective date of this subchapter, smoke
detectors shall be required in all dwellings rented for occupancy. Dwellings
meeting the state's Uniform Building Code fire detection standards shall not
be required to install smoke detectors.



(Ord. G-81-888, passed 4-6-1981)



§ 94.42  TYPE AND PLACEMENT.



   (A)   In order to comply with this subchapter, only ionization or
photo-electric type detectors approved by a nationally-recognized testing
laboratory shall be installed. Smoke detectors with power sources other than
a hard wire AC primary power source may be powered by self-monitored
batteries or operated from an electrical outlet which is fitted with a plug
restraining device; provided, the outlet is not controlled by any switch
other than the main power supply.



   (B)   Smoke detectors shall be placed in accordance with applicable
N.F.P.A. Standards. Detectors may be ceiling or wall mounted; provided that,
if wall mounted they shall be within 12 inches, but not closer than six
inches of the ceiling.



   (C)   In a dwelling unit which contains a well-defined sleeping room
separated from the other activity areas of the same unit, the detector shall
be located in the corridor within the unit or interior area giving access to
the rooms used for sleeping purposes. Where sleeping areas are separated or
where a single smoke detector will not adequately service all sleeping areas,
there shall be a smoke detector installed adjacent to each sleeping area. In
a rooming unit, the detector shall be centrally located on the ceiling.



   (D)   In a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or any
rooming unit, in addition to the requirements for individual smoke detectors
in each dwelling unit or rooming unit, detectors shall be placed in
centrally-located common areas so that smoke detectors will adequately
service all sleeping areas.



(Ord. G-81-888, passed 4-6-1981)



§ 94.43  PROVIDING, INSTALLING AND MAINTAINING SMOKE DETECTORS.



   (A)   The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for supplying and
installing, in an operable condition, the required detectors and for
providing the manufacturer's maintenance and testing instructions to a tenant
when appropriate. The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for
maintenance and testing of detectors, in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions, which are located in common areas or detectors in dwelling
units or rooming units where the occupancy of any one tenant is for less than
one month.



   (B)   The tenant in any occupancy of one month or more shall be
responsible for maintaining and testing the detector, in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions, which are within his or her exclusive control
during the life of the tenancy. The tenant shall be responsible for notifying
the owner, in writing, by registered mail when a detector becomes inoperable,
whereafter the owner has ten days in which to repair or replace in operable
condition the detector. In the battery operated type of detector, battery
replacement shall be the responsibility of the tenant. At every change of
tenancy, where the occupancy of any one tenant is of one month or more, it
shall be the duty of the owner to test and ascertain that those detectors
contained in the unit are in operable condition and, if not, the owner shall
be responsible for placing them in operable condition.



(Ord. G-81-888, passed 4-6-1981)



§ 94.44  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Prevention Bureau of the city shall be primarily responsible
for the enforcement of this subchapter. The Building Inspector shall assist
the Bureau of Fire Prevention by making referrals to the Bureau as part of
its regular inspection and enforcement of all city housing, building and
safety codes.



(Ord. G-81-888, passed 4-6-1981)



§ 94.45  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any fire or safety code of the city, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of health and safety shall prevail.



(Ord. G-81-888, passed 4-6-1981)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the code
hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with an order as affirmed or
modified by the Board of Public Works and Safety or by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every
violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not less than $5, nor more than $100. The imposition
of one penalty for any violation does not excuse the violation or permit it
to continue. The persons shall be required to correct or remedy the
violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise
specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. G-65-232, passed 11-1-1965; Ord. G-81-888, passed 4-6-1981)



CHAPTER 95:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



Section



   95.01   Purpose



   95.02   Applicability



   95.03   Definitions



   95.04   Determination of reportable quantities



   95.05   Administration



   95.06   Notice to Fire Communications Bureau



   95.07   Use and spill prevention control plan (HMPC Plan)



   95.08   Inspections



   95.09   Confidential information; trade secrets



   95.10   Violations; enforcement procedure



   95.11   Appeals and Overseer's Board



   95.12   Affirmative defenses



   95.13   Fees



   95.14   Disclaimer of liability



   95.15   Severability



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the public health and
safety in the city and the county, through the prevention and control of
hazardous material incidents and releases and to require the timely reporting
of releases thereof.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all persons who manufacture, use or store
hazardous materials in quantities prescribed by this chapter and as defined
herein, within the city or the county.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Shall have the meaning stated in 15 U.S.C. § 2052.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person who works, with or without compensation, in a
workplace.



   EMPLOYER. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
government agency or other entity engaged in a business or in providing
services, that has employees.



   ENVIRONMENT. The navigable waters of the United States and any other
surface water, ground water, drinking water supply, soil surface, subsurface
strata, storm sewer or publicly- or privately-owned treatment works (other
than those handling only wastewater generated at a facility) within the
boundaries of Floyd County. ENVIRONMENT shall include air only for purposes
of reporting releases pursuant to § 95.06(A).



   FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or
pipeline (including any pipe into a sewer or publicly-owned treatment works),
well, pit, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill, storage container,
motor vehicle, rolling stock or aircraft; or any site or area where a
hazardous material has been deposited, stored, disposed of or placed or
otherwise come to be located; but does not include any consumer product in
consumer use or any vessel.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance designated pursuant to §
311(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1321(b)(2)(A); any element, compound, mixture, solution or substance
designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980,
§ 102 (CERCLA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.: any hazardous waste
having the characteristics identified under or listed pursuant to § 3001 of
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq. (commonly
known as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA")), but not
including any waste the regulation of which under the Solid Waste Disposal
Act has been suspended by Act of Congress; any toxic pollutant listed under
§ 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C §
1317(a); any hazardous air pollutant listed under § 112 of the Clean Air
Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 7412; and any imminently hazardous chemical substance
or mixture with respect to which the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency has taken action pursuant to § 7 of the Toxic Substances
Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq. The term does not include
petroleum, including crude oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise
specifically listed or designated as a hazardous substance above and the term
does include, if stored, natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural
gas or synthetic gas usable for fuel (or mixture of natural gas and such
synthetic gas). HAZARDOUS MATERIALS shall include those contained in the
"List of Hazardous Materials", which is included as an appendix to Ord.
G-87-193 and which is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein, radioactive materials and isotopes, and explosives.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS shall not include household wastes and other materials
excluded by 40 C.F.R. § 261.4. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS shall not include any
material which is a gas under standard temperature and pressure except for
purposes of reporting of releases pursuant to § 95.06(A) and (D).



   NORMAL APPLICATION OF PESTICIDES. Application pursuant to the label
directions for application of a pesticide product registered under § 30 or
§ 24 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act as amended
(7 U.S.C. §§ 136 et seq.) (FIRFA), or pursuant to the terms and conditions
of an experimental use permit issued under § 5 of FIRFA, or pursuant to an
exemption granted under § 18 of FIRFA.



   OIL. Oil of any kind or in any form including, but not limited to,
petroleum, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with wastes other than
dredged spoil.



   PERSON. Any individual, trust, firm, company, society, corporation,
joint stock company, partnership, consortium, association, cooperative, joint
venture, city, county, city and county special district, the state or any
department or agency or political subdivision thereof, United States
government or other commercial or legal entities.



   RELEASE, AUTHORIZED. A release which is a federally permitted release
under 42 U.S.C. § 9601(10); a release to waters of the United States or
adjoining shorelines which is exempt from notification under 40 C.F.R. §§
117.11 through 117.14; the introduction of any pollutant into a publicly
owned treatment works which is not in violation of applicable pretreatment
requirements or other regulations controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the publicly owned treatment works; and any release which is
specifically authorized by the administering agency after review of the HMPC
Plan submitted pursuant to § 95.07 provided the HMPC Plan is part of an
approved permit.



   RELEASE, GENERALLY. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing
into the environment, but excludes with respect to a claim which such persons
may assert against the employer of such persons as provided by CERCLA
regulations, any release which results in exposure to persons solely within a
workplace; emissions from the engine exhaust of a motor vehicle, rolling
stock, aircraft, vessel or pipeline pumping station engine; and the normal
application of fertilizer and pesticides.



   REPORTABLE QUANTITY. That quantity as set forth in § 95.04.



   STORE. To deposit or place a substance in the city or county for a
period of ten days or more provided the substance is not otherwise in transit.



   USE. To store, maintain, treat, process, handle, generate, dispose of
or otherwise manage. USE shall not include any mode of transportation other
than on-site transportation.



   VESSEL. Every description of watercraft or other artificial contrivance
used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation on water.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.04  DETERMINATION OF REPORTABLE QUANTITIES.



   (A)   Listed hazardous materials. The quantity in the column "RQ"
for each hazardous material in Appendix A attached to Ord. G-87-193 and which
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein
is the reportable quantity for that material. The Appendix A list (40 C.F.R.
part 302) will be automatically updated at such times as EPA publishes a new
list. "Reportable quantities" may be adjusted higher or lower as provided by
divisions (D) and (G) of this section.



   (B)   Unlisted hazardous materials. Unlisted hazardous wastes
designated as hazardous materials have the reportable quantity of 100 pounds,
except for those unlisted hazardous wastes exhibiting the characteristics of
EP toxicity identified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.24. Unlisted hazardous wastes
which exhibit EP toxicity have the reportable quantities listed in Appendix A
attached to Ord. G-87-193 and which is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein for the contaminant on which the
characteristic of EP toxicity is based. If an unlisted hazardous waste
exhibits EP toxicity on the basis of more than one contaminant, the
reportable quantity for that waste shall be the lowest of the reportable
quantities listed in Appendix A for those contaminants. If an unlisted
hazardous waste exhibits the characteristic of EP toxicity and one or more of
the other characteristics the reportable quantity shall be the lowest of the
applicable reportable quantity.



   (C)   Oil.



      (1)   The reportable quantity for releases of oil to waters of
the United States or adjoining shorelines is any quantity which violates
applicable water quality standards or causes a film or sheen upon or
discoloration of the surface of the water or adjoining shorelines or causes a
sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon
adjoining shorelines.



      (2)   The reportable quantity for releases of oil to the
environment other than releases to waters of the United States and adjoining
shorelines is 56 gallons.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a
release of oil from a properly functioning vessel engine shall not be deemed
to be in a reportable quantity; however, this provision shall not be
applicable to oil accumulated in a vessel's bilges.



   (D)   Higher reportable quantity. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section, the administering agency, after review of the HMPC
Plan submitted pursuant to § 95.07, may designate a reportable quantity for
a hazardous material in excess of the quantity determined under this section
if the administering agency determines that the higher reportable quantity is
consistent with the purposes and objectives of this chapter.



   (E)   Release of hazardous materials to sanitary sewer system.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any release of a
hazardous material to a sanitary sewer system which is prohibited under
applicable pretreatment or other regulations governing discharges to the
sanitary sewer system shall be deemed to be discharged in a reportable
quantity.



   (F)   Component hazardous materials release. A release of a mixture
or solution of which a hazardous material is a component shall be considered
to be a release in a reportable quantity only where the component hazardous
material of the mixture or solution is released in a quantity equal to or
greater than its reportable quantity.



   (G)   Adjustments to reportable quantity list. The Appeals and
Overseer's Board, upon recommendation of a local regulatory agency or upon
request for review by a regulated hazardous materials user, may adjust upward
or downward the reportable quantity on the most current applicable list.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.05  ADMINISTRATION.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform county-wide
program for protection of the environment from releases of hazardous
materials to be administered by existing governmental agencies. The New
Albany Sewer Department and the Floyd County Health Department shall serve as
the lead agencies in the administration of this chapter.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.06  NOTICE TO FIRE COMMUNICATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   Notice upon discovery. Whenever a release (other than an
authorized release) of any hazardous material, in a quantity which exceeds
the reportable quantity, occurs on any facilities of any kind, the person in
charge, upon discovery of the release or evidence of there having been a
release, even though it has apparently been controlled, shall immediately
cause notice of the existence of the release, the circumstance of same and
the location thereof to be given to the appropriate Fire Department.



   (B)   Emergency telephone number. The notice required by this
section in New Albany and Floyd County shall be given by telephoning the
appropriate Fire Department or such other emergency telephone number as may
be designated. This call will meet the requirement of notifying local
agencies. In addition, the notice will be made to the Indiana State Board of
Health ((317) 633-0144) Environmental Emergency Response.



   (C)   Duty to control release. The requirements of this section
shall not be construed to forbid any person on or about the facilities from
using all diligence necessary to control the release prior to the
notification to the appropriate fire department, especially if the efforts
may result in the containment of the release and/or the abatement of extreme
hazard to the employees or the general public. Delays in reporting releases
due to in-house notification of off-site owners/supervisors shall not be
acceptable and may result in penalties.



   (D)   Air releases. Accidental air releases in excess of the
reportable quantities listed in Appendix A attached to Ord. G-87-193 and
which is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein or, if unlisted, as prescribed by § 95.04 (releases that are required
to be reported to state and federal authorities), shall be reported under the
requirements of this section unless a different reportable quantity has been
established under an approved HMPC Plan for the particular facility. In order
to insure compliance with the notice requirement of division (A) above, any
person required to prepare and submit a HMPC Plan for a facility pursuant to
§ 95.07 who possesses or stores at such facility hazardous materials that
are a gas at standard temperature and pressure in quantities equal to or
greater than the reportable quantity shall maintain at the facility a list of
the materials. Any person required to maintain a list pursuant to this
section may, in lieu thereof, incorporate the list in its HMPC Plan. Any list
maintained pursuant to this section shall, upon request, be made available at
the facility to representatives of the administering agencies.



   (E)   Duty to report to federal agencies. No statement contained in
this section shall be construed to exempt or release any person from any
other notification or reporting procedure required by any federal agency.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.07  USE AND SPILL PREVENTION CONTROL PLAN (HMPC PLAN).



   (A)   Applicability. The following persons who use hazardous
materials must prepare, submit and maintain a New Albany/Floyd County
Hazardous Materials Use and Spill Prevention Control Plan, hereinafter
referred to as the HMPC Plan:



      (1)   All federal, state and local government entities in the
city and the county which use hazardous materials;



      (2)   All of the following businesses or services in New
Albany and Floyd County which use hazardous materials, as classified by the
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code:



 

SIC
 
Business/Services




0782
 
Lawn and garden services


2011-3999
 
Manufacturing


4011-4953
 
Transportation, communication and public utilities


5043
 
Photograph equipment and supplies (wholesale trade)


5043
 
Photograph equipment and supplies (wholesale trade)


5085
 
Industrial supplies (wholesale trade)


5161-5199
 
Specific categories in wholesale trade


5541
 
Gasoline service stations (retail trade)


7011-7218
 
Industrial and commercial launderers and the like in services


7342
 
Disinfecting and exterminating services


7395
 
Photofinishing laboratories in services


7512
 
Passenger car rental in services


7513
 
Truck rental and leasing


7538-7549
 
Automotive repair shops and auto services in services


8062
 
General medical and surgical hospitals in services


8063
 
Psychiatric hospitals in services


8069
 
Specialty hospitals except psychiatric in services




 



      (3)   Those persons not covered in divisions (A)(1) or (2)
above who use hazardous materials may be required to submit a HMPC Plan if
the administering agency finds its necessary to protect the public health and
safety.



   (B)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Persons who handle agricultural chemicals in the
ordinary course of agricultural operations other than warehousing or bulk
storage of the chemicals for resale or commercial application;



      (2)   Persons who handle hazardous material otherwise
regulated only at temporary construction sites;



      (3)   Persons who handle hazardous materials only in
conjunction with residential use of property for noncommercial purposes;



      (4)   Consumer products and foodstuffs packaged for
distribution to, and intended for use by the general public. This refers to
ingredients used in production of foodstuffs which are regulated by the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act as amended, being 21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et
seq.;



      (5)   Retail sale; however, where a portion of the retail sale
is used for bulk storage, then bulk storage is regulated;



      (6)   Liquor stores;



      (7)   Any other exemption based on specific application to the
administering agency; provided that, the element, compound, mixture, solution
or substance to be considered for exemption, when released into the
environment will not present danger to the public health or welfare of the
environment or to the employees of any person or the general public; and



      (8)   Persons who do not handle hazardous materials in
quantities equal to or greater than the reportable quantities; provided that,
the administering agency may require a plan under such conditions as set
forth in division (A)(3) above.



   (C)   Requirements for HMPC Plan. The administering agency may
provide forms with the necessary instructions and requirements for completing
HMPC Plans in compliance with this chapter. The HMPC Plan will include, but
not be limited to:



      (1)   Facility identification;



      (2)   Spill history;



      (3)   Identification of hazardous material (HM) storage,
in-plant transfer, process and materials handling areas and hazardous
material truck and rail car loading and unloading areas;



      (4)   Description of plan site runoff from areas described in
division (C)(3) above, including in-place containment appurtenances (e.g.,
dikes) and means of releasing rainwater from the areas;



      (5)   Other means of spill prevention, control and
countermeasure of all listed hazardous materials, such as containment or
detection equipment and absorbent materials;



      (6)   Provisions for the operation and maintenance of all
items described in division (C)(5) above;



      (7)   Contingency plans, including spill notification
procedures for both internal personnel as well as outside authorities,
including MSD;



      (8)   Provisions for the training of personnel in the
utilization of division (C)(7) above;



      (9)   Security provisions;



      (10)   Provisions for inspections, spill reports preparation
and records retention;



      (11)   Schedule (with actual dates or milestones) for Plan
elements yet to be implemented, with provisions for reporting progress to MSD;



      (12)   Provisions for Plan review and amendment submission;



      (13)   Certification of Plan by a registered professional
engineer or an officer of the company; and



      (14)   For purposes of this section, one plan may be submitted
by the owner of electrical equipment at multiple locations used either as a
lubricant, coolant or insulation for the operation of the equipment;
divisions (C)(3) and (4) above shall not apply to single plans authorized
under this section.



   (D)   Plan submittal/schedule. Those persons within the customer
service area of the New Albany Sewer District, who are required by this
section to prepare a HMPC Plan, shall be required to submit the completed
HMPC plan in duplicate to the New Albany Sewer Department as a condition of a
wastewater discharge permit. All others shall be submitted to the Floyd
County Health Department. HMPC Plans will be submitted according to the
following schedule:



 

Priority Group
 
Submission Date
 
Est. No.
 
Summary Description
 
SIC Ident. Nos.
 
Final Approval Date


A
 
12-1-1985
 
1000
 
Gas stations; auto/truck rental; auto repair
 
517; 554; 7512; 7513; 7538; 7539
 
4-1-1986


B
 
4-1-1986
 
1100
 
Chemical manufacturing; chemical storage; distilled storage; cleaning
establishments; exterminating; medical supplies
 
28X; 5086; 6516, 519; 721; 7342; 806; 807
 
8-1-1986


C
 
6-1-1986
 
1700
 
Textile dyeing and manufacturing; lumber cutting and wood printing/publishing
industry; fabricated metals manufacturing; transportation equipment
manufacturing; railroad services; transit companies; freight terminals; water
transport; air transport; distilled beverage storage; photo supplies
 
078; 21X; 22X; 24X; 27X; 29X; 34X; 37X; 40X; 41X; 423; 44X; 45X; 518; 7395
 
10-1-1986


D
 
7-1-1986
 
400
 
Food manufacturing; paper products manufacturing; rubber and plastic
manufacturing; primary metal manufacturing; motor freight transport; hotels/
motels services; non-repair automotive services
 
20X; 26X; 30X; 33X; 421; 422; 701; 754
 
11-1-1986


E
 
9-1-1986
 
200
 
Furniture and fixture assembly; stone, clay and glass manufacturing;
machinery and equipment manufacturing (except transportation equipment);
transportation services; communication services; electric, gas and rooming
sanitary services; houses
 
23X; 25X; 32X; 35X; 36X; 38X; 39X; 47X; 48X; 49X; 702
 
1-1-1987


NOTE:  Priority Group A is highest priority for review and E is lowest



 



   (E)   Amended reportable quantities. HMPC Plans submitted as part of
any wastewater discharge permit may provide for amended reportable quantities
for releases provided the amendments are approved by the administering agency
and the requesting industry has a good safety record relating to hazardous
materials use.



   (F)   Review and approval of Plan. The HMPC Plan shall be reviewed
by the New Albany Sewer Department and the Health Department, the Fire
Department with jurisdiction, the Civil Defense Department and any other
local agency with appropriate authority; however, final administration action
on the HMPC Plan shall be taken by the administering agencies. Upon
submission of the HMPC Plan, the person submitting the plan shall be presumed
to be in compliance with this section pending final review of the Plan. HMPC
Plans which do not provide necessary information or are otherwise deficient
shall be rejected and returned to the person submitting the plan for revision
and resubmittal.



   (G)   Appeals. Any rejection or denial of approval of HMPC Plan may
be appealed to the Appeals and Overseer's Board pursuant to § 95.11.



   (H)   Updates, revisions and changes. A new or modified HMPC Plan
may be required and submitted to the administering agency with jurisdiction,
when any person institutes the use of a new process or change in its
manufacturing or processing facilities, or when there is a significant change
in its existing operation or wastewater constituents or characteristics.



   (I)   Training and educational programs.



      (1)   Each employer of employees who use hazardous materials,
as herein defined, and who is required to prepare an HMPC Plan shall be
required to have an initial and on-going safety and accident prevention
training program for all such employees. This training and education program
shall include, but not be limited to, appropriate work practices, protective
measures and emergency procedures. The details and frequency of the training
program should be provided as part of the HMPC Plan for the facility as
provided in division (C)(7) above.



      (2)   The administering agency shall have the authority to
require different frequencies of training for industries with frequent spills
and/or spill histories.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.08  INSPECTIONS.



   The administering agencies, the Fire Department and Sewer Department of
the city and the county's Health Department shall have the authority to
conduct periodic inspections of any facilities for the purposes of
ascertaining or causing to be corrected any condition which may be a
violation of this chapter. Joint inspection shall be conducted where
necessary for purposes of HMPC Plan review. Inspections shall be made during
normal working hours.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.09  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION; TRADE SECRETS.



   Information and data provided by any person or obtained from any
report, questionnaire, permit application, permit and monitoring program and
from inspections shall not be made available to the public or any other
governmental agency, unless required by law.



   (A)   Upon submission of information in any form, it shall be the
obligation of the submitter to separate all confidential and trade secret
material from any material subject to disclosure under the law.



   (B)   Any requests made under the law for information containing
confidential or trade secrets shall be brought to the attention of the person
requesting confidentiality of its trade secrets by certified mail return
receipt requested. The notification shall advise the person requesting
confidentiality of the decision of the administering agency regarding release
of the confidential information. In no event will the confidential
information be released until five days have elapsed from date notice is sent
by registered mail.



   (C)   Within 72 hours after receipt of notification, the person
requesting confidentiality of its trade secrets shall have the burden to
initiate appropriate actions at law or otherwise to protect its confidential
or trade secrets from disclosure, and must demonstrate the public disclosure
of confidential or trade secrets is likely to cause substantial harm to his
or her competitive position.



   (D)   (1)   Any individual who releases information containing
confidential or trade secrets in violation of the law or this section shall
be subject to disciplinary action by his or her employer for malfeasance and
willful neglect of official duties, and may further be guilty of misuse of
confidential information under state statutes.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall, in no way,
prohibit or limit the exchange of information, confidential or otherwise,
between public agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate
governmental need or is necessary in the performance of legitimate government
function.



   (E)   The county's Health Department shall be the repository for all
trade secret information.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.10  VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Primary responsibility. The Floyd County Health Department and
the city's Sewer Department shall have joint responsibility for enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Notice. Upon notification or discovery of any violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the administering agency shall immediately
investigate the site upon which the violation is located. The administering
agency will be the lead enforcement agency for violations of this chapter. If
a violation exists, a notice describing the violation shall be served upon
the person who is responsible for the facilities upon which the violation has
occurred, if the identity of the person is known. The notice shall also
include the following if applicable:



      (1)   A statement that the situation must be abated within the
period of time prescribed by the administering agency, giving the person
responsible for the release the option to initiate clean-up and disposal;
provided that, no unreasonable delay or damage to the public is the result
thereof;



      (2)   A statement that if the situation is not remedied within
the prescribed period of time, the administering agency with jurisdiction may
proceed to correct the violation;



      (3)   A statement that the person shall be liable for any
costs incurred by public agencies associated with their releases except for
those costs that are associated with a normal emergency response;



      (4)   A statement that after the administering agency has
corrected the violation, a bill shall be sent charging the person the amount
of costs and expenses incurred by the governmental agency in correcting the
violation; and



      (5)   A statement that penalties may be levied for violations
that have occurred.



   (C)   Governmental response. In cases where the identity of a person
who is responsible for facilities upon which a violation has occurred is not
known at the time a violation is reported, the city or any governmental
agency with jurisdiction in the county may take reasonable steps to abate any
problem and may take reasonable steps to clean up the area affected to assure
continuing safety of the public and the environment. When the identity of the
person responsible for the facility is determined, a bill shall be sent to
the person for the costs for correcting the violation according to the
provisions of division (B) above.



   (D)   Injunctive relief. The administering agency is empowered to
seek injunctive relief for violations of this chapter should other means
prove ineffective and a threat to public health and safety exists.



(Ord. G-87-193 passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.11  APPEALS AND OVERSEER'S BOARD.



   (A)   Purpose. An Appeals and Overseer's Board, composed of
representatives of industry, regulatory agencies and the general public
appointed by the Mayor and County Commissioners, shall be established to
ensure that appeal is available to those persons aggrieved by an action of
the administering agency regarding the adequacy of any HMPC Plan; to those
persons fined or penalized pursuant to this chapter; and to coordinate and
integrate the policies and procedures of the regulating agencies and persons
related to the HMPC Plan. Any recommendation of the Appeals and Overseer's
Board shall be advisory only and shall not be binding in any manner
whatsoever upon the board of the administering agency.



   (B)   Appeal. The Board, in hearing an appeal, shall recommend to
the administering agency that the agency's action be modified, upheld or
dismissed or that as fine or penalty levied upon a person for violation of
any provisions of this chapter be set aside, modified or left intact. The
Board, upon an HMPC Plan appeal, may recommend to the administering agency
exemptions or modifications in the content of the HMPC Plan and requirements
for reporting hazardous materials releases; provided, the exemption or
modification is based on the preventive physical aspects of the facility,
including containment structures and automatic monitors, and the recognized
and documented good performance of the industry in handling hazardous
materials.



   (C)   Composition.



      (1)   The Board shall be composed of representatives of
industry, regulatory agencies and the general public not to exceed 11
members, appointed by the Mayor, Common Council, County Council and County
Commissioners.



      (2)   The Mayor shall appoint five members, one of whom shall
be representative of the Fire Marshal's Office; two of whom shall be
representatives of industry; and two of whom shall be representatives of the
general public. The Common Council shall appoint a representative. The County
Commissioners shall appoint four members, one of whom shall be a
representative of the Civil Defense Office; one of whom shall be a
representative of a regulatory agency; one of whom shall be a representative
of industry; and one of whom shall be a representative of the general public.
The County Council shall appoint a representative.



      (3)   A simple majority of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The Appeals and Overseer's Board shall function according to the
by-laws developed by the Board.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.12  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.



   It shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action other than
an action for violation of § 97.06, including the recovery of clean-up costs
pursuant to this chapter, if a person can prove that a release of hazardous
materials was caused solely by an act of God; an act of war; negligence on
the part of the city or county government; an act or omission of a third
party; or any combination of the foregoing clauses.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.13  FEES.



   Fees shall be imposed for HMPC Plan review or approval, the revenues of
which shall cover only the costs of HMPC Plan review and approval. The
administering agency will set and collect fees. The fee schedule shall be
uniform for all administering agencies.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.14  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
administering agency for any damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. All persons
are advised to determine, to their own satisfaction, the level of protection,
in addition to that required by this chapter, necessary or desirable to
ensure that there is no unauthorized release of hazardous materials.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.15  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision or section of this chapter or the enforcement of any
such provision or section is held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity or unenforceability shall not
affect or render invalid or unenforceable any other provision.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Amount exceeding reportable quantity. The person responsible
for a hazardous material release in an amount exceeding the reportable
quantity may be fined not more than $1,000, if the release is not an
authorized release, and if the release involved willful violations,
negligence or repeated spills under similar conditions and where a
significant quantity of hazardous material is involved taking into account
real or potential damage to the environment and threat to the public health.
Every incident giving rise to such a release shall constitute a separate
offense; however, no person shall be held responsible for more than one
violation per day where the violations occur at the same facility and are
causally related.



   (B)   Failure to notify the appropriate Fire Department. The person
who fails to notify the appropriate Fire Department as required by § 95.06
may be fined not more than $2,500.



   (C)   Any provision other than notification. The person who
otherwise violates any provision of this chapter other than § 95.06 shall be
fined not more than $100. Every incident giving rise to such a violation
shall constitute a separate offense; however, no person shall be held
responsible for more than one violation per day where the violations occur at
the same facility and are causally related.



   (D)   Civil damages. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, subject to the affirmative defenses set forth in §
95.12, become liable civilly to the city and/or county government for any
expense, loss or damage caused to the government by reason of the violation,
including, but not limited to, any clean-up, evacuation, administrative or
other expenses, and legal expenses.



   (E)   Violation of city wastewater discharge regulations or Health
Department regulations. Any person who violates any provision of the city
wastewater discharge regulations or the Health Department Regulations
requirements, or conditions set forth in permits duly issued, or who
discharges wastewater which causes pollution, or violates any cease and
desist order, prohibition, discharge limitation, natural standard or
performance, pretreatment or toxicity standard, may also be liable civilly to
liabilities imposed by the city's Sewer District. The civil liability may be
in a sum not to exceed $2,500 for each violation. Each incident giving rise
to a violation of these sections shall constitute a separate offense;
however, no person shall be held responsible for more than one violation per
day where the violations occur at the same facility and are causally related.



   (F)   Penalties imposed pursuant to legislative authority. Any
penalties imposed under this section shall be levied by the administering
agency with jurisdiction pursuant to its legislative authority.



(Ord. G-87-193, passed 7-6-1987)



CHAPTER 96:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   96.01   Regulating nuisances created by noise



   96.02   Exemptions



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  REGULATING NUISANCES CREATED BY NOISE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city’s
corporate limits, to continue, or cause to be made or continued, any
unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of
others, unless the making and continuing of the noise is necessary for the
protection or preservation of property or the life, health, or safety of a
person or persons. Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in § 96.99.



   (B)   The following acts are hereby declared to be unreasonably
loud, harsh or excessive noises in violation of this chapter, but the
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   The sounding of any horn or other such audible signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any right-of-way,
parking lot or other public place, except as a danger warning, for an
unreasonable period of time;



      (2)   The use or operation of any radio, stereo, or other
machine or device for the producing, reproducing or amplification of sound in
any vehicle in such a manner as to create an unreasonably loud, harsh, or
excessive noise, that disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of others;



      (3)   The use or operation of, or allowing the use or
operation of, any radio, stereo, musical instrument, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to
create an unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise which disturbs the
peace, quiet, and comfort of others by creating or allowing a louder volume
than is necessary for the convenient hearing of the person or persons who are
voluntarily in the room, chamber, or vehicle in which any machine, device, or
musical instrument described above is located;



      (4)   The use or operation of any vehicle in such manner as to
produce any unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise, or to discharge into
the open air the exhaust of any vehicle, except through a muffler or other
device which will effectively prevent any unreasonably loud, harsh or
excessive noises therefrom;



      (5)   The creation of any unreasonably loud, harsh, or
excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle,
or by the operation of any such vehicle;



      (6)   The use of any mechanical loud speaker, amplifier, sound
system, stereo or radio on any moving or standing vehicle for advertising,
entertainment or any other purpose, in such a manner as to create an
unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise; and



      (7)   The unreasonably prolonged continuation of animal
noises, as provided in § 91.07.



   (C)   The standards which shall be considered in determining whether
a violation of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:



      (1)   The volume of the noise;



      (2)   The intensity of the noise;



      (3)   The volume and intensity of background noise, if any;



      (4)   The proximity of the noise to a residential area, place
of public accommodation, such as a hotel, motel, inn, campground and the
like, health care facilities, churches or schools;



      (5)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;



      (6)   The density of inhabitation of the area within which the
noise emanates;



      (7)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



      (8)   The duration of the noise;



      (9)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or
constant; and



      (10)   Whether any applicable exemptions apply.



(Ord. A-03-53, passed 8-21-2003; Am. Ord. G-11-42, passed 12-15-2011; Ord.
G-16-08, passed 9-1-2016)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Sounds emitted from authorized emergency vehicles;



   (B)   Lawn mowers, weed blowers, garden tractors, construction and
repair equipment, go-carts, power tools, when properly muffled, between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. only;



   (C)   Burglar alarms and other warning devices when properly
installed, providing the cause for the alarm or warning device sound is
investigated and turned off within a reasonable period of time;



   (D)   Events authorized by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
However, there shall not be more than three events, totaling six days, in a
calendar year authorized by Board of Public Works and Safety, granted to any
individual or entity in a calendar year. Any additional annual exemptions
will require Council approval;



   (E)   Noise associated with scholastic or athletic events;



   (F)   Sounds emitted for emergency purposes;



   (G)   Sounds associated with consumer fireworks permitted by state
law under I.C. 22-11-14 et seq.;



   (H)   Sounds associated with the normal conduct of legally
established non-transient businesses, organizations and governmental
entities, when the sounds are customary, incidental and within the normal
range appropriate for the use; provided, however, that, commercial
enterprises shall not be entitled to this exemption between the hours of
10:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. on weekdays, and 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Fridays
and Saturdays. However, it is noted that §§ 156.078(B)(7) and 156.078(C)(7)
are applicable for light industrial use and heavy industrial use,
respectively;



   (I)   Garbage collection between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.;



   (J)   Sounds associated with equipment or animals lawfully utilized
by disabled persons to accommodate their disability;



   (K)   Noise associated with an auction conducted by a licensed
auctioneer;



   (L)   Noises resulting from any and all transportation, flood
control, utility company maintenance and construction operations at any time
on rights-of-way, and noises from situations which may occur on private real
property, including in parking lots, deemed necessary to serve the best
interest of the public and to protect the public’s health and well being,
including but not limited to, street or hard surface sweeping or cleaning,
debris and limb removal, removal of downed wires, restoring electrical
service, repairing traffic signals, unplugging sewers, snow removal, house
moving, vacuuming catch-basins, removal of damaged poles and vehicles, repair
of water hydrants and mains, gas lines, oil lines, and sewers; and



   (M)   Noises from activities conducted on public parks or
playgrounds and public or private school grounds, including but not limited
to, school athletic and school entertainment events.



(Ord. A-03-53, passed 8-21-2003; Ord. G-11-42, passed 12-15-2011; Ord.
G-16-08, passed 9-1-2016)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A first violation of any section of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of $150 for the first offense. The date of
the citation is the date for use to determine whether divisions (B) and (C)
herein should apply.



   (B)   A second violation of any section this chapter by the same
person or entity within a six-month period from the first violation shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of $300.



   (C)   A third or more subsequent violations of this chapter by the
same person or entity within a six- month period from the first violation
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of $500 per violation thereafter;



(Ord. A-03-53, passed 8-21-2003; Ord. G-11-42, passed 12-15-2011; Am. Ord.
G-16-08, passed 9-1-2016)



CHAPTER 97:  NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Maintaining conditions constituting a nuisance



   97.02   Failure to keep trees trimmed



   97.03   Casting offensive matter on land



   97.04   Permitting offensive substance to remain in cellar



   97.05   Discharging dense smoke



   97.06   Changing watercourse without authority



   97.07   Vehicle with offensive muffler



   97.08   Notice to be given of violation



   97.09   No indoor furniture or appliances shall be kept outdoors



Weeds and Other Environmental Nuisances



   97.15   Purpose and intent



   97.16   Definitions



   97.17   Application of subchapter



   97.18   Prohibited activity



   97.19   Determination of violation



   97.20   Enforcement



   97.21   Right of property owner or occupant to object to complaint



   97.22   Adoption of state law



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  MAINTAINING CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE.



   It shall be unlawful and it shall be a nuisance for any person to
erect, construct, cause, permit, keep or maintain within the city limits an
environmental nuisance that is injurious to health, or indecent or offensive
to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property; and any person
maintaining any nuisance as set forth in this section is declared to be the
author and maintainer of a nuisance.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.02  FAILURE TO KEEP TREES TRIMMED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep trees situated on
property owned or controlled by him or her properly trimmed and in a safe
condition.



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.03  CASTING OFFENSIVE MATTER ON LAND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge water or cast any
offensive matter or substance on the land or property of another.



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  PERMITTING OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCE TO REMAIN IN CELLAR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any noxious or offensive
substance to remain in any cellar, lot or premises.



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  DISCHARGING DENSE SMOKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge dense smoke or noxious
gases to the detriment of adjoining property owners.



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.06  CHANGING WATERCOURSE WITHOUT AUTHORITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner or change
the course or depth of any watercourse without authority of the Board of
Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.07  VEHICLE WITH OFFENSIVE MUFFLER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a
loud and offensive muffler.



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Light Motor Vehicle Noise Control, see §§ 96.15 through 96.17



§ 97.08  NOTICE TO BE GIVEN OF VIOLATION.



   No charges shall be filed for violation of this chapter unless the
offender shall fail to correct the condition within five days after receiving
notice that the Board of Public Works and Safety has ordered the condition
corrected. The notice may be served by any member of the Police Department,
or by mailing it by registered or certified mail with return receipt
requested.



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958)



§ 97.09  NO INDOOR FURNITURE OR APPLIANCES SHALL BE KEPT OUTDOORS.



   (A)   Indoor furniture or appliances shall not be stored or kept
outdoors for extended periods of time. Only furniture and appliances rated
for outdoor use and which do not deteriorate under outdoor conditions shall
be used or stored outdoors;



   (B)   This section shall not apply to furniture or appliances set
out for garbage or curbside pickup for up to a period of 72 hours; and



   (C)   Anyone who violates this section shall be subject to the fines
and penalties in § 37.02(B)(6), with each day in violation being a separate
offense.



(Ord. G-13-03, passed 2-21-2013)



WEEDS AND OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL NUISANCES



§ 97.15  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to protect the
public safety, health and welfare and enhance the environment of the people
of the city by making it unlawful to allow an environmental public nuisance
to exist.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001)



§ 97.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE. An individual designated to make environmental
public nuisance inspections, by the Board of Public Works and Safety, or by
the head of any city governmental department designated by the Mayor to
enforce this subchapter.



   CITY. The City of New Albany, Indiana.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation on
private property which is neglected, disregarded or not cut, mown or
otherwise removed, and/or which has attained a height of nine inches or more;



      (2)   Any accumulation of dead weeds, grasses or brush on
private or governmental property;



      (3)   Any poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plant or
plants detrimental to health, growing on any private or governmental
property; or



      (4)   Property that has been allowed to become a health or
safety hazard, or on which litter or waste products has accumulated, unless
specifically authorized under existing laws and regulations.



   INSPECTOR. An employee of the Street Commissioner or any other city
governmental department so designated by the Mayor, having the power to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter by issuing city ordinance violation
summonses.



   OWNER. Any one or more of the following:



      (1)   The owner or owners in fee simple of a parcel of real
estate, including the life tenant or tenants if any;



      (2)   The record owner or owners, as reflected by the most
current records in the Assessor's office for the township in which the real
estate is located; or



      (3)   The purchaser or purchasers of the real estate under any
contract for the conditional sale thereof.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All real estate within the city, except governmental
property.



   TRAFFIC HAZARD. Any environmental public nuisance that is potentially
dangerous to the existing traffic at the intersection in question, as it may
block or prohibit the view of any oncoming traffic. If the Inspector finds
such a violation, he or she shall find it necessary to waive the five-day
grace period and abate the problem as soon as possible.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001)



§ 97.17  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   Each department or agency of the United States, the state or
any other political subdivision thereof, shall be required to keep
governmental property free from environmental public nuisances.



   (B)   Each owner of private property shall be required to keep that
private property free from environmental public nuisances.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001)



§ 97.18  PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner of private property or governmental
property to allow an environmental public nuisance to exist on that property.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.19  DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Complaint. Violations under this subchapter shall be cited by
any city department that receives a complaint regarding an environmental
public nuisance on any property within the city and they shall forward that
complaint to the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Assignment of complaint. The Board of Public Works and Safety
shall then forward the complaint to the Inspector, who, in turn, shall
process the complaint and follow the case through to its resolution.



   (C)   Notice to abate.



      (1)   When a complaint addresses private property, the
Inspector, through the Board of Public Works and Safety, shall cause a
written notice to abate to be served upon the owner of the property in
question, who shall be granted a minimum of five calendar days to remove the
environmental nuisance.



      (2)   This notice shall be served by a law enforcement
officer, by certified mail to the owner, or by conspicuously posting on the
property a "notice" placard containing the following information:



         (a)   The address of the property;



         (b)   The date of the notice;



         (c)   The address and the telephone number of the Board
of Public Works and Safety; and



         (d)   A warning that, if the environmental public
nuisance is not removed within five calendar days after posting, the city
will abate the nuisance and seek recovery of the actual costs involved in its
removal and that costs and fines may be assessed without further notice for
subsequent violations pursuant to § 97.19(C)(4).



      (3)   After posting a notice to abate, the Inspector shall
serve the owner of the subject property with a copy of the notice by regular
first class United States mail, postage prepaid. However, any failure to give
the written notice shall not constitute a defense to any action to enforce §
97.18.



      (4)   Any notice to abate issued shall be valid until the end
of the calendar year in which it is issued for any additional offenses under
the same provisions of this chapter. The Board of Works is not required to
re-notify a property owner of each subsequent violation of the same section
of this chapter before it takes action to remove the nuisance and further
cite the property owner.



   (D)   Publication of notice.



      (1)   In lieu of the notice required by division (C) above,
the city, through the Board of Public Works and Safety, may, on two separate
occasions during the month of March, publish a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, that weeds not cut by May 1 of that year
will be cut by the city in an ongoing as-needed basis, and the owner of the
property shall be charged with the costs under division (C) above.



      (2)   The published notice shall contain all of the
information required of the notice to abate.



      (3)   The city may cut weeds as many times as are necessary
and its actual cost shall be charged to the property owner.



   (E)   Inspection. Following the expiration of the notice to abate,
an Inspector shall visually inspect the property to determine whether an
environmental public nuisance exists. If an environmental public nuisance
exists, action shall be taken to abate that nuisance in accordance with this
subchapter.



   (F)   Abatement by city on governmental property. Where the
complaint addresses governmental property, the Inspector, having determined
that a violation exists and threatens the health and safety of the people of
the city, may direct the city to immediately enter upon the premises and
remove the environmental public nuisance.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001; Ord. G-11-35, passed 11-17-2011)



§ 97.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Citation for violation. Having found an environmental public
nuisance to exist on private property and to have not been abated as directed
by the written notice to abate under § 97.19(D), the Inspector may cause a
citation for violation of a city ordinance to be issued to the offending
property owner.



   (B)   Abatement by city on private property.



      (1)   After issuing a citation for violation of a city
ordinance under division (A), the Inspector shall furnish the Controller with
a statement of the actual cost of removing the nuisance.



      (2)   The actual abatement may be assigned to a city
department or contracted out through standard procedures.



   (C)   Responsibility of the offender for the costs of enforcement.



      (1)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall make a
statement of the actual cost incurred in eliminating the environmental public
nuisance. The costs shall include:



         (a)   The cost of removal of the public nuisance;



         (b)   Administrative fees, not to exceed $100 for each
calendar year;



         (c)   Any reasonable and necessary costs incurred in
enforcement; and



         (d)   All recording fees associated with the collection
of the outstanding balance.



      (2)   The statement shall be delivered to the property owner
by first-class mail.



      (3)   Within 30 days after its receipt, the owner shall pay to
the city the amount noted in the statement, which shall be deposited to the
general fund of the department specified to enforce the ordinance.



   (D)   Failure to pay. If the owner fails to pay the amount within 30
days after receiving a statement, a copy of all costs shall be filed in the
office of the County Auditor for the purpose of placing the amount claimed on
the tax duplicate against the property so that the amount claimed can be
collected as taxes are collected, subject to the above limitations.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001; Ord. G-11-35, passed 11-17-2011)



§ 97.21  RIGHT OF PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO OBJECT TO COMPLAINT.



   (A)   (1)   Upon receipt of a notice to abate, the property owner
or occupant served, or his or her duly authorized representative, may notify
the Board of Public Works and Safety of an intent to object to any notice to
abate.



      (2)   This correspondence shall be in writing and shall
specify the street address of the property involved.



      (3)   The Board of Public Works and Safety must receive any
such correspondence within the amount of time set out in the notice to abate.



   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of the correspondence, the Board of
Public Works and Safety shall provide copies of same to the City Attorney and
to the Inspector involved, who shall cause the objection to be investigated.



      (2)   No further action shall be pursued against that owner to
abate the environmental public nuisance until the objection is resolved.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001)



§ 97.22  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



    It is the express intent of this chapter to adopt I.C. 36-7-10.1.



(Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined $25 for the first offense, and $50 for each
subsequent offense.



   (B)   Each day a violation is permitted to continue beyond the
period prescribed by § 97.19(C)(1) shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   In addition to any fine imposed herein, the offender shall be
responsible for all costs of abatement and the costs in § 97.19(C)(1).



(Ord. G-58-49, passed 12-1-1958; Ord. G-01-25, passed 6-21-2001; Ord.
G-11-35, passed 11-17-2011)



CHAPTER 98:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



City Parks



   98.01   Use of grounds and facilities



   98.02   Certain acts prohibited



   98.03   Picnic areas and use



   98.04   Special activities



   98.05   Operation of motor vehicles and boats



   98.06   Animals within park area



   98.07   Peddling or soliciting



   98.08   Erection of signs prohibited



   98.09   Fishing



   98.10   Hours of closing



   98.11   Exception to regulations



   98.12   Severability



Public Golf Courses



   98.25   Green fees to be deposited in special nonreverting fund



   98.26   Improvement of public golf course; nonreverting capital fund
established



   98.27   Deposit of monies into fund



 



   98.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Department of Parks and Recreation, see §§ 33.001 and 33.002



CITY PARKS



§ 98.01  USE OF GROUNDS AND FACILITIES.



   Each person, firm or corporation using the public parks and grounds
shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when the fires are permitted,
and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and
sanitary condition.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-03-08, passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



§ 98.02  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using the
parks to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts:



   (A)   Commit any assault, battery or engage in fighting;



   (B)   Prevent any person from using any park or any of its
facilities or interfere with the use in compliance with this subchapter and
the rule applicable to use;



   (C)   Carry or discharge firearms, fireworks, BB guns, air guns,
bows and arrows, crossbows, slingshots, blowguns, rockets, paint-ball guns or
martial arts weapons unless authorized by the Superintendent or a duly sworn
police officer;



   (D)   Hit golf balls;



   (E)   Damage, cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, plant,
shrub, rock, building, monument, fence, bench, equipment or other structure,
apparatus or property; or to pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub,
bush, plant or flower; or to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any
manner any building, monument, fence, bench, equipment or other structure;



   (F)   Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, gravel or
fertilizer;



   (G)   Swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain,
pond, lake or stream;



   (H)   Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into the waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of the waters;



   (I)   Make or kindle a fire, except in picnic stoves, braziers, fire
pits or designated areas for that purpose;



   (J)   Place, abandon or leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, grass
clippings, leaves or other refuse in any public park except in a proper waste
receptacle. Nor is the dumping of any personal items, trash, grass clippings,
leaves or other refuse, for the purpose of disposal, allowed in any park;



   (K)   Participate or engage in any activity in any public park area
when the activity will create a danger to the public, a public nuisance or
cause damage to park property;



   (L)   Camp, sleep or stay overnight in any park unless authorized by
the Superintendent in writing;



   (M)   Possess or consume any alcoholic beverages;



   (N)   Disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, service, concert,
exercise or exhibition;



   (O)   For any person over the age of six years to use the restrooms
and washrooms designated for the opposite sex, unless assistance is necessary;



   (P)   Stand, skate, sit or walk on areas of water covered with ice;



   (Q)   Use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplified music, sound or
voices except when authorized by the Superintendent, or in connection with
use of any amphitheater provided the amplified music or sound is within the
prescribed levels governed by state or local law, measured at the property
boundary;



   (R)   Smoke on and around playgrounds or near any youth activity or
event; and/or



   (S)   Use any metal detector on any park property.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-971, passed 6-6-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-91-260, passed 4-1-1991; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



Statutory reference:



   Battery statutes, see I.C. 35-42-2-1, 35-42-2-3 and 35-45-1-3



§ 98.03  PICNIC AREAS AND USE.



   No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any
of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to
the exclusion of other persons except by reservation permit available from
the Department of Parks and Recreation, nor shall any person use the area and
facilities for an unreasonable amount of time if the facilities are crowded.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-03-08, passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



Cross-reference:



   Nonreverting operating fund for shelter rentals, see § 35.24



§ 98.04  SPECIAL ACTIVITIES.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Use or operate any remote controlled airplane, boat,
helicopter, parasail, hang glider or hot air balloon, unless otherwise
designated by the Superintendent; and/or



   (B)   To conduct or participate in any tournament, camp or organized
sporting activity which had not been specifically authorized by the
Superintendent.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.05  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND BOATS.



   The use of rowboats, canoes, kayaks and boats with electric trolling
motors is permitted. It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Ride, drive or go at a rate of speed greater than the posted
speed limit upon any bicycle, motorcycle, in-line skates, automobile or other
vehicle whatsoever, upon any parking lot or area, drive or street in any
park; provided, however, bicycles and in-line skating are allowed on park
trails;



   (B)   Ride, drive or park any motorcycle, automobile, motorized
scooter or other motorized vehicle upon, over or across any park curb,
sidewalk, grass, lawn, hiking or jogging trail or park land, except
authorized city vehicles, and in designated areas, unless authorized by the
Superintendent;



   (C)   Use or operate any motorboat on any creek, pond, lake or water
within any park;



   (D)   Operate any vehicle in a park facility parking lot after
normal hours of operation; and/or



   (E)   Park or operate any truck-trailer, trailer, semi-trailer or
pole-trailer in a park facility parking lot at any time, unless they are on
official business.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-91-260,
passed 4-1-1991; Ord. G-03-08, passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.06  ANIMALS WITHIN PARK AREA.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal, reptile or
fowl of any kind; provided that, this shall not apply to domestic animals as
defined by the Animal Control Code. All permitted animals shall be led by a
static cord or chain not more than ten feet long or a retractable cord not
more than 15 feet long;



   (B)   Ride or drive any horse or animal, except on or immediately
along the side of existing roadways;



   (C)   Allow a domestic animal to defecate in any park without
immediately removing and disposing of the feces in proper waste receptacles;
and/or



   (D)   Hunt, abandon, replace, remove or injure any animal, domestic
or wild, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds,
mammals, reptiles, fowls and livestock.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.07  PEDDLING OR SOLICITING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than employees or officials
of the NA-FC Park Board or individuals acting on behalf of the NA-FC Park
Board to:



   (A)   Sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections,
merchandise or services except pursuant to a written agreement with the city
or written permission from the Superintendent; and/or



   (B)   Practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade,
occupation, business or profession, or to circulate any petition.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.08  ERECTION OF SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to distribute, post, place or erect any
static or mobile advertising, handbill, circular bill, notice, paper or other
advertising device on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a
park unless approved by the NA-FC Park Board.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.09  FISHING.



   (A)   All persons fishing in areas under the NA-FC Department of
Parks and Recreation must conform to all rules, regulations and state laws
set forth by the Department of Natural Resources (Division of Fishing and
Wildlife). The legal size of large mouth bass will be determined by the
Department of Natural Resources.



   (B)   Minnows shall not be used as bait.



   (C)   Dumping of fish taken from another source is not allowed.



   (D)   Fishing after park hours is allowed with a night fishing
permit obtained through the Parks Department.



   (E)   Seining of minnows or fish from the creeks, ponds, and lakes
in any park is not allowed.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.10  HOURS OF CLOSING.



   It shall be unlawful to remain, stay or loiter in any park between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day unless authorized by
the Superintendent in writing.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.11  EXCEPTION TO REGULATIONS.



   These provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government
official in pursuit of any official duty.



(Ord. G-77-657, passed 6-6-1977; Ord. G-83-1003, passed 12-5-1983; Ord.
G-85-104, passed 10-7-1985; Ord. G-86-136, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. G-03-08,
passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.12  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision or section of this subchapter or the enforcement of
any such provision or section is held to be invalid or unenforceable by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity or unenforceability shall not
affect or render invalid or unenforceable any other provision.



(Ord. G-03-08, passed 3-3-2003)



PUBLIC GOLF COURSES



§ 98.25  GREEN FEES TO BE DEPOSITED IN SPECIAL NONREVERTING FUND.



   All green fees derived from the operation of Valley View Golf Course
shall be deposited in a special non-reverting fund which is established for
expenditure by the city's Park and Recreation Board for the purpose of the
operation and maintenance of the public golf course.



(Ord. A-66-264, passed 9-12-1966)



§ 98.26  IMPROVEMENT OF PUBLIC GOLF COURSE; NONREVERTING CAPITAL FUND
ESTABLISHED.



   A special nonreverting capital fund is established, to be available for
the deposit and expenditure of funds by the city's Park and Recreation Board
for the purpose of making capital improvements of the public golf course.



(Ord. A-66-264, passed 9-12-1966)



§ 98.27  DEPOSIT OF MONIES INTO FUND.



   Monies procured from such activity shall be deposited at least once
each month with the Fiscal Officer of the city. The Fiscal Officer shall
deposit the monies either in the special non-reverting fund or in the special
non-reverting capital fund, as directed by the city's Park and Recreation
Board. Monies from either shall be disbursed only on a warrant of the Board,
signed by the President and Secretary.



(Ord. A-66-264, passed 9-12-1966)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $10, nor more than $100.



(Ord. G-03-08, passed 3-3-2003)



CHAPTER 99:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   99.01   Street sweeping; schedules



   99.02   Posting of house numbers



Excavations



   99.15   Permit required



   99.16   Application for permit



   99.17   Permit fees



   99.18   Agreements to be made by applicant



   99.19   Failure of applicant to restore street



   99.20   Excavation to be refilled; surface to be restored



   99.21   Violation of, or failure to, comply with regulations



Rights-of-Way



   99.35   Use limited to ingress and egress of traffic and certain
other activities



   99.36   Use without permission; impounding of property



   99.37   Recovery of impounded property



   99.38   Sale of unclaimed property



   99.39   No soliciting or collecting donations in public roadways



Moving Buildings



   99.50   Permit required



   99.51   Issuance of permit upon compliance with conditions



   99.52   Applicant must be insured



   99.53   Fee for moving



   99.54   Moving buildings in violation of regulations



   99.55   Dwelling may be destroyed if in violation



   99.56   Exception



Administration



   99.70   Street Commissioner; duties; compensation



 



   99.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 99.01  STREET SWEEPING; SCHEDULES.



   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle upon any of the streets and
alleys within the city during the times indicated by this section, street
sweeping schedules, for the sweeping or cleaning of the alley or street.



   (B)   Street sweeping schedules.



      (1)   On Mondays, when permitted by time and weather
conditions, the north side of streets will be swept, as indicated.



         (a)   From 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 a.m., Market, Spring,
Elm and Oak Streets will be swept between East Third and Silver Streets.



         (b)   From 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m., Culbertson,
Ekin, Beeler and Shelby Streets will be swept between Silver and State
Streets.



         (c)   From 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m., Market and
Spring Streets will be swept between West Second and West Seventh Streets.



      (2)   On Tuesdays, when permitted by time and weather
conditions, the south side of streets will be swept, as indicated.



         (a)   From 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 a.m., Market, Spring,
Elm and Oak Streets will be swept between East Third and Silver Streets.



         (b)   From 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m., Culbertson,
Ekin, Beeler and Shelby Streets will be swept between Silver and State
Streets.



         (c)   From 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m., Market and
Spring Streets will be swept between West Second and West Seventh Streets.



      (3)   On Wednesdays, when permitted by time and weather
conditions, the east side of streets will be swept, as indicated.



         (a)   From 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 a.m., all streets lying
between East Fourth and Silver Streets will be swept between Market and Oak
Streets.



         (b)   From 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m., all streets
lying between Silver Street and the city limits will be swept between Market
and Oak Streets.



      (4)   On Thursdays, when permitted by time and weather
conditions, the west side of streets will be swept, as indicated.



         (a)   From 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 a.m., all streets lying
between East Fourth and Silver Streets will be swept between Market and Oak
Streets.



         (b)   From 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m., all streets
lying between Silver Street and the city limits will be swept between Market
and Oak Streets.



      (5)   On Fridays, when permitted by time and weather
conditions, alleys will be swept.



      (6)   On Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, when
permitted by time and weather conditions, the downtown area bounded on the
north by Oak Street, on the south by Main Street, on the east by East Third
Street and on the west by West Second Street will be swept between 4:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.



   (C)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be
removed, towed away and stored in a safe place. The vehicle shall be restored
to its owner, upon payment of all fees and/or penalties and a towing fee of
$45, if recovered within 24 hours. After the expiration of 24 hours, there
shall be an additional $5 per day storage fee.



(Ord. G-64-226, passed 10-4-1965; Ord. G-01-03, passed 1-4-2001; Ord.
G-09-14, passed 5-4-2009) Penalty, see § 37.02



Cross-reference:



   Additional parking provisions, see Ch. 75: Parking Schedules



§ 99.02  POSTING OF HOUSE NUMBERS.



   (A)   All owners or occupants of commercial or residential buildings
located within the city limits should be and are required to conspicuously
post their address so as to be easily visible from the street on which the
building or home lies.



   (B)   The address shall be in standard arabic numbers no smaller
than three inches high and shall be posted either on the improvements or on a
sign or mailbox on the street.



   (C)   The numbers shall be of a color in contrast to its background
so as to be easily read.



(Ord. G-93-156, passed 8-19-1993)



EXCAVATIONS



§ 99.15  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any person, firm or corporation which digs, excavates or cause to be
dug or excavated any trench or other excavation of any kind or nature
whatsoever through or under a roadway, sidewalk, highway, or grass plot in
any public roadway in the city, or through or under any public place in the
city or to cut into or open, or cause to be cut into or opened any pavement
surface of any street or alley or public place within the city limits without
first securing a permit as provided in this chapter shall be subject to the
fine(s) in section § 99.99 of this chapter. The City Clerk and Board of
Works shall maintain a registry of excavation projects and the parties
involved for reference should issues arise.



(Ord. G-11-11, passed 4-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.16  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   The permit shall be issued by the City Clerk upon the filing by the
applicant of a written application on forms prescribed by the City Clerk and
the Board of Works, setting forth the location and purpose of the proposed
excavation, the length, width and depth of the proposed trench, the area of
the roadway surface to be removed, and the proposed remedial measures to be
taken by the applicant. The applicant shall also be responsible for posting
safety signage at the location of the excavation(s) which comply with the
most recent edition of the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
The applicant shall also post a sign at the location of the excavation
indicating who is performing the excavation work on the site while the work
is being performed.



(Ord. G-11-11, passed 4-21-2011)



§ 99.17  PERMIT FEES.



   The City Clerk shall issue to such applicant a permit for excavation
within the city streets, highways, alleys or other public places upon the
payment by the fees provided for in the following schedule:



   (A)   Excavations of less than 150 square inches: $50;



   (B)   Excavations in excess of 150 square inches and less than 12
square feet shall be charged the following permit and inspection fees:



 

Permit fee
 

$100



Tamping
 

$50



Inspection of concrete
 

$25



Inspection of black top or other paving material used to conform to the
paving of the street
 

$25




 



   (C)   For excavations in excess of the 12 square feet the applicant
shall pay a permit fee of $100, an inspection fee at the rate of $25 per hour
for each hour restoration of the excavation shall progress.



(Ord. G-11-11, passed 4-21-2011)



§ 99.18  AGREEMENTS TO BE MADE BY APPLICANT.



   The applicant shall agree to indemnify the city against all claims,
suits, actions and proceedings of every nature, for or on account of injuries
or damages to persons or private property arising directly from the proposed
work, to do the work under the direction and supervision and to the approval
of the Board of Public Works and Safety and the City Engineer, and in
accordance with the specifications furnished from such persons and to
maintain and keep in good order and repair, the portion of the street,
sidewalk or other public place so excavated for a period of five years from
the date of the making of the excavation or until the city re-paves the
portion of the street, whichever comes first, and to further agree that in
the event that such repairs become necessary that the city may make the
repairs and charge the same to the applicant, in the event the applicant
fails, for a period of 30 days after notice to make the repairs, to make
same. If the applicant makes three or more separate cuts for excavation
within a one block radius, the applicant agrees to resurface or repave the
entire block rather than only doing so where the cuts or excavation was
performed.



(Ord. G-11-11, passed 4-21-2011)



§ 99.19  FAILURE OF APPLICANT TO RESTORE STREET.



   In the event that the applicant shall be notified to restore any
street, sidewalk or other public place, and shall fail so to do, no permits
hereunder shall be issued to the person, firm or corporation so long as such
order by the Board shall remain in default, and until the order has been
complied with.



(Ord. G-11-11, passed 4-21-2011)



§ 99.20  EXCAVATION TO BE REFILLED; SURFACE TO BE RESTORED.



   The excavation shall be refilled and the surface of the street,
sidewalk or other public place restored under the supervision of, approval of
and according to specifications furnished by the Board of Public Works and
Safety and the City Engineer.



(Ord. G-11-11, passed 4-21-2011)



§ 99.21  VIOLATION OF, OR FAILURE TO, COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any provision of this
subchapter or fail to comply with the provisions of the subchapter.



(Ord. 4486, passed 8-3-1953)  Penalty, see § 99.99



RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 99.35  USE LIMITED TO INGRESS AND EGRESS OF TRAFFIC AND CERTAIN OTHER
ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall use the rights-of-way of
the city for any purpose except for ingress and egress to traffic upon the
rights-of-way, or otherwise in conformance with this subchapter, without the
written permission of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Board of Works and Safety may approve the use of the
public sidewalks for outdoor dining in association with a retail food
establishment at the address requested, so long as a four-foot clear path
remains open and passable between the back of the curb and the seating area.
No table, chair, temporary fence or other appurtenance shall be stored in the
rights-of-way when the business is closed.



   (C)   If the restaurant had the appropriate permits to legally sell
alcoholic beverages out of doors, a fence or other device shall separate the
outdoor seating area and the passable area of the public right-of-way.



   (D)   The Board of Works and Safety may approve the display of
merchandise on a public sidewalk in association with a commercial enterprise
at the address requested, so long as the merchandise is located next to the
principal entrance to the place of business and shall be limited to a total
of no more than four items. A minimum four-foot wide clear path shall remain
open and passable between the back of the curb and display area. Displays of
merchandise shall not be stored on the public sidewalks after the close of
business.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a business or groups of
businesses to conduct a temporary sidewalk sale in conformance with other
appropriate approvals.



   (F)   The Board of Works and Safety may permit small, temporary or
portable signs to be displayed during business hours, when associated with a
business located at the address requested. No sign shall exceed a total of
eight square feet of sign face area for a total of 16 square feet. No
permitted sign shall be lighted, nor shall any sign be placed where it blocks
a clear four-foot wide path from the back of the curb. No sign shall
interfere with sight distance, nor inhibit on-street parking. No sign shall
be stored on the public sidewalk after the close of business.



   (G)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit any downtown
festival, or other approved festival; provided that, all appropriate
approvals are granted in full.



(Ord. G-74-561, passed 10-7-1974; Ord. A-03-65, passed 12-1-2003)  Penalty,
see § 99.99



§ 99.36  USE WITHOUT PERMISSION; IMPOUNDING OF PROPERTY.



   In the event that any person, firm or corporation shall use the
rights-of-way without the written permission of the Board of Public Works and
Safety of the city, the Street Commissioner or his or her authorized
representative shall forthwith remove the property from the rights-of-way and
impound the same.



(Ord. G-74-561, passed 10-7-1974)



§ 99.37  RECOVERY OF IMPOUNDED PROPERTY.



   All property impounded pursuant to § 99.36 shall be held for a period
of 30 days, during which period of time, the property can be redeemed upon
the payment for the property to the city, for the costs incurred in the
removal of this property.



(Ord. G-74-561, passed 10-7-1974)



§ 99.38  SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   If, at the expiration of 30 days, the property has not been redeemed by
the rightful owner thereof, the property shall be sold and the proceeds of
this sale shall inure to the General Fund of the city.



(Ord. G-74-561, passed 10-7-1974)



§ 99.39  NO SOLICITING OR COLLECTING DONATIONS IN PUBLIC ROADWAYS.



   (A)   No individual, business, or organization shall be permitted to
solicit or collect donations for any purpose within a public roadway within
the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to events approved by the Board
of Works which take place in a closed roadway, such as street fairs or
festivals.



(Ord. G-13-04, passed 2-21-2013)  Penalty, see § 99.99



MOVING BUILDINGS



§ 99.50  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move,
transport or convey any structure over, on or across the public ways of the
city without first obtaining a permit therefor as herein set out.



(Ord. G-59-64, passed 7-8-1959)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.51  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT UPON COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS.



   A permit may be issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety for the
moving of the structure over, on or across the public ways of the city upon
the following conditions which shall first be complied with.



   (A)   The City Engineer must certify that the building to be moved
is structurally sound, capable of being moved and will conform in its new
location to all applicable building and zoning regulations.



   (B)   The City Engineer must certify that the streets included in
the route of the proposed move are capable of supporting the moving operation.



   (C)   The Traffic Safety Officer and the Chief of Police must
approve the route and time of the proposed move.



   (D)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her
representative, must certify either:



      (1)   There are no street trees which would be damaged in the
proposed move; or



      (2)   Any trees involved can be trimmed so as to accommodate
the move without serious or permanent injuries or damage.



   (E)   Any privately- or publicly-owned utilities affected must
certify that proper arrangements have been made with them by the mover
concerned.



(Ord. G-59-64, passed 7-8-1959)



§ 99.52  APPLICANT MUST BE INSURED.



   (A)   Before any such permit is issued the person, firm or
corporation applying for a permit hereunder, must present to the Board of
Public Works and Safety a policy insuring against any damage to the public by
reason of the moving, in the amount of not less than $25,000 personal injury
to such  person, $50,000 for each accident and $25,000 property damage.



   (B)   In addition to such insurance, the applicant shall execute a
bond payable to the city in a sum of not less than $10,000, with corporate
surety approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety, that he or she will
strictly comply with the terms of the permit and that the applicant will
repair, compensate or reimburse the city for any cost or expense involved in
the repair of any public property which may be damaged by the move, and that
he or she will further pay damages to any person whatsoever, occasioned by
the moving.



(Ord. G-59-64, passed 7-8-1959)



§ 99.53  FEE FOR MOVING.



   The applicant, before the issuance of the permit and after complying
with the foregoing provisions, shall pay to the City Controller for the use
of the city the sum of $50 for each building or structure to be moved.



(Ord. G-59-64, passed 7-8-1959)



§ 99.54  MOVING BUILDINGS IN VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall move or attempt to move any
building or structure in the public ways of the city in violation of the
terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. G-59-64, passed 7-8-1959)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.55  DWELLING MAY BE DESTROYED IF IN VIOLATION.



   Any dwelling so found being moved along or over any of the streets of
the city may be removed by any police or police officers.



(Ord. 4494-1, passed 10-5-1953)



§ 99.56  EXCEPTION.



   This subchapter shall not apply to prefabricated homes being
transported from the factory to the site of erection in a knocked-down
condition, tool houses or other small structures used by contractors nor
house trailers.



(Ord. 4494-1, passed 10-5-1953)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 99.70  STREET COMMISSIONER; DUTIES; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   There is created the Office of Street Commissioner.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to inspect all
excavations and restoration of excavations made within the city limits.



   (C)   The Street Commissioner shall keep an accurate record of the
time, date and location of all excavations made in streets, alleys, sidewalks
or public places, the person, firm or corporation making the excavation, the
date of restoration and type of restoration.



   (D)   For his or her services performed by the Street Commissioner,
the same shall receive the fees designated herein as inspection fees.



(Ord. 4486, passed 8-3-1953)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter to
which no other specific penalty applies shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 99.01 shall be subject to
the fines and penalties listed in § 37.02.



   (C)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 99.15 or 99.21 or §§
99.50 or 99.54 shall be fined not more than $2,500. Each day’s violation
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (D)   The penalty for violating § 99.39 shall be $100 per day.



(Ord. G-65-226, passed 104-1965; Ord. G-01-03, passed 1-4-2001; Ord. G-09-14,
passed 5-4-2009; Ord. G-13-04, passed 2-21-2013)



CHAPTER 100:  TREES, SHRUBS AND GROUNDCOVERS



Section



   100.01   Definitions



   100.02   Jurisdiction



   100.03   Permits



   100.04   Plantings



   100.05   Tree plats



   100.06   Stumps



   100.07   Injurious actions against trees



   100.08   Development and redevelopment of property



   100.09   Trees, shrubs and groundcovers on private property



   100.10   Notices



   100.11   Arborists license and bond



   100.12   Obstruction or interference with agents of the Board



   100.13   Collection of donations, fees and fines



 



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD. The New Albany Board of Public Works and Safety or an agent
thereof.



   CITY PROPERTY. All land within the limits of any public street,
alleyway and other public place.



   CITY TREE, SHRUB or GROUNDCOVER. Any tree, shrub or groundcover located
on city property.



   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT. The measurement of a tree's diameter, measured
at a height of three and one-half feet above ground level.



   DRIPLINE. The width of a tree crown as measured by the lateral extent
of the foliage.



   GROUNDCOVER. With the exclusion of turf grass species and weeds, any
woody or herbaceous, perennial, annual or biennial ground-level plant
generally used as a landscape amenity.



   HAZARDOUS TREE. A tree, located anywhere within the corporate limits,
that poses an imminent threat to the safety of people or property.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association corporation, company
or organization of any kind.



   SHALL. The act referred to is always mandatory and never merely
suggestive.



   SHRUB. Any woody, low-growing, perennial plant generally supported by
multiple stems.



   TOPPING. The cutting back of the leading shoot or shoots of major limbs
which form the natural canopy of the tree so as to disfigure the tree's crown.



   TREE. Any woody, perennial plant with one or more trunks ordinarily
growing to definite heights and generally developing many branches.



   TREE CARE. The treating, spraying, trimming, pruning, removal and any
other maintenance or cultural work intended for the enhancement or
preservation of trees, shrubs or groundcovers and the removal and prevention
of any and all damages to trees, shrubs or groundcovers caused by pests,
blights diseases or any other cause.



   TREE PLAT. The unpaved portion of any city street right-of-way or
alleyway suitable for the planting of trees, shrubs, groundcovers or turf
grasses.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.02  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The Board shall seek the advice of the city's Tree Board in
all routine matters regarding or relating to tree care and the planting of
trees, shrubs and groundcovers on city property prior to taking action on the
matters.



   (B)   The Board shall have the authority to order, control and
regulate tree care and planting of trees, shrubs and groundcovers on city
property.



   (C)   The Board shall have the authority to adopt and enforce rules,
regulations and specifications relative to tree care and planting of trees,
shrubs and groundcovers on city property.



   (D)   The Board shall have the authority to order, control and
regulate the removal of dead and diseased trees, or portions thereof, which
constitute a menace to public safety and health, wherever located within the
city.



   (E)   The Board shall have the authority to regulate and prescribe
the terms and conditions upon which permits for planting and tree care shall
be issued.



   (F)   Upon the discovery of any destructive or communicable disease
or other pestilence which endangers the growth or health of trees or
threatens to spread disease or insect infestations, the Board shall, at once,
cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property upon which
the diseased or infested tree is situated, and the notice shall require the
property owner to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition
within reasonable time to be specified in the notice.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.03  PERMITS.



   (A)   Other than in emergency situations which threaten public
safety and require immediate action, no person shall perform tree care, as
defined in § 100.01, on any city tree, shrub or groundcover without first
obtaining the written permission of the Board.



   (B)   Permits are not required for work done by any of the
departments of the city, public and private utilities, or their agents and/or
contractors; provided, all parties have come into agreement with the Board
prior to proceeding with the work.



   (C)   Permits shall be made available without charge or fee.



   (D)   A notice served or decision made by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, Plan Commission or Common Council shall act as a permit.



   (E)   Permits shall describe the manner in which work shall be
performed and allot a time frame within which the work must be completed.



   (F)   Any permit shall become void if the terms of the permit are
violated.



   (G)   The granting or denial of permits by the Board shall be made
in accordance with the provisions set forth herein or as otherwise adopted by
the Board.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.04  PLANTINGS.



   (A)   No tree, shrub or groundcover shall be planted on city
property without prior written approval of the Board.



   (B)   The Board shall maintain a list of desirable tree, shrub and
groundcover species for planting on city property. Tree species shall be
categorized in three size classes based on mature height: small (under 20
feet), medium (20 to 40 feet) and large (over 40 feet).



   (C)   The spacing of tree plantings shall be in accordance with the
size class listed in division (B) of this section,  in that no trees may be
planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium
trees, 40 feet; large trees, 50 feet; except in special planting approved by
the Board.



   (D)   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and
sidewalks, except where planting wells are utilized, shall be in accordance
with the species size classes listed in division (B) of this section, and no
trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small
trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; large trees, four feet; except in
special planting approved by the Board.



   (E)   No tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines.



   (F)   No tree, other than species categorized as small trees in
division (B) of this section, shall be planted under or within ten feet
laterally of overhead utility wires.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.05  TREE PLATS.



   The Board shall have the right, power and authority granted to
municipalities under state law to require the owners of parcels of land
adjacent to any public street or alleyway of the city to maintain turf
grasses and weeds growing upon tree plats in a manner acceptable to the Board.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.06  STUMPS.



   (A)   All stumps of city trees and shrubs shall be removed below the
surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above
the surface of the ground.



   (B)   Stumps shall be removed in a timely manner as deemed
appropriate by the Board.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.07  INJURIOUS ACTIONS AGAINST TREES.



   (A)   No person shall place or keep any substance around any city
tree, shrub or groundcover which in any manner impedes the free entrance of
air and water to the roots of such plant or stunts the free growth of the
plant.



   (B)   In the event of excavation or construction near any city tree,
such guards as will effectively prevent injury to the tree shall be placed as
follows:



      (1)   A minimum of four feet from the trunk of any tree
measuring less than four inches diameter breast height;



      (2)   A minimum of eight feet from the trunk of any tree
measuring greater than four inches, but less than eight inches diameter
breast height; and



      (3)   At the dripline, as a minimum, for any tree measuring
greater than eight inches diameter breast height.



   (C)   In the event of excavation or construction near any city tree,
all building activity, building materials and debris shall be kept beyond the
dripline of the tree.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any manner of wire,
rope, chain, cable, nail, staple, tack or other device to attach or anchor
any structure or object onto, in or adjacent to any city tree, shrub or
groundcover without the written permission of the Board.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to top any city tree.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under
utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical, may be exempted from this section at the determination of the
Board.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.08  DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT OF PROPERTY.



   In accordance with the Zoning Code, Subdivision Control Ordinance and
other ordinances that regulate development, the Board shall review the
landscape portion of any site plan and may require changes, additions or
deletions of plant material specified in the site plan.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.09  TREES, SHRUBS AND GROUNDCOVERS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No property owner shall permit any part of any tree, shrub or
groundcover on his or her property to obstruct movement of vehicles or
pedestrians in the public right-of-way.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep trees
situated on property owned or controlled by them properly trimmed and in a
safe condition.



   (C)   The owner of any property within the corporate limits shall on
20-days' notice given by order of the Board, trim any tree, shrub or
groundcover on their property that is in violation of this chapter. If the
property owner fails to comply with the order, the Board shall cause the
tree, shrub or groundcover to be maintained in accordance with this chapter.



   (D)   The expense of tree care which is performed by the city, as
per division (C) herein, shall be a lien on the property of the owner and
shall be collected in the same manner as assessments for the cutting of weeds
if no payment is received for the services within 60 days of request for
payment by the Clerk-Treasurer. In addition to the above methods, the city
shall have the right to bring a civil action to recover any delinquent
charges, together with reasonable attorney's fees.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.10  NOTICES.



   (A)   No notice shall be required for the removal of any tree on
city property which has been determined by the Board to be hazardous.



   (B)   Where non-hazardous trees are concerned, notice of a proposed
tree removal shall be given to the public through a clear visual
identification of targeted trees at least two weeks in advance of the
proposed removal.



   (C)   Public and private utilities and their agents and contractors,
in the absence of an emergency, shall notify the city of their intent to
remove any city tree at least two weeks in advance of the proposed removal.



   (D)   All notices provided for herein shall be served upon any real
estate owner who is a resident of the city by leaving a correct copy of the
notice at the owner's last known place of residence. If the owner is not a
resident of the city, the notice may be served by sending a correct copy of
the notice by the United States certified mail, addressed to the owner at the
last known mailing address with a return receipt requested. If the residence
or address of the owner is unknown or cannot be ascertained, then notice may
be served by publishing the notice once each week for two consecutive weeks
in a daily newspaper of general circulation within the city. The period
specified in the notice shall be deemed to commence on the day following the
date the notice was sent or first published.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.11  ARBORISTS LICENSE AND BOND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of tree
care without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee
shall be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that, no license shall
be required of any public service company including utilities and their
agents and contractors or city employees doing the work in pursuit of their
public service endeavors. Before any license is issued, each applicant shall
first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 property damage
indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the
pursuit of endeavors herein described.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.12  OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH AGENTS OF THE BOARD.



   No person shall, in any manner, obstruct or interfere with the agents
or employees of the Board engaged in carrying out the provisions of this
chapter or any orders issued by the Board.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.13  COLLECTION OF DONATIONS, FEES AND FINES.



   All fees and fines connected to the enforcement of this chapter shall
be deposited into the Non-Reverting Tree Fund. Donations from businesses and
citizens in support of the New Albany Urban Forestry Program and future tree
planting projects shall also be deposited therein.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The City Forester and agents of the Board shall have authority
to do all acts necessary to enforce this chapter, including the issuance of
citations.



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is
subject to a fine of $50 per occurrence.



   (C)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.



   (D)   In addition to any fine imposed, any person whose violation of
the provisions of this chapter results in damage to trees may be liable for
the cost of those damages up to $5,000 for each tree.



(Ord. G-98-290, passed 12-17-1998)



CHAPTER 101:  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



   101.01   Suppression of disease in unlicensed child care facilities



§ 101.01  SUPPRESSION OF DISEASE IN UNLICENSED CHILD CARE FACILITIES.



   (A)   If it has reason to believe that a contagious and/or
communicable disease and/or illness is present in an unlicensed child care
home, the Floyd County Health Department may require any individual operating
an unlicensed child care home to cease all operations until the unlicensed
child care home has been properly cleaned, sanitized and disinfected to
eliminate the possibility of spreading the disease.



   (B)   The Floyd County Health Department may require an individual
operating an unlicensed child care home to hire professionals, who are
properly trained in the eradication of contagious and/or communicable
diseases, to clean, sanitize and disinfect the entire premises of the child
care home if any child for whom care is provided at the home is found to have
any contagious and/or communicable disease or illness.



   (C)   The Floyd County Health Department may require any individual
operating an unlicensed child care home to provide proof of immunizations for
each child for whom care is provided.



   (D)   In the event that any individual and/or unlicensed child care
home fails to comply with an order of the Floyd County Health Department
and/or the provisions of this section, the Floyd County Health Department may
issue an order requiring the unlicensed child care home to immediately cease
all operations until the individual and/or unlicensed child care home comes
into compliance.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit, in any
way, the authority and powers granted to the Floyd County Health Department
in I.C. 16-20-1-1 et seq.



(Ord. G-09-21, passed 5-21-2009)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT REGULATIONS





         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         112.   AMUSEMENTS





         113.   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM





         114.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES





         115.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS





         116.   MASSAGE PARLORS





         117.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS





         118.   PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS





         119.   TAXICABS





         120.   ADULT CABARETS





         121.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES





         122.   TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS





         123.   SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS PROHIBITED





         124.   SWIMMING POOLS




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT REGULATIONS



Section



   110.01   When license required



   110.02   Application for license



   110.03   Forms



   110.04   Signatures required upon issuance



   110.05   Investigations or inspections



   110.06   Fees



   110.07   Posting of license



   110.08   Expiration of licenses; notification



   110.09   Revocation of license



   110.10   Building and premises to comply with city requirements



   110.11   Inspection of premises



   110.12   Change of location



   110.13   Operation as nuisance prohibited



§ 110.01  WHEN LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business
or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be
subject to this license requirement if, by himself or herself or through an
agent, employee or partner, he or she holds himself or herself forth as being
engaged in the business or occupation; solicits patronage therefor, actively
or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of the business or
occupation in the city.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Applications for all licenses and permits required by
ordinance shall be made in writing to the City Controller in the absence of
provision to the contrary.



   (B)   (1)   Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any,
the time covered and the fee to be paid.



      (2)   Each application shall contain such additional
information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the city officials in
issuing the permit or license applied for.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.03  FORMS.



   Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the City Controller.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.04  SIGNATURES REQUIRED UPON ISSUANCE.



   Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the Mayor
and the City Controller in the absence of any provision to the contrary.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.05  INVESTIGATIONS OR INSPECTIONS.



   On the receipt of an application for a license or permit where
ordinances of the city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the
issuance of the permit or license, the City Controller shall refer the
application to the proper officer for making the investigation within 48
hours of the time of receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the
investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within ten days after receiving the application or a copy thereof.
The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection in regard to
the licenses in the connection of the care and handling of food, the
prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease. The Building Inspector
shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the
construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations,
except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by
some other officer designated by the Mayor.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.06  FEES.



   In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the City Controller. When an applicant has not engaged in the
business until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the
license fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter
or fraction thereof during which the business has been or will be conducted.
Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of the
Corporation Fund.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.07  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the city to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for the business at all times.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.08  EXPIRATION OF LICENSES; NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the
fiscal year of the city where they are issued, where no provision to the
contrary is made.



   (B)   The City Controller shall mail to all licensees of the city a
statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee three
weeks prior to the date of the expiration, if an annual license. Failure to
send out the notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not
excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal
thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a
license.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.09  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the Board of
Public Works and Safety at any time during the life of the license or permit
for any material violation by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance
provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or to the premises occupied. The revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed. No license will be revoked without prior
written notice to the license holder and an opportunity for a hearing within
seven days.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.10  BUILDING AND PREMISES TO COMPLY WITH CITY REQUIREMENTS.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no
permit shall be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to
be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the
city. No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of the Zoning Code of
the city.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.11  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for, or in
connection with, the operation of a licensed business of occupation are
provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure
compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to
be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any
officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make the
inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.



   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the
municipality whose business is governed by the provision to give to any
authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same sufficient
samples of the material or commodity for the analysis.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
City Controller may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any
licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any such officer or
employee who is authorized to make inspection or take the sample to make the
inspection or take an adequate sample of the commodity, or who interferes
with the officer or employee while in the performance of his or her duty in
making the inspection. No license shall be revoked for the cause unless
written demand is made on the licensee or person in charge of the premises,
in the name of the city, stating that the inspection or sample is desired at
the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.12  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted
act may be changed, provided ten-days' notice is given to the City Controller
in the absence of any provision to the contrary, and provided further that
the building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of the ordinances are
complied with.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 110.13  OPERATION AS NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated so as to
amount to a nuisance in fact.



(Ord. G-79-736, passed 3-5-1979)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   111.01   River Heritage Overlook Cultural Center



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  RIVER HERITAGE OVERLOOK CULTURAL CENTER.



   The sale, consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages within the
area of the River Heritage Overlook Cultural Center, as defined east at the
concrete floodwall just east of East 6th Street, west to the Jaycee Park
marker just east of West 10th Street, north at the north edge of the levy,
and south to the Ohio River's edge, is prohibited except during those special
events held in such area as determined and designated by the River Heritage
Overlook Cultural Center Committee.



(Ord. G-88-130, passed 8-18-1988)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   An individual found to be in violation of the provisions of § 111.01
as a first offense shall pay a civil penalty of $25 to the City Clerk. For
any subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter, the person shall
be fined not less than $26, nor more than $100.



(Ord. G-88-130, passed 8-18-1988)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Coin-Operated Amusement Devices



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License required



   112.03   License fee



   112.04   Persons underage prohibited to play



   112.05   Revocation of license



COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any amusement machine or device
operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for
the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is
charged. The term does not include vending machines in which are not
incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any
coin-operated mechanical musical devices.



   OPERATOR. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
sets up for operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose of
operation by another any device as herein defined, whether such setting up
for operation, leasing or distributing is for a fixed charge or rental, or on
the basis of a division of the income derived from the device, or otherwise.



   PROPRIETOR. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
club who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor, has under his, her or its
control any establishment, place or premises in or at which the device is
placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or
play.



(Ord. G-79-737, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
proprietor of coin-operated amusement devices without having obtained a
proper license. This license shall be obtained pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 110.



(Ord. G-79-737, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 112.03  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee for each proprietor shall be $25 per year for each
coin-operated amusement device, up to four devices. For the operation of four
or more coin-operated amusement devices, the license fee for each proprietor
shall be $100 per year.



(Ord. G-79-737, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 112.04  PERSONS UNDERAGE PROHIBITED TO PLAY.



   No proprietor shall permit or allow any person under the age of 16
years to operate or play any coin-operated amusement devices, as defined
herein, during the hours in which the city's public schools are in session.



(Ord. G-79-737, passed 3-5-1979)



§ 112.05  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Controller shall have the right to revoke any license issued
hereunder pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 110.



(Ord. G-79-737, passed 3-5-1979)



CHAPTER 113:  CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM



Section



   113.01   Short title



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Grant of authority



   113.04   Compliance with applicable laws and codes



   113.05   Indemnification



   113.06   Construction standards



   113.07   Street vacation or abandonment



   113.08   Conditions on street occupancy



   113.09   Operational regulations



   113.10   Service to municipal buildings and schools



   113.11   Rates



   113.12   Payment to city



   113.13   Assignment, transfer, lease or merger



   113.14   Forfeiture of franchise



   113.15   Failure to insist upon compliance



   113.16   Written acceptance



§ 113.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the cable television
franchise code.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. A system of coaxial cables, fiber optic cable,
waveguides or other conductors and equipment for the reception, amplification
and distribution of television, radio or other signals to subscribing members
of the public for a fee.



   COMPANY. The grantee of rights for a franchise.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. G-77-679, passed 11-7-1977; Ord.
G-79-747, passed 6-4-1979; Ord. G-97-178, passed 5-6-1997)



§ 113.03  GRANT OF AUTHORITY.



   (A)   There is granted by the city to the company the right and
privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain a cable television system
for the reception, amplification and distribution of video and audio signals
to subscribing members of the public for a fee, for a period of eight years
from and after the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   The company is granted by the city the right and privilege to
construct and maintain the cable television system in, upon, along, across,
above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now
laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, in
the city.



   (C)   The right to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways
and places for the purpose herein set forth shall not be exclusive, and the
city reserves the right to grant a similar use of the streets, alleys, public
ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise.



   (D)   In connection with the right and privilege, herein granted,
the Council has examined and approved the legal character, financial,
technical and other qualifications of the company, as well as the adequacy
and feasibility of its construction arrangements, as part of a public
proceeding affording due process.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. G-89-204, passed 11-16-1989; Ord.
G-97-178, passed 5-6-1997)



§ 113.04  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND CODES.



   (A)   The company shall, at all times during the life of this
franchise, be subject to all lawful exercises of the police power of the city.



   (B)   The company agrees to comply with all valid local, state and
federal regulations, including the rules and regulations of the FCC.



   (C)   Any amendments or modifications of § 76.31 of the rules of
the FCC shall be incorporated into this franchise within one year of the
adoption of the modification, or at the time of the renewal of this
franchise, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.05  INDEMNIFICATION.



   The company shall indemnify, protect and save the city harmless from
and against any and all losses, costs or expenses resulting from damage to
any property or bodily injury or death to any person, including payments made
under any worker's compensation law, which arise out of or occur by reason of
the exercise by the company of the rights granted in this franchise. The
company shall carry insurance to protect itself and the city from and against
all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities
which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of the
loss, injury or damage. The insurance policy shall specifically provide that
the city shall be a named insured. The amounts of the insurance against
liability due to physical damage to property shall be not less than $50,000
as to any one claim, and not less than $200,000 aggregate in any single
policy year; and against liability  due to bodily injury or to death of
persons, not less than $100,000 as to any one person, and not less than
$300,000 as to all such claims arising from any one accident. The company
shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it and the
city from any and all claims under the worker's compensation laws in effect
that may be applicable to the company. All insurance required by this section
shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire period of this
franchise. The policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof,
shall be filed with the City Clerk of the city.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.06  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   The company shall construct a substantial portion of its cable
system and commence cable television operations within one year after it has
received a certificate of compliance from the FCC, and it shall thereafter
equitably and reasonably extend the system so as to enable it to render
service to all feasible areas within the city within three years after it has
received a certificate of compliance from the FCC.



   (B)   With regard to the company's construction, operation and
maintenance of its cable television system, the following standards shall
apply:



      (1)   The construction, maintenance and use of the company's
cable television system shall comply with the standards for materials and
engineering and all other provisions of the National Electric Safety Code and
the National Electrical Code; and



      (2)   The city shall have the right to supervise all
construction and installation work performed subject to the provisions of
this chapter and to make such inspections as it shall find necessary to
ensure compliance with governing ordinances.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.07  STREET VACATION OR ABANDONMENT.



   In the event any street, alley, public highway or utility easement, or
any portion thereof, used by the company shall be vacated by the city or the
use thereof discontinued by the company during the term of this franchise,
the company shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless
specifically permitted to leave them there, and upon the removal thereof,
restore, repair or reconstruct the street area where the removal has occurred
in such condition as may be required by the city. In the event of failure,
neglect or refusal of the company, after 30-days' notice by Common Council to
repair, improve or maintain such street proportions, the city may do the work
or cause it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared by the
city shall be paid by the company, and collection may be by court action or
otherwise.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.08  CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the company within the city shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of all streets, alleys and
other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the
streets, alleys or other public ways and places.



   (B)   Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense
and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed to as good
condition as before the work was commenced, and shall maintain the
restoration in an approved condition for a period of three years.



   (C)   Relocation. In the event that at any time during the period of
this franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or
width of any street, alley or other public way, the company, upon reasonable
notice by the city, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other system fixtures at its own
expense.



   (D)   Temporary removal of wire for building moving. The company
shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued
by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of
buildings. The expense of the temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the company shall have
the authority to require payment in advance. The company shall be given not
less than 120-hours' advance notice to arrange for the temporary wire changes.



   (E)   Trimming of trees. The company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging any street, alley or other public way so as
to prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with its wires,
cables or other equipment.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.09  OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The company shall, while operating under this franchise,
maintain efficient cable television service in the city. However, the company
shall not be liable for loss or damage caused by interruption or failure of
service due to accident or breakdown of lines or equipment, strike, riot, act
of God or the public enemy, or such other causes beyond its control, or due
to shutdowns for reasonable periods to make repairs to equipment; but the
company shall in these cases exercise proper diligence in repairing the
equipment and resume operation of same without unnecessary delay.



   (B)   The company has adopted, and the Common Council has approved,
procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints regarding its
cable television operations. Notice of the procedures for reporting and
resolving complaints shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial
subscription to the cable television system operated by the company. Further,
the company shall have a local business office or agent in the city for the
purpose of receiving notice of, investigating, and seeing that proper steps
are taken to effect the resolution of any problems relating to service or
other aspects of its cable television operations. The local manager shall
have primary responsibility for the continuing administration of this
franchise and for the implementation of the procedures of this division.



   (C)   The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of
the company's plans, contracts and engineering, accounting, financial,
statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the
operation of the company and to all other records required to be kept
hereunder.



   (D)   A copy of any and all rules, regulations, terms and conditions
adopted by the company for the conduct of its business shall be filed with
the City Clerk; and a copy shall also be available for public inspection at
the office of the company.



   (E)   This franchise shall not in any way be construed as a license
or permit to the company to engage in the sale or service of radio or
television sets or equipment. As part of the consideration for the granting
of this franchise, the company shall not engage in the sale or service of TV
sets, appliances or parts.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.10  SERVICE TO MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND SCHOOLS.



   (A)   The company agrees to and shall furnish, without installation
charge or monthly service fee, three connections to the City-County Building,
one of which shall be directly into the police station facilities, and one
connection to all fire houses and any other municipal building or buildings
designated by the Common Council, and to all public and parochial,
elementary, secondary and college level schools located within the city.



   (B)   The company shall reserve one channel for use by public and
parochial elementary, secondary and college level schools.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.11  RATES.



   The rates or charges which the company assesses its subscribers for
cable television services shall be at all times fair and reasonable.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.12  PAYMENT TO CITY.



   (A)   The company shall pay to the city, for and in consideration of
the right and privilege to conduct cable television operations pursuant to
this franchise, an annual fee in a percentage of its gross subscriber
revenues (as defined pursuant to the rules of the FCC) which are derived from
its cable television operations in the city, the percentage to be determined
by the Common Council, with each year's fee due and payable to the City Clerk
by January 31 for the preceding calendar year.



   (B)   In the event of revocation or termination of this franchise,
the final annual fee payment shall be prorated from the immediately preceding
January 1 to the date of termination of service.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. G-89-204, passed 11-16-1989)



§ 113.13  ASSIGNMENT, TRANSFER, LEASE OR MERGER.



   (A)   This franchise shall not be assigned, nor shall control of the
company be transferred, without the prior approval of the Common Council,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (B)   The company shall not consolidate or merge or enter into any
agreement in restriction of competition with any other person, firm or
corporation engaged in the transmission of television signals by cable to
members of the public within limits of the city, and shall not purchase or
otherwise acquire all or any portion of any system or plant within the city
of any other person, firm or corporation engaged in the transmission of
television signals by cable to members of the public within the limits of the
city without the prior consent of the Council, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.14  FORFEITURE OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   The city may declare a forfeiture of this franchise and revoke
the same in the event the company:



      (1)   Substantially violates any provision of this chapter,
where the violation remains uncured for a period of 30 days subsequent to
receipt by the company of a written notice of the violation, except where the
violation is not the fault of the company or is due to excusable neglect; or



      (2)   Practices any fraud or deceit upon the city.



   (B)   The forfeiture shall be declared by an ordinance of the Common
Council duly adopted after 20-days' notice to the company, and shall, in no
way, affect any of the city's rights under this franchise, may be terminated
and cancelled under this section, except for nonpayment of monies due to the
city from company, the company shall be provided with an opportunity to be
heard at a public hearing before the Council upon ten-days' written notice to
the company of the time and place of the public hearing; provided that, the
notice shall affirmatively cite the reasons alleged to constitute a cause for
revocation; and provided further that notice of the public hearing shall be
published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least five days
before the hearing.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.15  FAILURE TO INSIST UPON COMPLIANCE.



   Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms or
conditions of this chapter shall not constitute a general waiver or
relinquishment of any terms or conditions, but the same shall be and remain
at all times in full force and effect.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



§ 113.16  WRITTEN ACCEPTANCE.



   The company shall, within ten days after this chapter becomes
effective, file in the office of the City Clerk a written acceptance of this
chapter. Failure on the part of the company to file the written acceptance
within this time shall be deemed an abandonment and rejection of the rights
conferred hereby, and this chapter shall thereupon be null and void. The
acceptance shall be unqualified and shall be construed to be an acceptance of
all the terms, conditions and restrictions contained in this chapter.



(Ord. G-77-639, passed 1-3-1977)



CHAPTER 114:  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES



Section



   114.01   License required



   114.02   Application for license



   114.03   Standards for issuance of license



   114.04   Public hearing



   114.05   Licensing agency



   114.06   Revocation of license



   114.07   Disclaimer of liability



Cross-reference:



   Emergency telephone system, see §§ 92.15 through 92.17



§ 114.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish,
operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess
to be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients
upon the streets, alleys or public ways or places of the city unless he or
she holds a currently valid license for an ambulance issued pursuant to this
chapter. An ambulance operated by an agency of the federal government shall
not be required to be licensed hereunder.



   (B)   No ambulance shall be operated for ambulance purposes, and no
individual shall drive, attend or permit it to be operated for such purposes,
on the streets, alleys or any public way or place in the city, unless it
shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of a person who is
holding a currently valid license as an advanced life support emergency
medical technician.



   (C)   However, no such license shall be required for an ambulance or
for the driver or emergency medical technician of an ambulance:



      (1)   Which is rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in
the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed
ambulances of the city are insufficient or unable to cope; or



      (2)   Operated from a location or headquarters outside of the
city in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the limits of
the city to locations within the city; but no such ambulance shall be used to
pick up patients within the city for transportation to locations within the
city unless properly licensed under this chapter.



   (D)   All ambulance services now operating in the city shall have
six months from the date of enactment of this chapter to meet the standards
required herein.



(Ord. G-87-194, passed 8-3-1987)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Applications for ambulance licenses hereunder shall be made upon such
forms as may be prepared or prescribed by the Common Council of the city, and
shall contain:



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the
ambulance;



   (B)   The location of the station or stations at which the ambulance
will be based in the city;



   (C)   The trade or other name, if any, under which the applicant
does business or proposes to do business;



   (D)   The training and experience of the applicant in the
transportation and care of patients meeting all criteria required for
licensing by the state;



   (E)   A description of each ambulance, including make, model, year
of manufacture, motor and chassis number, current state license numbers, the
length of time the ambulance has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia,
name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to
designate applicant's ambulance;



   (F)   A description of the communication system to be used by the
ambulance company;



   (G)   Staffing provisions and qualifications;



   (H)   A certification of liability insurance for each and every
ambulance owned or operated by the applicant in an amount not less than
$300,000 providing for the payment of damages for the injury or death of
individuals in accidents or damage to personal property, with proper
endorsement to hold the city harmless therefor;



   (I)   Such other information as may be deemed reasonably necessary
to a fair determination of compliance with this chapter; and



   (J)   An accompanying license fee of $100 per ambulance to be
operated in the city.



(Ord. G-87-194, passed 8-3-1987)



§ 114.03  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such:



      (1)   Be suitable for the transportation of patients from the
standpoint of health, sanitation and safety, and be maintained in suitable
premises;



      (2)   Contain equipment conforming with the standards,
requirements and regulations provided for herein, which equipment shall be in
proper and good condition for the use;



      (3)   Currently comply with all applicable laws and local
regulations relating to health, sanitation and safety; and



      (4)   Be equipped with such lights, sirens and special
markings to designate it as an ambulance.



   (B)   Required equipment in each ambulance shall include, at all
times when the ambulance is in use as such, all equipment necessary for light
rescue, protracted extrication, dressing wounds, splinting fractures,
controlling hemorrhages, providing oxygen, assisting respiration, monitoring
blood pressure, pulse and respiration rates, assisting in emergency
childbirth, cardiopulmonary support and management of mentally deranged.



   (C)   The ambulance drivers and advanced life support emergency
medical technicians shall be duly licensed by the state.



   (D)   The equipment and licensed personnel shall meet the Floyd
County Memorial Hospital requirements of a sponsoring, supervisory hospital.



   (E)   A permanent log of ambulance runs shall be maintained for
inspection.



   (F)   The licensee shall maintain a permanent, 24-hour station or
substation within the city.



(Ord. G-87-194, passed 8-3-1987)



§ 114.04  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   Upon application being filed with the City Controller, the
matter shall be scheduled for hearing by the Emergency Medical Services Board
of the city, at its next regularly scheduled meeting.



   (B)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Board shall issue
a license to operate for a period of one year if it finds:



      (1)   The public convenience and necessity require the
proposed ambulance service;



      (2)   The applicant is a responsible and proper person to
conduct or work in the proposed business; and/or



      (3)   All required criteria specified in this chapter have
been met.



(Ord. G-87-194, passed 8-3-1987)



§ 114.05  LICENSING AGENCY.



   This chapter shall be administered by the Board of Public Works and
Safety of the city.



   (A)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Board to administer the
provisions of this chapter, to receive applications for licensing, to conduct
such hearings as may be necessary to determine whether licenses should be
issued, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter by
regulating licensees and to conduct suspension and revocation proceedings
when required.



   (B)   Injunctive relief. The Board is empowered to seek injunctive
relief for violations of this chapter should other means prove ineffective,
and a threat to public health and safety exist.



(Ord. G-87-194, passed 8-3-1987)



§ 114.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   An ambulance license may be suspended or revoked for the
failure of the licensee to comply with, or his or her violation of, any
applicable standards, provisions or requirements of this chapter or of any
regulations promulgated hereunder, but only after warning and a period of 30
days for compliance with the warning by the licensee.



   (B)   The licensee shall be afforded the opportunity to appear
before the Board of Public Works and Safety for full evidentiary hearing on
any alleged noncompliance or violation.



   (C)   Any sanction, suspension or revocation decision shall be in
writing and shall be promptly transmitted to the licensee to whom it refers.



   (D)   The licensee or applicant shall have the right to appeal any
decision, order, regulation, suspension or revocation to the Common Council
of the city by written request within 30 days of the Board action for which
review is sought.



(Ord. G-87-194, passed 8-3-1987)



§ 114.07  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
administering agency for any damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. G-87-194, passed 8-3-1987)



CHAPTER 115:  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



Drive-In Restaurants



   115.01   Definition



   115.02   Certain acts prohibited on premises



   115.03   Driving through premises



   115.04   Parking prohibited by other than patrons



Board of Health Fees



   115.20   Applicability; administration



   115.21   Definitions



   115.22   Registration and licensing



   115.23   Operational requirements and inspections



   115.24   License fees



   115.25   Enforcement



Beds and Breakfast



   115.35   Definitions



   115.36   Permits



   115.37   Permit fees



   115.38   Inspection



   115.39   Violations



   115.40   Compliance and enforcement



   115.41   Appeals section



   115.42   Conflict of interest



   115.43   Partial invalidity of provisions



   115.44   Repeal and effective date



 



   115.99   Penalty



DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS



§ 115.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, ice cream
or other food or beverage is served directly to or is permitted to be
consumed by patrons in vehicles parked on or adjacent to the premises of such
a restaurant.



(Ord. G-65-197, passed 4-5-1965)



§ 115.02  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person shall race the motor of any vehicle, start or stop
any vehicle suddenly without cause, squeal the tires, blow the horn or make
or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise by any means whatsoever,
while on or adjacent to the premises of a drive-in restaurant, so as to cause
a nuisance.



   (B)   No person, whether in or out of any vehicle, shall drink any
beer or any other alcoholic beverage, while on or adjacent to the premises of
a drive-in restaurant.



   (C)   No person shall loiter as set forth in this division (C).



      (1)   (a)   A person commits a violation if he or she
loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for
law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety
of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify
himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or
herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct. No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the
police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.



         (b)   Any police officer may arrest any person suspected
of being a loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears
that the delay in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would
result in the suspect's escape.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being
warned by a police officer, or where a "no loitering" sign or signs have been
posted, to loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public
sidewalk, street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of
private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct
unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be
unlawful for any person to block, obstruct or prevent free access to the
entrance to any building open to the public.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near
any thoroughfare or place open to the public for the purpose of inducing,
enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution.
Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the
action is consistent with the intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure
another to commit an act of prostitution are that the person is a known
prostitute or panderer and repeatedly beckons, in the attempt to stop or
engage male or female passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or
attempts to stop motor vehicles by engaging their operators by hailing,
waving of arms or other bodily gestures. The violator's conduct must be such
as to demonstrate a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure
another to commit an act of prostitution. No arrest shall be made for a
violation of this division unless the arresting officer first affords the
person an opportunity to explain his or her conduct and no one shall be
convicted of violating this division if it appears at trial that the
explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.



      (4)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACEhas the
following definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:  an area generally visible to public view, including
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not) and buildings open to the general public,
including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the
doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing
them.



(Ord. G-65-197, passed 4-5-1965)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.03  DRIVING THROUGH PREMISES.



   No person shall drive any vehicle onto the premises of a drive-in
restaurant and then drive out of the premises without parking the vehicle,
unless there is no unoccupied parking space available on the premises, nor
shall any person cruise without parking, except for bona fide reasons
relating to negotiating traffic or conducting any lawful business.



(Ord. G-65-197, passed 4-5-1965)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  PARKING PROHIBITED BY OTHER THAN PATRONS.



   (A)   No person shall leave any vehicle unoccupied on any drive-in
restaurant premises without the knowledge and consent of the operator of the
restaurant, unless the person is inside of the restaurant building.



   (B)   Any unoccupied vehicle may be towed away by the city at the
expense of the owner.



(Ord. G-65-197, passed 4-6-1965)  Penalty, see § 115.99



BOARD OF HEALTH FEES



§ 115.20  APPLICABILITY; ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   This subchapter shall apply within the incorporated areas of
the city.



   (B)   The administration and enforcement of this subchapter is
vested in the Floyd County Health Board (Health Board) appointed pursuant to
I.C. 16-20-2-6, the County Health Officer appointed pursuant to I.C.
16-20-2-16 and the County Health Department (Department) created and
established pursuant to I.C. 16-20-2-2.



(Ord. A-00-64, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 115.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.



   DEPARTMENT. The Floyd County Health Department, being an agency of
local government, created and acting pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 16-20
et seq., and its duly authorized employees and representatives.



   HEALTH BOARD. The Floyd County Board of Health duly constituted and
acting pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 16-20 et seq., and its duly
authorized representatives.



   HEALTH OFFICER. The Floyd County Health Officer duly appointed by the
Floyd County Board of Health and acting pursuant to the provisions of I.C.
16-20 et seq., and his or her duly authorized representatives.



   MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any retail food establishment capable
of being readily moved from location to location or one without a fixed
location.



   RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. An operation that:



      (1)   Stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends or otherwise
provides food for human consumption, such as:



         (a)   A restaurant;



         (b)   A satellite or catered feeding operation;



         (c)   A catering operation if the operation provides
food directly to a consumer or to a conveyance used to transport people;



         (d)   A market;



         (e)   A grocery store;



         (f)   A convenience store;



         (g)   A vending location;



         (h)   A conveyance used to transport people;



         (i)   An institution; or



         (j)   A food bank.



      (2)   Relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly
or indirectly through a delivery service, such as home delivery of grocery
orders or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by
common carriers;



      (3)   Includes an element of the operation, such as a
transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a
vending location or satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding
location is permitted (licensed) by proper authority;



      (4)   Is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary or
permanent facility or location, where consumption is on or off the premises,
and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food; and



      (5)   Is a bed and breakfast establishment as defined and
regulated under I.C. 16-41-31 et seq.



   TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any retail food establishment
which shall operate for a period of time not to exceed 14 days.



(Ord. A-00-64, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 115.22  REGISTRATION AND LICENSING.



   (A)   Except as provided by applicable law, rule or regulation, or
except as expressly provided by this subchapter, no person, firm or
corporation shall operate or continue to operate a retail food establishment
in the city (including mobile and temporary establishments) without first
having registered with and obtained a license from the Health Department to
do so. Applications for a retail food establishment license shall be
submitted on forms provided by the Health Department.



   (B)   No license to operate a retail food establishment shall be
issued except after an inspection of the proposed establishment by the Health
Officer (or his or her designee) and a finding that same conforms with the
minimum requirements therefor as established by applicable law and the rules
of the state's Department of Health. To allow for verification that the
proposed retail food establishment is constructed, equipped and otherwise
meets the requirements of applicable law, rules and regulations, an
application for a new license shall be submitted to the Health Department at
least 30 days prior to the anticipated date for commencement of operations.



   (C)   Licenses for non-temporary retail food establishments shall
expire on June 30 following the date of issuance. Licenses for temporary
retail food establishments shall expire not later than the fourteenth day
following the date of issuance.



   (D)   A separate license is required for each retail food
establishment owned and/or operated by an applicant and a license issued by
the Health Department is not transferable. Upon issuance, a license shall be
prominently displayed upon the premises of the retail food establishment.



   (E)   No license under this subchapter shall be required of an
organization which is exempt from the application of I.C. 16-42-5-4, and no
fee shall be collected pursuant to § 115.24. However, the remaining
provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the retail food establishment
operated by the organization.



(Ord. A-00-64, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 115.23  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All retail food establishments shall be maintained and
operated in accordance with applicable provisions of I.C. Title 16, together
with such rules and regulations which may be promulgated, from time to time,
by the Indiana Department of Health and the county's Health Department, all
of which code provisions, rules and regulations are incorporated herein by
reference and made a part hereof.



   (B)   All retail food establishments shall be subject to inspection
by the Health Officer, from time to time, to assure compliance with this
subchapter and applicable law, rules and regulations, and the operator of a
retail food establishment shall, upon request, permit access to all parts
thereof and allow the copying of all records relative to the enforcement of
this subchapter.



   (C)   Upon finding a violation of this section, including the laws,
rules and regulations made a part hereof by reference, the Health Officer
shall proceed in accordance with the requirements of I.C. 16-42-5-25;
provided, upon finding such a violation by the holder of a license for a
temporary retail food establishment, the Health Officer may order immediate
corrective action, and upon the failure to comply with such order in a timely
manner, the Health Officer may summarily revoke the temporary license and
forbid the further sale or serving of food pursuant to the temporary license.



(Ord. A-00-64, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 115.24  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   The following fees shall be payable by the applicant for a
retail food establishment license:



      (1)   For a temporary retail food establishment license: the
sum of $5 per day of operation, but not to exceed the sum of $25;



      (2)   For a restaurant, tavern, retail food store or similar
retail food establishment: the sum of $75; and



      (3)   For all other retail food establishments: the sum of $50.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing fees, the Health Department shall
collect the printing costs of plan review packets if required in connection
with new or remodeled retail food establishments.



   (C)   For licenses which upon initial issuance will expire in fewer
than 180 days from the date thereof, the applicant shall pay one-half of the
fee set forth in divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section.



(Ord. A-00-64, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 115.25  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, and except in
those instances of a violation of a statute, rule, or regulation having an
established penalty or remedy therefor, enforcement of this subchapter as
against a person violating the terms and provisions of same shall be in
accordance with the provisions of I.C. 34-28-5. An action to enforce this
subchapter shall be brought in the name of the Health Officer or the Health
Board, as appropriate, and upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence of a
violation hereof, judgment shall be entered against the defendant for a sum
of not less than $100 for each violation. A separate violation of this
subchapter shall be deemed to occur for each day that a person shall be in
violation of the terms and provisions hereof.



   (B)   In addition to the remedy set forth in division (A) above, an
action may be brought for mandatory or injunctive relief as against any
person violating the terms and provisions of this subchapter, which action
shall be brought in the name of the Health Officer or Health Board, as
appropriate.



   (C)   To the extent permitted by law and this subchapter, an action
under division (A) above may be joined with an action under division (B)
above, and to any judgment in favor of the Health Officer and/or Health Board
shall be added costs of the action, reasonable attorney fees and expenses
incurred by the Department in the enforcement of this subchapter.



   (D)   In all actions under this subchapter, the Health Board and/or
the Health Officer shall be represented by the attorney retained by the
Health Board pursuant to I.C. 16-20-1-1.



(Ord. A-00-64, passed 12-4-2000)



BEDS AND BREAKFAST



§ 115.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT (410 I.A.C. 7-15.5). An operator
occupied residence that:



      (1)   Provides sleeping accommodations to the public for a fee;



      (2)   Has no more than 14 guest rooms;



      (3)   Provides breakfast to its guests as part of the fee; and



      (4)   Provides sleeping accommodations for no more than 30
consecutive days to a particular guest.



   CHIEF FOOD SPECIALIST. The official, as defined below, who has primary
responsibility over bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, and temporary food establishment inspections.



   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.  For purposes of this subchapter, a situation in
which the private financial interest of the official, the official's spouse,
ex-spouse, siblings, in-laws, children and/or unemancipated child, may
influence the judgment in the performance of a public duty. The official may
be subject to other ethical requirements in addition to those set forth
herein.



   CRITICAL VIOLATION. A condition that is more likely than other
violations to significantly contribute to food contamination, illness, or an
environmental health hazard.



   ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST.  An official hired by the Health
Officer and designated as environmental health specialist.



   ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPERVISOR.  The official who has primary
responsibility over all environmental health specialists.



   HAZARD ANALYSIS CRITICAL CONTROL POINT (HACCP) PLAN (410 I.A.C.
7-24).  A written document that delineates the formal procedures for
following the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles developed by
the National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods.



   HEALTH DEPARTMENT.  The Floyd County Health Department, having
jurisdiction over bed and breakfast establishments, retail food
establishments, and temporary food establishments.



   HEALTH OFFICER. The person, duly appointed, by the Floyd County Health
Department under I.C. 16-20-2-16 having jurisdiction in Floyd County or his
or her duly authorized representative.



   HEARING BOARD.  A subcommittee of Floyd County Board of Health
comprised of at least four members of the Floyd County Board of Health. The
Hearing Board shall not include the Health Officer or any other employee of
the Health Department.



   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. Any circumstance or situation, which in the
opinion of the Health Officer, presents a serious health risk to the public.



   INSPECTION REPORT.  The document prepared by the Health Department
that is completed as the result of the inspection and provided to an
operator, as defined below.



   OFFICIAL.  Any environmental health specialist of Floyd County,
Indiana.



   OPERATOR.  Person, as defined below, who has a primary oversight
responsibility for operation of the establishment through ownership, lease,
or contractual agreement, and who is responsible for the storage,
preparation, display, transportation or serving of food to the public.



   ORDER.  A Health Department action of particular applicability that
determines the legal rights, duties, privileges, immunities, or other legal
interests of one or more specific persons, including a permit, as defined
below.



   PERMIT.  The document issued by the Health Department that authorizes
a person, as defined below, to be an operator of a bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, or temporary food establishment.



   PERSON. Means and includes, an individual, agent, association, business
organization, cooperative, corporation, entity, firm, institution,
municipality or governmental unit, partnership, proprietorship, school, trust
or estate.



   PERSON IN CHARGE.  Shall mean the individual present at a retail food
establishment who is responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.



   RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT (410 I.A.C. 7-24).



      (1)   An establishment that stores, prepares, packages,
serves, or otherwise provides food for human consumption, including:



         (a)   A restaurant;



         (b)   A satellite or catered feeding location;



         (c)   A catering operation if the operation provides
food directly or indirectly to a consumer;



         (d)   A market;



         (e)   A grocery store;



         (f)   A convenience store;



         (g)   An institution;



         (h)   A food bank; or



         (i)   A food service establishment that relinquishes
possession of food to a consumer directly or indirectly through a delivery
service, such as home delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout
orders, or other delivery service.



      (2)   The term RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT includes, but is not
limited to, the following:



         (a)   An element of the establishment, such as a
transportation vehicle that supplies a vending location or satellite feeding
location.



         (b)   An operation that is conducted in a mobile,
stationary, temporary, or permanent facility or location, where consumption
is on or off the premises, and regardless of whether there is a charge for
the food.



      (3)   The term RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT does not include the
following:



         (a)   An establishment that offers only prepackaged
foods that are not potentially hazardous.



         (b)   A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut
fresh fruits and vegetables.



         (c)   A food processing plant operated under I.C.
16-42-5.



         (d)   A private home where food is prepared by a member
of an organization that is operating under I.C. 16-42-5-4 and is sold or
offered for human consumption.



         (e)   A bed and breakfast establishment as defined and
regulated under I.C. 16-41-31 and 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5.



         (f)   A private home that receives catered or
home-delivered food.



         (g)   A private home which provides childcare and is not
subject to I.C. 12-13-5.



         (h)   A private home which provides residential care and
is not subject to I.C. 12-15 and/or I.C. 23-2-4.



         (i)   A private home.



   RETAIL FOOD MARKET ESTABLISHMENT. Any retail food establishment,
including, but not limited to, a grocery store, convenience store, salvage
store, discount store, meat market, poultry market, fish market, fresh fruit
and vegetable market, delicatessen, confectionary, candy kitchen, nut store,
retail bakery store, or any food establishment, whether fixed or movable,
where food is intended primarily for human consumption off the premises of
such retail food establishment, is manufactured, produced, stored, prepared,
handled, sold, or offered with or without charge. Provided, however, that the
provisions of this subchapter shall not include meat or poultry
slaughterhouses.



   RETAIL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any retail food establishment,
including, but not limited to, a restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria,
short-order café, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain,
commissary, drive-in restaurant, drink establishment, snack bar, food
counter, dining room, food catering facility, seasonal establishments opened
for more than six months out of the year, industrial feeding establishment,
private, public, or non-profit organization or institution routinely serving
food, and any other eating or drinking establishment, where food or drink
products are prepared, served, or provided primarily for human consumption at
such retail food establishment, with or without charge. The term does not
include private homes where food is prepared or served for individual family
consumption.



   TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT (410 I.A.C. 7-24). A retail food
establishment that operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days
in conjunction with a single event or celebration.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.36  PERMITS.



   (A)   General. It is unlawful to operate any bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, or temporary food establishment in
Floyd County, without first obtaining a permit from the Health Department.



   (B)   Posting. The permit must be posted in a conspicuous location
in the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, or
temporary food establishment.



   (C)   Separate permits. A separate permit shall be required for each
bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, or temporary food
establishment operated or to be operated by any person.



   (D)   Permit issuance. A permit may only be issued to persons who
comply with the applicable requirements of 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5 and/or 410
I.A.C. 7-24. Any permit issued under this subchapter is not transferable.
Upon the change of location of any bed and breakfast, retail food
establishment, or temporary food establishment, all existing permits become
void. A permit shall not be sold, assigned, licensed, or transferred.



   (E)   Term. Permits issued by the Health Officer shall be valid
according to the following periods:



      (1)   The permit for a retail food establishment or bed and
breakfast establishment shall be for a term of one year. Said permit shall be
renewed annually beginning on July 1 of current year and expiring on June 30
of the following year.



      (2)   The permit for a temporary food establishment shall be
for a term not to exceed 14 consecutive days. A temporary food establishment
permit shall be for the term of one continuous operation.



   (F)   Permit content. Permits issued by the Health Officer shall
contain:



      (1)   The name and address of the operator to whom the permit
is granted;



      (2)   The location of the establishment for which the permit
is issued;



      (3)   The issuance and expiration date(s); and



      (4)   Other such pertinent data as may be required by the
Health Officer.



   (G)   Application. A person desiring to operate a bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment and/or temporary food establishment
shall submit to the Health Department a written application for a permit on a
form provided by the Health Department (State Form 50033).



   (H)   Content of the application. The application shall include:



      (1)   The name, mailing address, telephone number, and
original signature of the person and/or operator applying for the permit and
the name, mailing address, and location of the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment;



      (2)   Information specifying whether the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment
is owned by an association, corporation, individual, partnership, or other
legal entity;



      (3)   The name, title, address, and telephone number of the
operator directly responsible for the bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment;



      (4)   The name, title, address, and telephone number of the
person who functions as the immediate supervisor of the person specified
under subdivision (4) of this section such as the zone, district, or regional
supervisor;



      (5)   The names, titles, and addresses of:



         (a)   The person(s) comprising the legal owners of the
operator and/or the person authorized to accept service of process and
notices, and



         (b)   The local resident agent of the operator or the
person holding the permit, if one is required for such operator or person;



      (6)   A statement signed by the applicant that:



         (a)   Attests to the accuracy of the information
provided in the application, and



         (b)   Affirms that the applicant will:



            1.   Comply with this subchapter, and



            2.   Allow the Health Department access to the Bed
and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, and/ or temporary
food establishment and records as specified in 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5 and 410
I.A.C. 7-24;



      (7)   Other information required by the Health Department.



   (I)   Qualification. To qualify for a permit, an applicant must:



      (1)   Be an owner and/or operator of the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment;



      (2)   Comply with the requirements of this subchapter;



      (3)   Agree to allow access to the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, and or temporary food establishment
and provide required information; and



      (4)   Pay the applicable permit fees at the time of issuance
or renewal.



   (J)   Plans requirements.



      (1)   The owner or other authorized agent of an existing or
proposed bed and breakfast establishment, and/or retail food establishment
shall submit to the Health Department properly prepared plans and
specifications, in accordance with State Form 50004 plan review questionnaire
for review and approval before:



         (a)   The construction of a Bed and breakfast
establishment, and/or retail food establishment;



         (b)   The conversion of an existing structure for use as
a bed and breakfast establishment and/or retail food establishment; or



         (c)   The remodeling of a bed and breakfast
establishment and/or retail food establishment or a change of type of bed and
breakfast establishment, and/or retail food establishment or food operation
if the Health Department determines that plans and specifications are
necessary to ensure compliance with this section.



      (2)   The plans and specifications for a Bed and breakfast
establishment, and/or retail food establishment shall include, the type of
operation, type of food preparation (as specified in Appendix B of the
published version of 410 I.A.C. 7-24), and the menu.



      (3)   The plans and specifications shall be deemed
satisfactory and approved by Health Department before a permit hereunder can
be issued.



      (4)   A pre-operational inspection must show that the bed and
breakfast establishment and/or retail food establishment is built or
remodeled in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that
the establishment is in compliance with this subchaptere, 410 I.A.C. 7-24
and/or 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5.



   (K)   Change of ownership. The Health Department may renew a permit
for an existing bed and breakfast establishment, and/or retail food
establishment or may issue a permit to a new owner of an existing bed and
breakfast establishment and/or retail food establishment after a properly
completed application is submitted, reviewed, and approved, the fees are
paid, and an inspection shows that the establishment is in compliance with
this subchapter.



   (L)   Responsibilities of the operator. Upon acceptance of the
permit issued by the Health Department, the operator in order to retain the
permit shall:



      (1)   Comply with the provisions of this subchapter and all
laws and rules adopted by reference herein and the conditions of any
variances granted by the Indiana State Department of Health;



      (2)   Immediately discontinue affected operations and notify
the Health Department if an imminent health hazard may exist;



      (3)   Allow representatives of the Health Department access to
the bed and breakfast establishment and/or retail food establishment at all
reasonable times;



      (4)   Comply with directives of the Health Department
including time frames for corrective actions specified in Inspection reports,
notices, orders, warnings, and other directives issued by the Health
Department in regard to the operator's bed and breakfast establishment and/or
retail food establishment or in response to community emergencies;



      (5)   Accept notices issued and served by the Health
Department;



      (6)   Be subject to the administrative, civil, injunctive, and
criminal remedies authorized in law for failure to comply with this
subchapter or a directive of the Health Department; and



      (7)   Post the permit in a location in the bed and breakfast
establishment and/or retail food establishment that is conspicuous to
consumers;



   (M)   Equipment. All equipment installed in a food establishment for
use in the cleansing and bactericidal treatment of utensils, or in the
preparation, storing, handling, cleaning, sanitizing, serving, or displaying
of any food or beverage products, shall be of a type conforming with all
applicable requirements with regard to proper holding temperatures, design,
construction, location and materials, as required in 410 I.A.C. 7-24, and as
amended hereafter. The Floyd County Health Department may prohibit the
further use of any equipment that fails to meet the requirements above.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.37  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Unlawful to operate without paying permit fee. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate a bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment and/or temporary food establishment in Floyd County, who
has not paid the permit fee required to be paid for the operation of such
establishment.



   (B)   Fees set by Health Department. Permit fees to be paid for the
issuance of a permit under this subchapter for a bed and breakfast
establishment, a retail food establishment and/or a temporary food
establishment shall be set by the Health Department, as provided by the
statutes of the State of Indiana, (see I.C. 16-20-1-27), and as set forth and
approved by Floyd County Council and Floyd County Board of Commissioners.



   (C)   Expiration of permits. For permits which upon initial issuance
will expire in fewer than 180 days from the date thereof, the applicant shall
pay one-half of the fees set forth by the Health Department.



   (D)   Receipt provided. A receipt for the payment of such fee shall
be provided by the Health Department.



   (E)   Payment required. The payment of such fees shall be required
for each bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment and/or
temporary food establishment operated or to be operated by any person.



   (F)   Exemption from permit fees. A not for profit organization that
offers food for sale to the final consumer at an event held for the benefit
of the organization is exempt from the payment of fees. This exemption only
applies to organizations that meet the criteria addressed in I.C. 16-42-5-4.
The Health Officer shall be provided, upon request, proof of an
organization's tax exemption.



   (G)   Late fees. A late fee (1) for failure to pay the Permit fee
prior to the commencement of operation of the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment
and (2) for failure to renew a permit prior to its expiration shall be paid
in the amount of 50% of the above annual fee for such permit, or in such
amount as set from time to time by the Floyd County Health Board.



   (H)   Credit not transferable. Credit for the payment of fees under
this subchapter is not transferable or refundable.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.38  INSPECTION.



   (A)   General. The Health Department shall inspect a bed and
breakfast establishment and/or retail food establishment bi-annually, or less
frequently if indicated under the risk based assessment method as outlined by
the Indiana State Department of Health. The Floyd County Board of Health may
inspect more frequently if a risk is posed by any of the following: the
establishment has had critical violations in the last inspection, the
establishment serves an at-risk population, or a consumer complaint or a
report of a food-borne illness has been reported to the department.



   (B)   Temporary food establishment. The Health Department shall
periodically inspect throughout its permit period a temporary food
establishment that prepares, sells, or serves unpackaged potentially
hazardous food and may inspect a temporary food establishment that prepares,
sells or serves unpackaged, non-potentially hazardous food that:



      (1)   Has improvised rather than permanent facilities or
equipment for accomplishing functions such as hand-washing, food preparation
and protection, food temperature control, ware-washing, providing drinking
water, waste retention and disposal, and insect and rodent control; or



      (2)   Has untrained food employees.



   (C)   Performance and risk based inspections. Within the parameters
for risk specified above, the Health Department shall prioritize, and conduct
more frequent inspections based upon its assessment of a bed and breakfast
establishment and/or retail food establishment's history of compliance with
this subchapter and the bed and breakfast establishment and/or retail food
establishment's potential as a vector of food-borne illness by evaluating:



      (1)   Past performance, for violations of 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5,
410 I.A.C. 7-24 and/or 410 I.A.C. 7-22 and/or HACCP plan requirements that
are critical or non-critical;



      (2)   Past performance, for numerous or repeat violations of
410 I.A.C. 7-15.5 and/or 410 I.A.C. 7-24 and/or HACCP plan requirements that
are non-critical;



      (3)   Past performance, for complaints investigated and found
to be valid;



      (4)   The hazards associated with the particular foods that
are prepared, stored, or served;



      (5)   The type of operation including the methods and extent
of food storage, preparation, and service;



      (6)   The number of people served; and



      (7)   Whether the population served is a highly susceptible
population.



   (D)   Application and permit fees. The application for any permit
shall be tendered with the following application fees:



      (1)   Each new retail food establishment shall be required to
pay an application fee of $100 for the review of plans and specifications and
for the initial inspection of such establishment. This fee is in addition to
the permit fee.



      (2)   Permit fees for retail food establishments are payable
as follows: permit fees for retail food market establishments:



 

Up to and including 3,000 square feet
 
$125


3,000 up to and including 20,000 square feet
 
$175


20,000 up to and including 70,000 square feet
 
$225


70,000 square feet and above
 
$275



 



      (3)   Permit fees for retail food service establishments:



 

1–5 employees
 
$125


6–9 employees
 
$175


10–15 employees
 
$225


16–20 employees
 
$275


21 or more employees
 
$325



 



      (4)   Permit fees for temporary food establishments:  $20 per
day, not to exceed $100, for a maximum of 14 days.



      (5)   Flat rate permit fees:



 


Bed & breakfast establishments

 
$150


Retail food establishments that are seasonal concessions operated less than
six months per year
 
$125


Farmers market - potentially hazardous foods
 
$125



 



   (E)   Access allowed at reasonable times after due notice.



      (1)   After the Officer or an official presents official
credentials and provides notice of the purpose of and the intent to conduct
an inspection, the operator shall allow the Health Department to determine if
the Bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, and/or
temporary food establishment is in compliance with this subchapter by
allowing access to the establishment, allowing inspection, and providing
information and records specified in this subchapter. Inspections shall be
conducted during the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, or temporary food establishment's hours of operation and other
reasonable times.



      (2)   Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of
a food establishment permit to operate.



      (3)   If access is denied, an order issued by the appropriate
authority allowing access may be obtained according to law. (See I.C.
16-20-1-26)



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. G-10-21, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 115.39  VIOLATIONS



   (A)   Inspection reports. At the conclusion of the inspection, the
Health Department shall provide a copy of the completed inspection report and
the notice to correct violations to the operator or to the person in charge,
as required under I.C. 16-20-8-5.



   (B)   Timely correction of critical violations.



      (1)   Except as specified in the next paragraph, an operator
shall at the time of inspection correct a critical violation of 410 I.A.C.
7-15.5, 410 I.A.C. 7-24 and/or 410 I.A.C. 7-22 and implement corrective
actions for a HACCP plan provision that is not in compliance with its
critical limit.



      (2)   Considering the nature of the potential hazard involved
and the complexity of the corrective action needed, the Health Department may
agree to or specify a longer time frame after the inspection, for the
operator to correct critical code violations or HACCP plan deviations.



      (3)   After receiving notification that the operator has
corrected a critical violation or HACCP plan deviation, or at the end of the
specified period of time, the Health Department shall verify correction of
the violation, document the information on an Inspection Report, and enter
the report in the Health Department's records.



   (C)   Refusal to sign acknowledgement.



      (1)   Refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will not
affect the operator's obligation to correct the violations noted in the
inspection report within the time frames specified.



      (2)   A refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt is noted
in the inspection report and conveyed to the Health Department historical
record for the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment
and/or temporary food establishment.



   (D)   Public information. Except as specified in section 176 (Trade
Secrets) of 410 I.A.C. 7-24, the Health Department shall treat the inspection
report as a public document and shall make it available for disclosure to a
person who requests it as provided in law. (See I.C. 16-20-8-6)



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.40  COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Application denial. If an application for a plan review and/or
permit to operate a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, and/or temporary food establishment is denied, the Health
Department shall provide the applicant with a notice that includes:



      (1)   The specific reasons and rule citations for the
application and/or permit denial;



      (2)   The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to
qualify for the application and/or permit; and



      (3)   Advisement of the applicant's right of appeal and the
process and time frames for appeal that are provided in law.



   (B)   Permit suspension. The Health Department may suspend a permit
to operate a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment
and/or temporary food establishment if it determines through any inspection,
or examination of records, or other means as specified in this subchapter,
that an imminent health hazard exists.



   (C)   Ceasing operation and contacting the health department.



      (1)   An operator of a bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment and/or temporary food establishment shall immediately
discontinue operations and notify the Health Department if an imminent health
hazard may exist because of an emergency such as a fire, flood, extended
interruption of electrical or water service, sewage backup, misuse of
poisonous or toxic materials, onset of an apparent food-borne illness
outbreak, gross unsanitary occurrence or condition, or other circumstance
that may endanger public health.



      (2)   An operator need not discontinue operations in an area
of an establishment that is unaffected by the imminent health hazard.



   (D)   Resuming operation. If only a portion of a bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment and/or temporary food establishment
is affected the operator may continue operations in the unaffected portion,
provided there is no imminent health hazard to such unaffected portion.
Otherwise, the operator must obtain approval from the Health Department
before resuming operations.



   (E)   Outstanding fees.  Any outstanding fees may be a condition
upon which a permit may not be issued or may be suspended.



   (F)   Enforcement options. When the Health Officer or an official
finds a critical violation at a retail food establishment it will be
addressed at the time of the inspection; a follow-up inspection may also be
conducted.



      (1)   First follow-up inspection: A letter of warning may be
issued when there are critical or noncritical violations continuing upon the
first follow-up inspection. If a letter of warning is issued, a second
follow-up inspection will be conducted.



      (2)   Second follow-up inspection:



         (a)   After a second follow-up inspection in which it is
determined that critical or noncritical violations are continuing, one or a
combination of the following measures may be implemented at the discretion of
the Environmental Health Supervisor:



            (1)   Letter of warning;



            (2)   Informal meeting held in the Health
Department offices;



            (3)   A meeting held at the establishment by the
Health Officer, Environmental Health Supervisor or chief food specialist;
and/or



            (4)   Another follow-up inspection.



         (b)   There shall be a fee payable before any second
follow-up inspection in the amount of 50% of the annual permit, or in such
amount as set from time to time by the Floyd County Health Board.



      (3)   Third/subsequent follow-up inspection:



         (a)   Upon a third inspection follow-up inspection, with
continuing critical or noncritical violations, or upon the continued unlawful
operation during an event of imminent health hazard, an enforcement action
may be instituted, and may include one or more of the following:



            (1)   Issuance of a notice of violation and order
to abate;



            (2)   Follow-up inspections conducted as often as
necessary to ensure compliance; and/or



            (3)   If the action concerning public health is a
criminal offense, request county prosecuting attorney to institute a
proceeding in the courts for enforcement. (See I.C. 16-20-l-25(c)).



         (b)   There shall be a fee payable upon before any third
follow-up inspection or subsequent inspection in the amount of 50% of the
annual permit, or in such amount as set from time to time by the Floyd County
Health Board.



   (G)   Permit revocation. The Health Department may permanently
revoke a permit to operate a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, and/or temporary food establishment, if it determines through
a review of subsequent inspection reports conducted after the approval of
Ordinance G-11-03 that repeat and habitual critical violations are
continually existing, which present an imminent health hazard.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. G-11-07, passed 4-4-2008)



§ 115.41  APPEALS SECTION.



   (A)   An operator aggrieved by an order is entitled to a review of
the final order before a Hearing Board by filing a written request therefore
with the Health Officer (Secretary of the Board of Health; see I.C.
16-20-1-10). The written request must be sent by certified mail or by hand
delivery to the Health Officer at 1917 Bono Road, New Albany, Indiana 47150,
during regular hours of operation, and must be received within 15 days after
the date such order is issued. The written request must set forth with
specificity the factual and/or legal grounds for appeal, and only those
matters set forth in the written request may be argued before the Hearing
Board.



   (B)   Upon the Health Officer's receipt of such request, the Hearing
Board shall hear the matter in an open hearing after at least five-days'
written notice of the time, place and nature thereof. The time shall be
measured pursuant to the Indiana rules of court. (A shorter period of time
for hearing may be requested and granted in the sole discretion of the
Chairperson of the Floyd Board of Health, provided that such shorter time
must permit compliance with I.C. 5-14-1.5.)



   (C)   The notice of the hearing date shall be served upon the
operator requesting the review by delivering such notice to the address of
the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment or temporary
food establishment listed on the permit application or by facsimile or to
such other address (if within Floyd County), as the operator shall designate
in the letter of request to the Health Officer. Such delivery may be made by
leaving the notice at the required address or by regular U.S. Mail.



   (D)   The Hearing Board shall establish the rules of procedure for
the hearing and shall advise the operator of the same prior to the start of
the proceedings. Such rules shall provide that an order may only be
supported, in whole or in part, by a majority decision of the Hearing Board.



   (E)   Within seven days from the conclusion of the hearing, The
Hearing Board shall make written findings of facts and conclusions concerning
the final order or determination and shall deliver the same to the operator
requesting the review by delivering the same to the address of the bed and
breakfast establishment, retail food establishment or temporary food
establishment listed on the permit application or by facsimile or by had
delivery to such other address (if within Floyd County), as the operator
shall designate in the letter of request to the Health Officer. Such delivery
may be made by leaving the notice at the required address or by regular U.S.
Mail.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.42  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   No Health Department Official shall conduct himself or herself in a
manner that is or could have the appearance of a conflict of interest.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.43  PARTIAL INVALIDITY OF PROVISIONS.



   Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
subchapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the
remainder of this subchapter shall not be affected thereby.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.44  REPEAL AND EFFECTIVE DATE.



   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this subchapter
are hereby repealed, and this subchapter shall be in full force and effect 30
days after its adoption and publication as provided by law.



(Ord. G-08-14, passed 5-5-2008)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§ 115.01
through 115.04 shall be fined not less than $1, nor more than $100.



(Ord. G-65-197, passed 4-5-1965)



CHAPTER 116:  MASSAGE PARLORS



Section



General Provisions



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Physical therapist; exception



Permit Requirements



   116.20   Permit required



   116.21   Application; inspection fee



   116.22   Inspection; permit issuance; posting



   116.23   Revocation of permit



Operational Conditions and Requirements



   116.35   Right of entry; noncompliance; revocation



   116.36   Interference with enforcement official



   116.37   Physical examinations of employees



   116.38   Notice of infectious or contagious disease



   116.39   Certain uses of premises prohibited



   116.40   Abatement as a public nuisance



 



   116.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Live Adult Entertainment Businesses, See Ch. 120



   Sexually Oriented Businesses, See Ch. 121



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE. A method of treating the superficial soft parts of the body
for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of any one or all of the
following procedures with the hands or an instrument: rubbing, stroking,
kneading or tapping.



   MASSAGE PARLOR OR ESTABLISHMENT. A room or rooms fitted and used
commercially for massage treatment.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)



§ 116.02  PHYSICAL THERAPIST; EXCEPTION.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be considered to apply to
physical therapists who are licensed to practice physical therapy, including
massage for the treatment of physical or mental ailments or diseases,
pursuant to the laws of the state.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)



Statutory reference:



   Licensure of physical therapists, see I.C. 25-27-1



PERMIT REQUIREMENTS



§ 116.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall establish, maintain or operate a massage parlor or
establishment without first having procured a permit to do so.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.21  APPLICATION; INSPECTION FEE.



   (A)   Every person desiring a permit to establish, maintain or
operate a massage parlor or establishment shall make application for the
permit in writing to the Department of Health upon blanks prepared and
furnished by the Department and shall remit therewith and pay the sum of $50
to cover the fee for the inspection hereinafter provided for, and for
inspection for the following 12 months. The fee of $50 shall be payable
annually.



   (B)   The application shall set forth the name of the applicant and,
if a corporation or other company, the name and residence of the principal
officers, and shall state the location for which the permit is desired, the
number of rooms or apartments therein, and other information as the
Department of Health may require.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.22  INSPECTION; PERMIT ISSUANCE; POSTING.



   Upon receipt of an application by the Department of Health, the
Director of Health shall, within five days thereafter make or cause to be
made an inspection of the premises described in the application for the
purpose of ascertaining whether sanitary arrangements, conditions or
appliances therein are sufficient to protect properly the public health and
the health of the persons to be employed therein. If the Director of Health
or any deputy of the Director finds upon inspection that the proposed massage
parlor or establishment is so constructed and located that it can be kept,
operated and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
the Director shall issue a permit authorizing the applicant to establish,
operate or maintain a massage parlor or establishment at the place described
in the application for a permit. Every permit granted under the provisions of
this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place, visible to the public,
within the establishment for which the permit is issued.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.23  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   If, at any time after the issuance of a permit, the permittee shall
keep, maintain or operate any massage parlor or establishment in such a
manner that the public health or health of persons employed therein is
endangered, it shall be grounds for a hearing in accordance with § 116.35 of
this chapter.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS



§ 116.35  RIGHT OF ENTRY; NONCOMPLIANCE; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Director of Health, his or her deputies, sanitary
inspectors or any police officer shall have the right, at all reasonable
times, to enter and inspect any massage parlor or establishment for the
purpose of ascertaining if the conditions and requirements of this chapter
are being complied with, and if the inspections disclose any lack of
conformity to the provisions of this chapter, the deputy, sanitary inspector
or police officer shall immediately notify the Department of Health. It shall
be the duty of the Department of Health promptly to set a hearing to
determine if the conditions and requirements of this chapter are being
complied with and to determine if the permit of the massage parlor or
establishment should be revoked or placed on probation.



   (B)   The hearing process under this section shall be conducted
under the Administrative Adjudication Act as found in I.C. 4-21.5-3-1 through
4-21.5-3-37.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.36  INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner obstruct, hinder
or interfere with any officer or person in the full discharge of his or her
duty under this chapter or to refuse or withhold any information desired by
the enforcement officer relative to the sanitary condition, management or
arrangement of any massage parlor or establishment.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.37  PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS OF EMPLOYEES.



   Every person connected with or employed by any massage parlor or
establishment shall have within 12 months passed a medical examination made
by a licensed physician approved by the Director of Health and shall submit
such specimens of body fluids and discharges for examinations as the Director
of Health may require.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.38  NOTICE OF INFECTIOUS OR CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.



   Notice shall be sent to the Director of Health immediately by the
operator of any massage parlor or establishment in which any case of
infectious, contagious or communicable disease occurs, and no person infected
with the disease shall be employed in any manner by the massage parlor or
establishment.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.39  CERTAIN USES OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   General. No person shall use for housing, sheltering or
harboring of its employees or other persons any massage parlor or
establishment or cause or permit the same to be used as living quarters by
employees or other persons.



   (B)   Use of premises for immoral purposes.



      (1)   No massage parlor or establishment shall be used for any
immoral or indecent purposes whatsoever and any discovery of any immoral or
indecent acts permitted or performed on the premises shall be sufficient
evidence for the immediate revocation of the permit therefor.



      (2)   No person holding a permit under this chapter shall
administer to a person of the opposite sex any massage, alcohol rub or
similar treatment, fomentation, bath or electric or magnetic treatment,
except on the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor,
podiatrist or registered physical therapist. A person shall neither cause nor
permit in or about his or her place of business, or in connection with his or
her business, any agent, employee, servant or other individual to administer
any such treatment to any individual of the opposite sex.



      (3)   All employees of establishments holding a permit under
this chapter, including masseurs, masseuses and therapists, shall wear clean,
nontransparent outer garments covering the sexual and genital areas.



      (4)   The sexual or genital areas of patrons of establishments
required to hold a permit under this chapter shall be covered with towels,
cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur,
masseuse or therapist.



      (5)   No person in any establishment holding a permit under
this chapter shall place his or her hand on, or touch with any part of his or
her body, or fondle in any manner, or massage, a sexual or genital area of
any other person.



      (6)   No employee of an establishment holding a permit under
this chapter shall perform or offer or agree to perform any act which shall
require the touching of the patron's genitals.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976; Ord. G-78-705, passed 8-14-1978)  Penalty,
see § 116.99



§ 116.40  ABATEMENT AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Every massage parlor or establishment which is not established,
maintained or conducted as herein provided is declared to be a public
nuisance, and, in addition to the penalties prescribed in § 116.99, shall be
abated in like manner as any other public nuisance.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation, and, on conviction therefor, in addition to having the
permittee's permit revoked or placed on probation in accordance with §
116.35, the person may also be fined not less than $10, nor more than $100,
for each offense. Each day that any person continues to violate any
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. G-76-614, passed 6-11-1976)



CHAPTER 117:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



General Licensing Provisions



   117.01   License required



   117.02   Application for license



   117.03   Period of validity



   117.04   Location specified where direct selling permitted



   117.05   Misrepresentation of goods or merchandise



Ice Cream Trucks



   117.15   Definitions



   117.16   Duty of driver of vehicle



   117.17   Insurance



   117.18   Certain equipment required on trucks; use



   117.19   Inspection of trucks



   117.20   Operational restrictions



   117.21   Backing truck prohibited



Direct Sellers



   117.35   Definitions



   117.36   Registration required; exemptions



   117.37   Application for registration



   117.38   Investigation of application



   117.39   Appeal of denial



   117.40   Conduct of registrants



   117.41   Disclosure requirements



   117.42   Report on convictions



   117.43   Revocation of registration



Soliciting and Panhandling



   117.50   Aggressive panhandling or solicitation prohibited



 



   117.99   Penalty



GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



§ 117.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
engage in the business of hawker or direct seller of any merchandise, article
or thing without having first secured a license therefor.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a
canvasser or solicitor, calling at a residence without previous consent of
the occupant for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or
business of any kind, or seeking information or donations without having
secured a license.



(Ord. G-78-686, passed 2-6-1978)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Applications for licenses as direct sellers, solicitors or canvassers
shall be made to the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city. The
applicant shall give his or her complete identification, his or her
signature, the name of his or her employer, the nature of the product or
services in which he or she is interested, the names of the manufacturers of
the products or of the organization he or she is representing and the
proposed method of operation in the city. The applicant shall state the
description and the number of vehicles, if any, intended to be operated, in
direct selling, soliciting or canvassing in the city.



(Ord. G-78-686, passed 2-6-1978)



§ 117.03  PERIOD OF VALIDITY.



   The license shall be valid for a period expiring 90 days after the date
of registration and licensing by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Licenses may be issued for a period of time in excess of 90 days, up to one
year.



(Ord. G-78-686, passed 2-6-1978)



§ 117.04  LOCATION SPECIFIED WHERE DIRECT SELLING PERMITTED.



   No direct seller shall ply his or her vocation on any street, sidewalk,
park, parkway or in any other public place in the city unless his or her
direct seller's license specifies that direct selling in such public places
is permitted thereunder.



(Ord. G-78-686, passed 2-6-1978)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.05  MISREPRESENTATION OF GOODS OR MERCHANDISE.



   Any licensed direct seller, solicitor or canvasser who shall be guilty
of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself or
herself or through an employee, while acting as a direct seller, solicitor or
canvasser in the city, or who shall barter or sell any goods, merchandise or
wares, other than those specified in his or her application for license,
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. G-78-686, passed 2-6-1978)  Penalty, see § 117.99



ICE CREAM TRUCKS



§ 117.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ICE CREAM TRUCK. Every motor vehicle in which ice cream, popsicles, ice
sherbets or frozen desserts of any kind are carried for purposes of retail
sale on the city streets.



   OPERATOR. Every person, film or corporation who owns, leases, contracts
or in any other fashion permits a person to operate on the city streets any
ice cream truck for the purpose of vending as defined herein.



   PERSON. Includes every driver of such vehicle as defined herein.



   VEND or VENDING. Offering ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or frozen
desserts for sale from a motor vehicle on the city streets.



(Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979)



§ 117.16  DUTY OF DRIVER OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking from either
direction an ice cream truck stopped on the street shall stop no less than 25
feet from the front or rear of the truck when the flashing lights and stop
signal arm described in § 117.18(A) are in use. After stopping, a driver may
proceed past the truck at a reasonable and prudent speed, not exceeding ten
mph, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian who crosses the
roadway to or from the ice cream truck.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle on a street with separate roadways
separated by a divider of some nature need not stop on meeting or passing an
ice cream truck on the parallel roadway.



(Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.17  INSURANCE.



   (A)   No license shall be issued to an ice cream vendor selling from
a truck unless a certificate is furnished to the city showing that the vendor
is carrying the following minimum amounts of insurance: public liability
insurance in an amount of not less than $500,000 for injuries, including
those resulting in death, resulting from any one occurrence and on account of
any one accident, and property damage insurance in an amount of not less than
$25,000 for damages on account of any one accident or occurrence.



   (B)   Certificates shall contain an agreement signed by the
insurance company that prior to modification, cancellation or termination of
the subject policy, written notice shall be sent to the City Clerk by the
insurance company.



(Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.18  CERTAIN EQUIPMENT REQUIRED ON TRUCKS; USE.



   (A)   General. In addition to other equipment required by law, every
ice cream truck shall be equipped with:



      (1)   Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as high and
as widely spaced laterally as practicable. These lamps shall be five to seven
inches in diameter and shall display two alternately flashing red lights on
the front of the vehicle and two alternately flashing red lights on the rear
of the vehicle, both lights visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight on a
straight level street.



      (2)   A stop signal arm that can be extended horizontally from
the left side of the truck duplicating the design and size of a standard
30-inch octagonal stop sign as set forth in the state's Manual of Uniform
Control Devices. This arm shall be red and white in color and contain two
alternately flashing lights three to five inches in diameter at the top and
bottom thereof, visible at 300 feet to the front and rear in normal sunlight
on a straight level street. The color of the two lights facing to the front
shall be red and the two lights facing to the rear shall be red. The bottom
of the signal arm shall be 42 inches above the highway.



      (3)   A convex mirror mounted on the front so the driver in
his or her normal seating position can see the area in front of the truck
obscured by the hood.



   (B)   Use of required equipment.



      (1)   The driver of an ice cream truck stopped on the streets
for the purpose of vending shall actuate the special flashing lights and
extend the stop signal arm required by division (A) of this section.



      (2)   These lights and the stop signal arm shall not be used
when the truck is in motion nor at any time the truck is stopped for a
purpose other than vending.



(Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.19  INSPECTION OF TRUCKS.



   Every ice cream truck shall be inspected by the Traffic Officer of the
Police Department once each year prior to its use in this city for the
purpose of retail sales of frozen dairy products. The Traffic Officer shall
inspect each ice cream truck to determine whether it complies with §§
117.15 through 117.21 and other state and local laws.



(Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.20  OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   A person shall vend only when the ice cream truck is lawfully
stopped.



   (B)   A person shall vend only from the side of the truck away from
moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or side of the street.



   (C)   A person shall not vend to a person standing in the roadway.



   (D)   A person shall not stop on the left side of a one-way street
to vend.



   (E)   The operator of any ice cream truck which traverses the
streets of the city for the purpose of vending products shall submit to the
traffic officer of the city prior to March 1 of each year hereafter a
detailed listing of the routes to be traveled each day by the motor vehicles.
The Traffic Engineer shall approve or disapprove the routes within 30 days
thereafter. Any routes not approved by the Traffic Engineer shall not be
utilized by the operator.



   (F)   (1)   Every operator or person falling within the purview
of § 117.15 shall at all times maintain in said vehicle, while vending
products on the streets, a second person who shall act as a guard and lookout
to assist the driver, and who shall at all times be available in, about and
around the vehicle to assist customers with their safety.



      (2)   The second person shall be one who has received special
training in traffic safety, based on a curriculum and educational experience
to be devised and carried out by specialized personnel of the Police
Department.



      (3)   This division shall be deemed complied with for the
second person on each vehicle on the issuance of a certificate of the
specialized training by the Chief of Police.



(Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.21  BACKING TRUCK PROHIBITED.



   The driver of an ice cream truck shall not back the truck to make or
attempt a sale.



(Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979)  Penalty, see § 117.99



DIRECT SELLERS



§ 117.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or
one purporting to be such.



   CLERK. The City Clerk.



   DIRECT SELLER. Any individual who, for himself, herself or for a
partnership, association or corporation, sells goods, or takes orders for the
later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business
place or residence of the individual, partnership, association or
corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, transient merchants.
The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the
retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.



   GOODS. Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include goods
provided incidental to services offered or sold.



   PERMANENT MERCHANT. A direct seller who, for at least one year prior to
the consideration of the application of this subchapter to the merchant, has
continuously operated an established place of business in this city or has
continuously resided in the city and now does business from his or her
residence.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate transient merchants, see I.C. 25-37-1-11



§ 117.36  REGISTRATION REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct
sales within the city without being registered for that purpose as provided
herein.



   (B)   The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this
subchapter:



      (1)   Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products
or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes;



      (2)   Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such
goods;



      (3)   Any person selling agricultural products which the
person has grown;



      (4)   Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes
orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly
offered for sale by the merchant within the city and who delivers such goods
in his or her regular course of business;



      (5)   Any person who has an established place of business
where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home
visit by, that person;



      (6)   Any person who has had, or one who represents a company
which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer;



      (7)   Any person selling or offering for sale a service
unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods;



      (8)   Any person holding a sale required by statute or by
order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale
pursuant to law;



      (9)   Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable
organization which has secured a permit as provided for in § 117.01 of this
chapter;



      (10)   Harvest Homecoming booths and concessions provided the
operators of the booths and concessions have prior approval of the Harvest
Homecoming Committee.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.37  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Applicants for registration must complete and return to the
City Clerk a registration form furnished by the Clerk which shall require the
following information:



      (1)   Name, permanent address and telephone number, and
temporary address, if any;



      (2)   Age, height, weight and color of hair and eyes;



      (3)   Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed
by, or whose merchandise is being sold;



      (4)   The temporary address and telephone number from which
business will be conducted, if any;



      (5)   The nature of the business to be conducted and a brief
description of the goods offered, and any services offered;



      (6)   The proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;



      (7)   The make, model and license number of any vehicle to be
used by applicant in the conduct of his business;



      (8)   The last three previous cities and towns, where
applicant conducted similar business;



      (9)   A place where the applicant can be contacted for at
least seven days after leaving the city; and



      (10)   A statement as to whether the applicant has been
convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's
transient merchant business within the last five years and if so, the nature
of the offense and the place of conviction.



   (B)   Each applicant shall present to the Clerk for examination the
following:



      (1)   A driver's license or some other proof of identity as
may be reasonably required;



      (2)   A state certificate of examination and approval from the
sealer of weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities;



      (3)   A state Health Officer's certificate where applicant's
business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law. The certificate shall state that the applicant is
apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more
than 90 days prior to the date the application for a license is made;



      (4)   At the time the registration is returned, a fee of $10
shall be paid to the Clerk to cover the cost of processing the registration;
and



      (5)   Upon payment of the fee, the Clerk shall register the
applicant as a direct seller and date the entry. The registration shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent
refusal as provided in § 117.38.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)



§ 117.38  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.



   Upon receipt of each application, the City Clerk may refer it
immediately to the Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation
of the statements made in the registration. The Clerk shall refuse to
register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation
that the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate
statement; complaints of a material nature have been received and proven
against the applicant by authorities in the three previous cities and towns
in which the applicant conducted similar business; or the applicant failed to
comply with any applicable provision of § 117.37(A). If the applicant has
been convicted of any offense, the Clerk may consider the acts upon which the
conviction resulted as to whether the applicant should be intrusted to serve
the public as a direct seller.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)



§ 117.39  APPEAL OF DENIAL.



   Any person denied registration may appeal the denial to the Board of
Public Works and Safety. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall hold a
public hearing on the denial within ten days after the appeal is filed.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)



§ 117.40  CONDUCT OF REGISTRANTS.



   The following regulations shall govern the conduct of registrants
hereunder.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a direct seller to misrepresent or
make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his or
her visit, his or her identity or the identity of the organization he or she
represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually
be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting.
The portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to impede the free
use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are
made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to allow rubbish or
litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he or she is conducting
business.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981; Ord. A-03-53, passed 8-21-2003)  Penalty,
see § 117.99



§ 117.41  DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.



   The following requirements shall govern the conduct of registrants.



   (A)   If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales
order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall
have the right to cancel the transaction within three days if it involves the
extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.



   (B)   If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later
delivery of goods, he or she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the
amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made,
the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so,
the terms thereof.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.42  REPORT ON CONVICTIONS.



   The Chief of Police shall report to the City Clerk all convictions for
violations of this subchapter and the Clerk shall note any such violation on
the record of the registrant convicted.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)



§ 117.43  REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.



   The registration of a direct seller may be revoked by the City Clerk
for any material violation of this subchapter. No registration will be
revoked without prior written notice to the registration holder and an
opportunity for a hearing within seven days.



(Ord. G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)



SOLICITING AND PANHANDLING



§ 117.50  AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING OR SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION (SOLICIT) or AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING (PANHANDLE)
. For purposes of this subsection are interchangeable and shall mean
requesting an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from
another person regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the
money or other thing of value, in one of the following manners:  in a way
that creates a reasonable fear of imminent bodily harm, using
obscene/profane/ abusive language, intimidating a person, threatening a
criminal act, approaching a person before sunrise or after sundown, following
a person who has refused to donate, asking again of a person who has refused
to donate, blocking or impeding a pedestrian path or entrance, approaching a
person in a group of two or more persons, within six feet from the edge of a
freeway entrance or exit ramp, or approaching a person for donations while
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.  Such definition does not include
standing passively, sitting, or performance art or a sign or other silent
indicia that a donation is being sought, except when said indicia occurs
within six feet from the edge of a freeway entrance or exit ramp.



   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE .  A device linked to a financial
institution's account record which is able to carry out transactions,
including but not limited to:  account transfers, deposits, cash
withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments.



   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY .  The area comprised of one or more
automatic teller machines and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION .  Any state bank, out-of-state bank, national
bank, trust company, or credit union as those terms are defined in state law.



   PUBLIC PLACE.   A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, including but not limited to any street, sidewalk,
highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of
amusement, park, playgrounds, fairgrounds, and sporting facilities.



   SOLICITING (SOLICIT) or PANHANDLING (PANHANDLE) .  For purposes of
this section, are interchangeable and mean requesting an immediate donation
of money or other thing of value from another person regardless of the
solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. 
The solicitation may be without limitation, by the spoken, written, or
printed word, or by other means of communication.  Purchase of an item for
an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable
person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, is a
solicitation for the purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   Prohibitions.  No person shall engage in panhandling or
aggressive panhandling in any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   No person shall engage in aggressive panhandling, as
defined under this section, at any time in any public place.



      (2)   On private or residential property after having been
asked to refrain from panhandling or aggressive panhandling by the owner or
other person lawfully in possession of such property.



      (3)   Within 20 feet of an automated teller machine, provided,
however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated
teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or
exit of the facility.



      (4)   When a person is an operator or occupant of a motor
vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving
a public parking space, or directing the operator or occupant to a public
parking space.



      (5)   When a person is an operator or occupant of a motor
vehicle on a public street, regardless if said vehicle is in motion, parked,
or stopped.



      (6)   In any public transportation vehicle or facility, or
within 20 feet of any bus stop, or in any public parking lot or structure.



      (7)   Within 20 feet of any outdoor dining area or outdoor
merchandise area, if such areas are in active use at the time.



      (8)   Within 20 feet of any school building or school
playground when school is in session or school related activities are taking
place on the premises.



      (9)   Within 20 feet of an entrance to any public restroom.



      (10)   Within a crosswalk, street, road, or highway.



      (11)   In a manner that impedes or blocks the flow of
pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk or public right-of-way.



      (12)   Within 20 feet of entry or exits of a public
entertainment venue.



   (C)   Severability.  Each section and provision of this section is
hereby declared to be independent sections and provisions and, not
withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared
to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provision of said
section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to
be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such
sections or provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to
which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby
declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed
independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid.



   (D)   Penalties.  Each act of panhandling prohibited by this
section shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable by a fine in an
amount not to exceed $25.  A third violation of panhandling, as defined by
this section, within a 12-month period, may result in a monetary fine not to
exceed $250.  In lieu of a $250 fine levied under this section, code
enforcement may waive said fine in exchange for community service.  Each act
of aggressive panhandling prohibited by this section shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed
$250.



(Ord. G-14-01, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 117.01 through 117.05 shall be guilty of a violation and, on conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $100, for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on or
during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 117.15 through 117.21 shall be fined not less than $5, nor more than
$500, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day on or during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 117.35 through 117.43 shall be fined not less than $5, nor more than
$100, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. G-78-686, passed 2-6-1978; Ord. G-79-752, passed 7-2-1979; Ord.
G-81-902, passed 8-3-1981)



CHAPTER 118:  PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS



Section



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   License required



   118.03   Bill of sale; copies sent to Police Department



   118.04   Holding period



   118.05   Exclusions



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PRECIOUS METAL. Any gold, silver or platinum, in any shape, form or use.



   PRECIOUS METAL DEALER. Any individual, firm, corporation or partnership
engaged in the business of purchasing and reselling precious metal at a
permanently established place of business or in connection with a business of
an itinerant nature.



(Ord. G-81-893, passed 5-4-1981)



§ 118.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, corporation, partnership or association shall engage
or continue to engage in the business of buying and selling precious metals
except as authorized by this chapter without having first obtained a license
from the City Controller. Applicants for the license shall conform to Chapter
110. The license fee shall be $10 per year and collected by the City
Controller, pursuant to Chapter 110.



(Ord. G-81-893, passed 5-4-1981)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.03  BILL OF SALE; COPIES SENT TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   If the precious metal licensee, in the conduct of the
business, purchases any article or articles from a seller, the purchase shall
be evidenced by a bill of sale properly signed by the seller. All bills of
sale shall be in triplicate and contain the following:



      (1)   The date of the sale;



      (2)   Amount of consideration;



      (3)   Name of licensee;



      (4)   Description of article or articles sold;



      (5)   Signature of the seller;



      (6)   Address of the seller; and



      (7)   Thumb print of the seller in a designated box on the
bill of sale.



   (B)   At the close of each business day in which the licensee has
purchased precious metals, the licensee shall send a copy of the bills of
sale to the Chief of the city's Police Department.



(Ord. G-81-893, passed 5-4-1981)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.04  HOLDING PERIOD.



   All precious metals purchased by the licensee shall be held by the
licensee for four business days after the purchase before the precious metals
are sold or otherwise disposed of by the licensee.



(Ord. G-81-893, passed 5-4-1981)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.05  EXCLUSIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the purchase from
persons, firms or corporations regularly engaged in the business of
manufacturing precious metals, the business of selling precious metals at
retail or wholesale, or to the purchase of one dealer from another if the
person, firm or corporation at the time of purchase provides each purchaser
with a bill of sale or other written evidence of title to the precious metal.



(Ord. G-81-893, passed 5-4-1981)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, corporation or
partnership to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by
this chapter and on conviction of the violation of this chapter, the
individual, firm, corporation or partnership shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $100, nor more than $1,000.



(Ord. G-81-893, passed 5-4-1981)



CHAPTER 119:  TAXICABS



Section



General Provisions



   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   Compliance with taxicab operation license regulations
required



   119.03   Taxicab operation license required; application



   119.04   Taxicab operation license fee



   119.05   Issuance of license



   119.06   Insurance required



   119.07   Reserved



   119.08   Taxicabs to have identifying signs



   119.09   Taxicab drivers



   119.10   Reserved



   119.11   Revocation of license; hearing



   119.12   Inspections



   119.13   Rates



Taxicab Drivers



   119.25   Taxicab driver’s license required



   119.26   Taxicab driver’s license application



   119.27   Refusal to issue; revocation



   119.28   Conditional license



   119.29   Employment of unlicensed taxicab drivers prohibited



 



   119.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB.  A motor vehicle that:



      (1)   Is designed and constructed to accommodate and transport
not more than six passengers in addition to the driver;



      (2)   Does not operate over any definite and designated routes
within the corporate boundaries of a city or town and the suburban territory
of a city or town; and



      (3)   Transports passengers to the destination designated by
the passengers at the time of their transportation.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)



§ 119.02  COMPLIANCE WITH TAXICAB OPERATION LICENSE REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall drive, run or operate
any taxicab upon or along any street or other highway within the city’s
corporate limits, except in accordance with regulations, terms and conditions
established by this chapter. Any person or persons, firm or corporation found
to be in violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in § 119.99(A).



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)  Penalty,
see § 119.99



§ 119.03  TAXICAB OPERATION LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring to operate
a taxicab or taxicab service upon or along the streets or other highways
within the city, shall, before undertaking to do so, file a signed
application form in writing for a taxicab operation license, duly sworn to by
the applicant or applicants with the Board of Public Works, which application
shall show the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the person, persons,
partnership, firm or corporation desiring the business license; if a
partnership or firm, the full name and address of each of the members
thereof; if a corporation, the name and address of each of the officers
thereof;



      (2)   A certified copy of the certificate of existence and
which shows registered agent of the applicant provided by the Secretary of
State of Indiana;



      (3)   The applicant is financially able to render taxicab
services as applied for and has the financial backing, including liabilities,
as required by any and all city, state, or federal regulation;



      (4)   The applicant owns and is the sole owner of the taxicabs
described in division (A)(5) below in his or her service; and



      (5)   The make, model, factory number and state license number
of each motor vehicle to be driven and operated as a taxicab under the
business license.



   (B)   Any person or persons, firm or corporation found to be in
violation of the requirements of this section shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 119.99(A).



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)  Penalty,
see § 119.99



§ 119.04  TAXICAB OPERATION LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Upon the filing of an application, the Board of Public Works
shall then pass upon the application, taking into consideration the
applicant, his or her financial standing, and his or her equipment for
rendering taxicab service in the city. If the Board of Public Works finds
that it is for the best interests of the city and the citizens thereof that
the applicant be issued a license to operate a taxicab service, then the
Board of Public Works shall instruct the City Clerk to issue a business
license upon the compliance of the applicant with all other provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall issue to the applicant, upon the approval
of the Board of Public Works as above, a license upon the payment of a fee
set forth in § 158.06(D) for each taxicab to be operated, for any calendar
year or fraction thereof the cabs are operated. The taxicab operation license
shall continue, subject to inspection, in effect from year to year until
revoked by the Board of Public Works. The license must be visible and
prominently placed in a window of the taxicab.



   (C)   The operation of an unlicensed taxicab will be subject to the
penalties of § 119.99(A).



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-96-133, passed 8-15-1996; Ord.
G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)



§ 119.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Upon filing the application, approval thereof by the Board of Public
Works, and payment of the required fees as fixed in § 119.04, and provided
the other stipulations and conditions hereof have been met, the City Clerk
shall issue to the applicant a license permitting the operation of the motor
vehicle or motor vehicles described in the application for one year,
commencing January 1 and ending December 31 of each year, subject to
revocation as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995)



§ 119.06  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No license shall be issued and no taxicab shall be operated on
any street or highway within the city until there is filed with the City
Clerk a policy of insurance executed by a company authorized to execute such
instruments under the laws of the state, running for the year of the license
to be issued to the applicant as provided in § 119.05.



   (B)   The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any
final judgment that may be rendered against the insured for damages to
property, bodily injuries or death of any passenger or passengers or any
other person or persons resulting from collision or other accident for which
the person, persons, firm or corporation may be found liable while operating
the taxicab described in the application, in a sum not less than the state
statutory minimums for property damage and for injury or death of any person
or persons.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.07  RESERVED.



§ 119.08  TAXICABS TO HAVE IDENTIFYING SIGNS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any
motor vehicle for taxicab services unless that vehicle is designated as a
taxicab by two or more colored signs, which signs must be permanently painted
of a fast color on the body of the vehicle. The signs must designate the
person, persons, firm or corporation to which the vehicle belongs, and must
be readable at 150 feet or more by a person of normal vision. Limousines
shall be exempt from this requirement.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.09  TAXICAB DRIVERS.



   It shall be the obligation of the owner or operator of any taxicab
company which has secured a license to operate in the city to ascertain that
each driver employed by that operator has obtained a state-required license
to operate for hire passenger-transporting conveyances. Each driver shall
present his or her license to the City Police Chief, or his or her designee,
prior to entering any employment as a driver for the inspection of the Police
Department, and the driver shall be instructed by the Police Chief, or his or
her designee, with respect to traffic ordinances of the city.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.10  RESERVED.



§ 119.11  REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works may suspend or revoke the license
issued to and for any taxicab or taxicabs for the violation of this chapter,
whether or not any criminal prosecution of the licensee is pending, upon
proof and hearing thereof.



   (B)   Any license issued to any owner or owners, operator or
operators under the terms and conditions of this chapter may be revoked or
indefinitely suspended by the Board of Public Works, upon failure of the
owner, owners, operator or operators to operate a taxicab or taxicabs in
compliance with the terms of this chapter and the laws of the state. However,
the owner or owners, operator or operators of each taxicab shall be given
five days’ written notice of the violation, and upon hearing and proof
thereof the license for the taxicab or taxicabs may be suspended for a
definite period or revoked.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.12  INSPECTIONS.



   Any vehicle used as a taxicab shall submit, upon request, to a safety
inspection by a member of the Police Department or the department’s
designee and further shall submit, upon request, to inspection and
verification of all meters or rate devices by the Department of Weights and
Measures or the Department’s designee.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.13  RATES.



   (A)   The rates charged by a taxicab service shall not exceed the
following:



      (1)   A startup fee of $4.10; for each additional mile $1.95;



      (2)   Thirty cents ($0.30) for each minute of waiting;



      (3)   An additional charge of $3.00 per passenger beginning
with the fifth passenger may be added to the metered fare; and



      (4)   Maximum hourly rate of $20.75 per hour.



   (B)   No taxicab service may charge a rate less than 80% of the
maximum charges outlined in divisions (A)(1) through (4) above. No additional
charge may be made for the following: luggage, grocery bags, laundry,
wheelchairs, or seeing-eye dogs or multiple passengers (except for more than
four passengers).



   (C)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is hereby authorized to
declare a fuel emergency and to authorize a fuel surcharge, which will be in
addition to the surcharges in division (A) of this section, to be added to
the taxicab rate when the cost of gasoline exceeds $3.50 per gallon,
according to the American Automobile Association’s published gasoline costs
for medium grade gasoline for a period of 15 days. The allowable surcharge of
5% rounded to the nearest five cents will be added to the rates of fare
authorized in this section. Any taxicab operator or company implementing this
surcharge shall reset its taximeters and flat rate schedules to include the
5% surcharge, and the Board of Public Works and Safety shall provide a form
notice of the surcharge to each taxicab company, and said company shall cause
a copy of the notice to be placed in each licensed taxicab. The Board of
Public Works and Safety is further authorized to terminate the surcharge when
the cost of gasoline falls below $3.50 per gallon according to the American
Automobile Association’s published rates for medium grade gasoline for a
period of 15 consecutive days, or to extend the surcharge in 30 day
increments if the cost of gasoline remains above $3.50 per gallon based upon
gasoline costs for medium grade gasoline as published by the American
Automobile Association.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)  Penalty,
see § 119.99



TAXICAB DRIVERS



§ 119.25  TAXICAB DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab as a driver
within the city without first having secured a taxicab driver’s license to
do so from the city. Any person or persons, firm or corporation found to be
in violation of the requirements of this section shall be subject to the
penalty provided in § 119.99(B).



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)  Penalty,
see § 119.99



§ 119.26  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Every person desiring to drive a taxicab in the city shall, before
undertaking to do so, file an application in writing for a taxicab driver’s
license, duly sworn by the applicant, with the City Clerk, which application
shall show the following:



   (A)   The name and present address of the applicant;



   (B)   The address of each place of residence of the applicant during
the last two years prior to the date of the application;



   (C)   The place of employment, the kind of employment and the name
of each of the employers of the applicant for the last five years immediately
preceding the date of the application;



   (D)   The applicant’s experience in automobile operation;



   (E)   Whether or not the applicant has ever or does use alcohol or
drugs;



   (F)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been charged or
convicted in any court for any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the facts and
details concerning each conviction;



   (G)   The applicant’s state driver’s license number;



   (H)   The applicant shall also at the time of filing an application
for a taxicab driver’s license, pay to the City Clerk the sum of $15 as fee
for an annual taxicab driver’s license. The license shall expire one year
after issuance unless it is revoked pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter;



   (I)   The applicant is fingerprinted;



   (J)   The applicant obtains a local background check and an
interstate identification index background check; and



   (K)   Any additional documentation deemed necessary by the Board of
Works or the City Clerk in verifying the responses given by an applicant.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)  Penalty,
see § 119.99



§ 119.27  REFUSAL TO ISSUE; REVOCATION.



   No taxicab driver’s license shall be issued to any person who does
not meet the requirements set forth in I.C. 9-24-1 et seq. In addition, all
applicants for a taxicab driver’s license shall provide all information
concerning any violations, past, present or future, of any local, state or
federal laws, and shall submit certified results of initial drug testing, and
random drug testing at least annually thereafter from a private drug-testing
contractor approved by the Board of Public Works. Violation of any local,
state or federal laws or failure of any drug test shall be adequate ends for
non-issuance, revocation or non-renewal of a taxicab driver’s license.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-96-133, passed 8-15-1996)



§ 119.28  CONDITIONAL LICENSE.



   Notwithstanding any of the express provisions of this chapter, the
Board of Public Works may, in its discretion, issue a conditional license
which shall, along with the regular license, be subject to immediate
revocation for any period the Board may determine, upon the licensee being
convicted of driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any
charge involving moral turpitude.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995)



§ 119.29  EMPLOYMENT OF UNLICENSED TAXICAB DRIVERS PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation licensed to operate taxicabs under this
chapter shall employ any person as a taxicab driver in the city unless that
taxicab driver has been duly licensed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Any person, firm, or corporation found to have knowingly
violated this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
119.99(B).



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)  Penalty,
see § 119.99



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or company found to be in violation of §§ 119.01
through 119.13 of this chapter shall be subject to impoundment of the
offending vehicle(s), towing and impoundment costs, and a fine of $2,500 to
be paid to the City Clerk before the vehicle will be released.



   (B)   Any person or company who violates §§ 119.25 through 119.29
shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense, and a fine of $250
for each subsequent offense.



   (C)   In addition to the penalties above, the Board of Public Works
may suspend or revoke the taxicab operation and/or driver’s license of any
business or individual who violates the provisions of this chapter. Each day
a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation.



(Ord. G-95-228, passed 8-17-1995; Ord. G-11-26, passed 8-18-2011)



CHAPTER 120:  ADULT CABARETS



Section



   120.01   Rationale and findings



   120.02   Definitions



   120.03   License required



   120.04   Issuance of license



   120.05   Fees



   120.06   Inspection



   120.07   Expiration and renewal of license



   120.08   Suspension



   120.09   Revocation



   120.10   Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal



   120.11   Transfer of license



   120.12   Hours of operation



   120.13   Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring, and interior
lighting requirements



   120.14   Remedies



   120.15   Applicability of chapter to existing businesses



   120.16   Prohibited conduct



   120.17   Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee
liability



   120.18   Failure of city to meet deadline not to risk
applicant/licensee rights



   120.19   Severability



§ 120.01  RATIONALE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult
cabarets in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult cabarets within the city.
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to
any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.



   (B)   Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse
secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made
available to the Common Council, and on findings, interpretations, and
narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v.
Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C, 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda
Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277
(2000); City of Kenton v. Playtime Theatres. Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young
v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc.,
501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State
Liquor Authority v. Belianca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and Plaza Group
Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct.
App. 2007); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th
Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th
Cir. 2003); Andy’s Restaurant & Lounge, Inc. v. City of Gary, 466 F.3d 550
(7th Cir. 2006); Schultz v. City of Cumberland, 26 F. Supp. 2d 1128 (W.D.
Wisc. 1998), aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 228 F.3d 831 (7th Cir. 2000);
Blue Canary Corp. v. City of Milwaukee, 270 F.3d 1156 (7th Cir. 2001); Matney
v. County of Kenosha, 86 F.3d 692 (7th Cir. 1996); Berg v. Health & Hospital
Corp., 865 F.2d 797 (7th Cir. 1989); DiMa Corp. v. Town of Hallie, 185 F.3d
823 (7th Cir. 1999); Graff v. City of Chicago, 9 F.3d 1309 (7th Cir. 1993);
North Avenue Novelties, Inc. v. City of Chicago, 88 F.3d 441 (7th Cir. 1996);
Chulchian v. City of Indianapolis, 633 F.2d 27 (7th Cir. 1980); Bigg Wolf
Discount Video v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003);
County of Cook v. Renaissance Arcade and Bookstore, 122 Ill. 2d 123 (1988)
(including cases cited therein); Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset,
316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); LLEH, inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th
Cir. 2002); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir.
2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane 368 F.3d 1186
(9th Cir. 2004); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860
(11th Cir. 2007); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir.
2007); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998);
Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); Gammoh
v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); People ex rel. Deters v.
The Lion’s Den. Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction
Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005);
Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings
of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); and based upon
reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around adult cabarets,
including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana -
1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix,
Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Los Angeles,
California - 1977; Whittier, California -1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001;
St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale,
Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977;
Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; New York, New
York Times Square - 1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working
Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State
of Minnesota); the Common Council finds:



      (1)   Adult cabarets, as a category of commercial uses, are
associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but
not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread
of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug
trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight,
litter, and sexual assault and exploitation.



      (2)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects
constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in
preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing
secondary effects, which is the city’s rationale for this chapter, exists
independent of any comparative analysis between adult cabarets and non-adult
businesses. Additionally, the city’s interest in regulating adult cabarets
extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future
adult cabarets that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and
documentation relied on in this chapter are reasonably believed to be
relevant to said secondary effects.



      (3)   The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its
stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary
effects of adult cabarets, including the judicial opinions and reports
related to such secondary effects.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the
sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to
them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club,
or similar commercial establishment, regardless of whether alcoholic
beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude.



   CITY.  New Albany, Indiana.



   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE, and EMPLOYMENT.  Any person who performs any service
on the premises of an adult cabaret, on a full time, part time, or contract
basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. EMPLOYEE does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises
or for the delivery of goods to the premises.



   ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any adult cabaret as a
new business; or



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business to any adult
cabaret.



   HEARING OFFICER.  An attorney, not otherwise employed by the city, who
is licensed to practice law in Indiana, and retained to serve as an
independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this chapter.



   INFLUENTIAL INTEREST.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The actual power to operate the adult cabaret or
sexually oriented business or to control the operation, management or
policies of the adult cabaret or sexually oriented business or legal entity
which operates the adult cabaret or sexually oriented business;



      (2)   Ownership of a financial interest of 30% or more of a
business or of any class of voting securities of a business; or



      (3)   Holding an office (such as president, vice president,
secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director and the like) in a
legal entity which operates the adult cabaret or sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate an adult
cabaret has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as
an applicant on the application for an adult cabaret license. In the case of
an “employee”, it shall mean the person in whose name the adult cabaret
employee license has been issued.



   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.



   OPERATOR.  Any person on the premises of an adult cabaret who causes
the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or
who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational
control of the business premises.  A person may be found to be operating or
causing to be operated an adult cabaret regardless of whether that person is
an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.



   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   PREMISES.  The real property upon which the adult cabaret is located,
and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not
limited to, the adult cabaret, the grounds, private walkways, and parking
lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control,
or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for an adult
cabaret license.



   REGULARLY.  The consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing
basis.



   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and expending across the
width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female
buttocks.  This definition shall include the lower portion of the human
female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human
female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or
similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in
part.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  Any of the following specified crimes
for which less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date:



      (1)   Rape, sexual assault, public indecency, statutory rape,
rape of a child, sexual exploitation of a minor, indecent exposure;



      (2)   Prostitution, patronizing prostitution, promoting
prostitution;



      (3)   Obscenity;



      (4)   Dealing in controlled substances;



      (5)   Racketeering, tax evasion, money laundering;



      (6)   Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one
of the foregoing offenses; or



      (7)   Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the
predicate act(s) been committed in Indiana, would have constituted any of the
foregoing offenses.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or



      (2)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with
any of the activities described in subsection (1) above.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT CABARET.  Any of the
following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute an
influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate an adult cabaret in the city without a valid adult cabaret license.



   (B)   Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an
“employee,” as defined in this chapter, of an adult cabaret in the city
without a valid adult cabaret employee license, except that a person who is a
licensee under a valid adult cabaret license shall not be required to also
obtain an adult cabaret employee license.



   (C)   Application. An applicant for an adult cabaret license or an
adult cabaret employee license shall file in person at the office of the
Building Commissioner a completed application made on a form provided by the
Building Commissioner. An adult cabaret may designate an individual with an
influential interest in the business to file its application for an adult
cabaret license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be
signed as required by division (D) herein and shall be notarized. An
application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person
required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in
this division (C), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee:



      (1)   The applicant’s full legal name and any other names
used by the applicant in the preceding five years.



      (2)   Current business address or another mailing address for
the applicant.



      (3)   Written proof of age, in the form of a driver’s
license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture
identification document issued by a governmental agency.



      (4)   If the application is for an adult cabaret license, the
business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number
of the adult cabaret.



      (5)   If the application is for an adult cabaret license, the
name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to
receive service of process.



      (6)   A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted
of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter, and if so, each specified criminal activity
involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the
dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable.



      (7)   A statement of whether any adult cabaret or sexually
oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has,
in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the
influential interest):



         (a)   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance;
or



         (b)   Been subject to a court order of closure or
padlocking.



      (8)   (a)   An application for an adult cabaret license
shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the
business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall
be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room
configuration requirements of this chapter shall submit a diagram indicating
that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of
the applicable regulations.



         (b)   The information provided pursuant to this division
shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the Building Commissioner within ten working days of a change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false
or incomplete.



   (D)   Signature. A person who seeks an adult cabaret employee
license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a
person who seeks an adult cabaret license under this section is an
individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license as applicant.
If a person who seeks an adult cabaret license is other than an individual,
each person with an influential interest in the adult cabaret or in a legal
entity that controls the adult cabaret shall sign the application for a
license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this chapter and
each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



   (E)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the
office of the Building Commissioner on a confidential basis, and such
information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent
required, by court order.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.04  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Business license.  Upon the filing of a completed application
for an adult cabaret license, the Building Commissioner shall immediately
issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is
from a preexisting adult cabaret that is lawfully operating in the city and
the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is
entitled to an annual adult cabaret license.  The temporary license shall
expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual
license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed adult cabaret license
application, the Building Commissioner shall either issue a license to the
applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the
applicant. The Building Commissioner shall issue a license unless:



      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age.



      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide information required
by this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question
or request for information on the application form.



      (3)   The license application fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.



      (4)   The adult cabaret, as defined herein, is not in
compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this chapter or is
not in compliance with the locational requirements of any other part of the
New Albany Code.



      (5)   Any adult cabaret or sexually oriented business in which
an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years
(and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest):



         (a)   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance;
or



         (b)   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.



      (6)   An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or
nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter.



   (B)   Employee license.  Upon the filing of a completed application
for an adult cabaret employee license, the Building Commissioner shall
immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks
licensure to work in a licensed adult cabaret and the completed application,
on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual adult
cabaret employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final
decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of
the filing of a completed adult cabaret employee license application, the
Building Commissioner shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue
a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The Building
Commissioner shall issue a license unless:



      (1)   The applicant is less than 18 years of age.



      (2)   The applicant has failed to provide information as
required by this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.



      (3)   The license application fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.



      (4)   Any adult cabaret or sexually oriented business in which
the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five
years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest):



         (a)   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance;
or



         (b)   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.



      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or
nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter.



   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued
to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for an adult
cabaret, the address of the adult cabaret. The adult cabaret license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult cabaret so
that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or
is open to the public. An adult cabaret employee shall keep the employee's
license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then
working or performing.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.05  FEES.



   The initial license and annual renewal fees for adult cabaret licenses
and adult cabaret employee licenses shall be as follows:  $200 for the
initial fee for an adult cabaret license and $100 for annual renewal; $50 for
the initial adult cabaret employee license and $25 for annual renewal.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.06  INSPECTION.



   Adult cabarets and adult cabaret employees shall permit officers or
agents of the city to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the
portions of the adult cabaret premises where patrons are permitted, for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this chapter,
during those times when the adult cabaret is occupied by patrons or is open
to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to
authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this
chapter, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.07  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar
year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked.  Such
license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as
provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at
least 60 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and
when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the
current license will not be affected.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.08  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall issue a written notice of
intent to suspend an adult cabaret license for a period not to exceed 30 days
if the adult cabaret licensee has knowingly violated this chapter or has
knowingly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this chapter.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall issue a written notice of
intent to suspend an adult cabaret employee license for a period not to
exceed 30 days if the employee licensee has knowingly violated this chapter.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.09  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall issue a written notice of
intent to revoke an adult cabaret license or an adult cabaret employee
license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this chapter or
has knowingly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this chapter
and a suspension of the licensee’s license has become effective within the
previous 12-month period.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall issue a written notice of
intent to revoke an adult cabaret license or an adult cabaret employee
license, as applicable, if:



      (1)   The licensee has knowingly given false information in
the application for the adult cabaret license or the adult cabaret employee
license.



      (2)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or
allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of
the adult cabaret:



      (3)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or
allowed prostitution on the premises of the adult cabaret;



      (4)   The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the adult
cabaret during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or
revoked;



      (5)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or
allowed any specified sexual activity or specified criminal activity to occur
in or on the premises of the adult cabaret; or



      (6)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a
person under the age of 18 years to consume alcohol or appear in a state of
semi-nudity or nudity on the premises of the adult cabaret.



   (C)   The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any
conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or
reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect
for revocation purposes.



   (D)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this
chapter, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult cabaret license or adult
cabaret employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes
effective.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.10  HEARING; LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; APPEAL.



   (A)   (1)   When the Building Commissioner issues a written
notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the Building
Commissioner shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the
specific grounds under this chapter for such action, to the applicant or
licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice
shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing
address on file with the Building Commissioner for the respondent. The notice
shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after
the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the Building
Commissioner, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not
request a hearing within said ten  days, the Building Commissioner’s
written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the
case may be, on the thirtieth day after it is issued, and shall be subject to
the provisions of division (B) of this section.



      (2)   If the respondent does make a written request for a
hearing within said ten days, then the Building Commissioner shall, within
ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent
indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that
the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be
transcribed.



      (3)   At the hearing, the respondent shall have the
opportunity to present all of respondent’s arguments and to be represented
by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and
cross-examine any of the Building Commissioner’s witnesses. The Building
Commissioner shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden
of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The
hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of
the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper
administration of justice. The Hearing Officer shall issue a final written
decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this
chapter, to the respondent within five days after the hearing.



      (4)   If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the
license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not
become effective until the thirtieth day after it is rendered. If the Hearing
Officer’s decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation of the license, the Hearing Officer shall, contemporaneously with
the issuance of the decision, order the Building Commissioner to immediately
withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the
respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is
not yet licensed, the Building Commissioner shall contemporaneously therewith
issue the license to the applicant.



   (B)   If any court action challenging a licensing decision is
initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of
the hearing within 30 days after receiving written notice of the filing of
the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or
disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by
the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. 
The following shall apply to any adult cabaret that is lawfully operating as
an adult cabaret, or any adult cabaret employee that is lawfully employed as
an adult cabaret employee, on the date on which the completed business or
employee application, as applicable, is filed with the Building Commissioner:
Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or
otherwise enjoin the city’s enforcement of any denial, suspension, or
revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the Building
Commissioner shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license.
The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of
the adult cabaret or to continue employment as an adult cabaret employee and
will expire upon the court’s entry of a judgment on the respondent’s
appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city’s
enforcement.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.11  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate an adult cabaret under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the adult cabaret license
application.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.12  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No adult cabaret shall be or remain open for business between 3:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. on any day.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.13  LOITERING, EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING, AND INTERIOR
LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult cabaret to:
(1) ensure that at least two conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is
permitted on the premises are posted on the premises; (2) designate one or
more employees to monitor the activities of persons on the premises by
visually inspecting the premises at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting
the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and (3) provide lighting
to the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring
to prohibit loitering. The lighting shall be of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than one foot candle as measured at the floor
level.  If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at
all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be
installed within an operator’s station.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult cabaret to
ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as
measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all
times that any customer is present in or on the premises.



   (C)   No adult cabaret shall erect a fence, wall, or similar barrier
that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from
being visible from a public right-of-way.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this
section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.14  REMEDIES.



   (A)   Any premises on which repeated violations of the chapter occur
shall constitute a public nuisance.  For purposes of this chapter, REPEATED
VIOLATIONS shall mean three or more violations of this chapter within a
one-year period dating from the time of any violation.



   (B)   The city’s legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute
civil proceedings to enjoin, restrain, or correct violations of this
chapter.  Such proceedings shall be brought in the name of the city,
provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken
hereunder, shall be held to exclude such proceedings as may be authorized by
other provisions of this chapter, or any of the laws in force in the city, or
to exempt anyone violating this code or any part of said laws from any
liability which may be incurred.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.15  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.



   All preexisting adult cabarets lawfully operating in the city in
compliance with all state and local laws prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and all adult cabaret employees working in the city prior to the
effective date of this chapter, are hereby granted a de facto temporary
license to continue operation or employment for a period of 90 days following
the effective date of this chapter. By the end of said 90 days, all adult
cabarets and adult cabaret employees must conform to and abide by the
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-20090



§ 120.16  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or
intentionally, in an adult cabaret, appear in a state of nudity or engage in
a specified sexual activity.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult
cabaret, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee
who, while semi-nude, remains at least five feet from all patrons and on a
stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 600 square feet.



   (C)   The interior of the premises of an adult cabaret shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an
operator’s station of every area of the premises, excluding restrooms, to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose.  If the adult cabaret
has two or more operator’s stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator’s
stations.  The view required in this division (C) must be by direct line of
sight from the operators stations.  An operator’s station shall not exceed
32 square feet of floor area. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that
at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator’s station at
all times that any patron is on the premises.



   (D)   No employee who regularly appears semi-nude in an adult
cabaret shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of
a customer on the premises of an adult cabaret.



   (E)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under
the age of 18 years to be or remain on the premises of an adult cabaret.



   (F)   No operator or licensee of an adult cabaret shall knowingly
violate the regulations in this section or knowingly allow an employee or any
other person to violate the regulations in this section.



   (G)   A sign in a form to be prescribed by the Building
Commissioner, and summarizing the provisions of divisions (A), (B), (D) and
(E), shall be posted near the entrance of the adult cabaret in such a manner
as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No person shall cover,
obstruct, or obscure said sign.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.17  SCIENTER REQUIRED TO PROVE VIOLATION OR BUSINESS LICENSEE
LIABILITY.



   This chapter does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental
state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless
mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this
chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this
chapter, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or
revocation of that employee’s license shall be imputed to the adult cabaret
licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter, or for purposes
of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director,
or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the
operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act
to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person
to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.18  FAILURE OF CITY TO MEET DEADLINE NOT TO RISK APPLICANT/LICENSEE
RIGHTS.



   In the event that a city official is required to act or to do a thing
pursuant to this chapter within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do
such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the
exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act
required of the city official under this chapter, and not completed in the
time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by
the city of an applicant or licensee's application for an adult cabaret
license or an adult cabaret employee’s license including a renewal), the
license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to
commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city’s
action has passed.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 120.19 SEVERABILITY.



   This chapter and each section and provision of this chapter hereunder,
are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not
withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared
to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this
chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to
be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such
sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to
which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby
declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed
independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any
procedural aspect of this chapter be invalidated, such invalidation shall not
affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this chapter.



(Ord. G-09-05, passed 3-2-2009)



CHAPTER 121:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   121.01   Purpose and findings



   121.02   Definitions



   121.03   Permitted, subject to certain objective criteria to promote
purpose and findings



   121.04   Preexisting sexually oriented businesses



   121.05   Permit required



   121.06   Issuance and renewal of permit



   121.07   Periodic inspection



   121.08   Expiration of permit



   121.09   Suspension of permit



   121.10   Revocation of permit



   121.11   Hearing on permit denial, suspension or revocation; appeal



   121.12   Minors not permitted on premises



   121.13   Hours of operation



   121.14   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos on premises



   121.15   Culpable mental state required to establish liability



   121.16   Failure of official to meet time frame not to risk rights
of applicant or permittee



 



   121.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Live Adult Entertainment Businesses, see Ch. 120



   Massage Parlors, see Ch. 116



§ 121.01  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult uses within
the city.



      (2)   The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of, or
reasonable access to, any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials.



      (3)   Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article
I, § 9, of the Indiana Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.



      (4)   Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.



   (B)   Findings.



      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined herein, should
be regulated.



      (2)   They should be segregated from one another and from
houses of worship, schools, parks, and residential neighborhoods to protect
the public health, welfare and safety because, inter alia, sexually oriented
businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide
variety of adverse secondary effects, including, but not limited to, personal
and property crimes, illicit and unsanitary sexual activity, illicit drug
use, decreased desirability of and negative impacts on the use of surrounding
properties, blight, litter and sexual assault and exploitation.



      (3)   The city has a substantial government interest in
preventing each of the aforementioned adverse effects.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.



   ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business; or



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.



   HOUSE OF WORSHIP. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.



   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.



   OPERATE or CAUSE TO OPERATE. To cause to function, or to put or keep in
a state of doing business. OPERATOR means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational
control of the business, or who causes it to function or  puts or keeps it
in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated
a sexually oriented business, whether or not that person is an owner or part
owner of the business.



   PARK. Any PARK used or designated as an area for recreational
activities, including but not limited to, playgrounds, nature trials,
swimming pools, athletic fields, basketball, baseball, tennis courts, walking
paths or similar public land within the city.



   PERMITTEE. A person whose name appears on the permit/application to
operate a sexually oriented business.



   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.



   REGULARLY FEATURES. The consistent and repeated offering of the
identified goods or services to the public as one of the intended
profit-making objectives of the commercial enterprise, which enterprise
regularly holds itself forth to the public as a place where the goods or
services may be obtained.



   RESIDENCE. Any structure used by one or more persons as a dwelling.



   SCHOOL. Any nursery SCHOOL; daycare facility; preschool; kindergarten
SCHOOL; public or private elementary, middle or secondary SCHOOL; special
education SCHOOL; vocational SCHOOL, junior college or college and
university. SCHOOL includes all SCHOOL grounds.



   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers no more than the genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage,
pubic area, vulva and nipple and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel; provided that, the areola and nipple are not exposed, in whole or in
part.



   SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for
stimulation of the male or female human genital organ or anus, or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, and shall include devices
such as dildos, vibrators and penis pumps, and shall also include other
devices with non-sex related utility, such as leather whips, straps and
ligatures, when the devices are marketed in a context suggesting sexual or
sadomasochistic purposes. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to
include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually
transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Those businesses defined as follows:



      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A commercial
establishment that has a significant or substantial percent of its
stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial percent of its
revenue, or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration,
of any one of the following:  books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other visual representations that are characterized by the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (2)   ADULT THEATER. An establishment where films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions,
which are characterized by the display of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, are regularly shown to persons for any form of
consideration. This definition shall include businesses that regularly
feature view booths or rooms of less than 150 square feet, wherein such films
are regularly shown.



      (3)   SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that
regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be
construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic or any
establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products
or services.



   SIGNIFICANT OR SUBSTANTIAL. Thirty percent or more.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



      (4)   Excretory functions, as part of or in connection with
any of the activities set forth in divisions (1) through (3) above.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.03  PERMITTED, SUBJECT TO CERTAIN OBJECTIVE CRITERIA TO PROMOTE
PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   It shall be considered a nuisance and a violation for any
person to establish, operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business in the city, unless it is 1,000 feet from:



      (1)   Any other sexually oriented business;



      (2)   Any house of worship, park or school; or



      (3)   Any structure used as a residence.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in
a straight line in all directions, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a
part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is or is to be
established.



   (C)   This chapter does not amend or supercede or revoke the city's
Live Adult Entertainment Ordinance (Chapter 120) or Massage Parlor Ordinance
(Chapter 116).



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.04  PREEXISTING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Two-year period for continued operation. In order to make a
reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location, a
preexisting sexually oriented business, lawfully existing in all respects
prior to the effective date of this chapter, may continue to operate for two
years following that date.



   (B)   Six-month hardship extension.



      (1)   At the conclusion of the two-year period, the sexually
oriented business shall no longer be recognized as a legal preexisting
sexually oriented business; provided that, upon a showing of financial
hardship, a preexisting sexually oriented business may apply for one or more
six-month extensions of the original two-year period.



      (2)   An application for an initial extension based upon
financial hardship ("hardship extension") shall be made at least 60 days
before the conclusion of the aforementioned two-year period.



      (3)   If a hardship extension is granted, subsequent
applications for hardship extensions shall be made at least 60 days before
the conclusion of the current extension period.



   (C)   Procedure for seeking hardship extension.



      (1)   An application for a hardship extension shall be filed
in writing with the Board of Public Works and Safety and shall include
evidence of purchase and improvement costs, income earned and lost,
depreciation and costs of relocation.



      (2)   Within ten days after receiving the application, the
Zoning Officer shall schedule a public hearing on the application before the
Planning Commission, which public hearing shall be conducted within 30 days
after the Zoning Officer's receipt of the application.



      (3)   Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
shall be published at least ten days before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation published within the city, and shall contain the
particular location for which the hardship extension is requested.



   (D)   Decision on hardship extension.



      (1)   The Planning Commission shall issue a written decision
within ten days after the public hearing on the application for a hardship
extension.



      (2)   The hardship extension shall be granted upon a showing
that the nonconforming sexually oriented business is unable to recoup its
investments in its current location, made prior to the effective date of this
chapter, unless the hardship extension is granted.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall maintain, operate, conduct or cause to be
conducted, any sexually oriented business within the limits of the city,
without first obtaining a permit under this section.



   (B)   An applicant for a sexually oriented business permit shall
file with the City Controller a completed application, made on a form
prescribed and provided by the City Controller.



      (1)   An application shall be considered complete if it
includes the information required in this section.



      (2)   The applicant shall be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   The application is complete when it includes the
information and items required in divisions (B)(3)(a) and (b) below:



         (a)   An application for permit must contain the
following information:



            1.   The full true name of the applicant, and any
other names or aliases used in the preceding five years;



            2.   The applicant's current business or mailing
address;



            3.   Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years
of age, consisting of either :



               a.   A copy of the applicant's birth
certificate and current photo;



               b.   A copy of the applicant's driver's
license with picture; or



               c.   Another picture identification document
issued by a government agency.



            4.   The name of the business, the business
location and legal description of the property and a description of the type
of sexually oriented business;



            5.   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration
of the premises, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by
the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but
shall be drawn to a designated scale, or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;



            6.   A signed statement stating the following:



               a.   That the business is authorized by the
State of Indiana to conduct business within the state;



               b.   That the site being applied for meets
the requirements of § 121.03, regarding required distances from all
residences, houses of worship, parks, schools and other sexually oriented
businesses; and



               c.   The name and address of the statutory
agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process.



            7.   If a person wishing to operate a sexually
oriented business is an individual, he or she shall sign the application for
a permit as applicant; and



            8.   If an entity (partnership, corporation,
limited liability company and the like) or group of individuals seeks to
obtain a permit, each individual with 20% or greater interest must sign as an
applicant, under oath, and provide the information required in this division.



         (b)   At the time of filing an application, the
applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable application fee of $200
for the investigation the city requires to review the application.



   (C)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with
the application for a permit under this chapter shall be maintained by the
city on a confidential basis and may be disclosed only:



      (1)   To other governmental agencies in connection with a bona
fide law enforcement or public safety function; or



      (2)   As may otherwise be required by law or a court order.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.06  ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Temporary permit.



      (1)   Upon the filing of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business permit, the City Controller shall issue a
temporary permit to the applicant.



      (2)   The temporary permit shall expire upon the final
administrative decision of the city to deny or grant a permit.



      (3)   Within 30 days after the receipt of a completed
application, the City Controller shall either issue a permit or issue a
written notice of intent to deny a permit.



   (B)   Reasons for refusal to grant a permit. The City Controller
shall approve the application and grant a sexually oriented business permit,
unless one or more of the following is true:



      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age;



      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide the information
required by § 121.05 or has provided false information on the application;



      (3)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business currently are in violation of or are not in compliance with the
city's health, fire or building codes, or the locational requirements of §
121.03;



      (4)   The applicant failed to pay the non-refundable permit
application fee; or



      (5)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter that has
been revoked within the previous year.



   (C)   Permit term and restrictions.



      (1)   The granting of a permit to a permittee for a sexually
oriented business shall be for one year.



      (2)   The permit is non-transferable to any other person other
than the applicant(s) listed on the application and is valid only for the
location listed on the application.



   (D)   Renewal of permit.



      (1)   The permittee who has been granted a permit to operate a
sexually oriented business and who wishes to renew a permit shall:



         (a)   File a renewal application of its permit 60 days
before the expiration of the issuance date when the original permit was
granted; and



         (b)   Follow all conditions of § 121.05.



      (2)   Upon application for renewal, the permittee shall pay a
non-refundable fee of $100 for the investigation the city requires to review
the renewal application.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.07  PERIODIC INSPECTION.



   (A)   To ensure compliance with the specific regulations of this
chapter, sexually oriented businesses permittees and their employees shall
permit officers or agents of the city to inspect, from time to time on an
occasional basis, portions of the sexually oriented business premises where
patrons are permitted, during those times when the sexually oriented business
is occupied by patrons or is open for business.



   (B)   The city shall construe this section narrowly to authorize
reasonable inspections of the permitted premises pursuant to this chapter,
but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.08  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Each permit shall expire one year from its date of issuance,
and may be renewed only by filing an application as provided in § 121.06(D).



   (B)   An application for renewal shall be filed at least 60 days
before the expiration date.



   (C)   When an application for renewal is filed less than 30 days
before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.09  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a
permit for a period not to exceed 30 days, if a permittee has knowingly
violated any section of this chapter, or has knowingly allowed an employee of
the sexually oriented business to violate this chapter.



   (B)   The issuance of a written notice of intent to suspend shall
not be a prerequisite to the issuance of a written notice of intent to revoke
a permit per § 121.10.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.10  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a
sexually oriented business permit, if a cause of suspension in § 121.09
occurs, and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The city shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a
sexually oriented business permit, if a permittee:



      (1)   Provided false information in conjunction with the
application for the sexually oriented business permit;



      (2)   Allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances
on the premises;



      (3)   Allowed prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   Operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the permittee's permit was suspended; and



      (5)   Allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the permitted premises.



   (C)   (1)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure
described in § 121.11, the city revokes a permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year.



      (2)   The permittee shall not be issued a permit for one year
from the date the revocation becomes effective; provided that, if the
conditions of § 121.11(B) are met, a provisional permit will be granted.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.11  HEARING ON PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; APPEAL.



   (A)   Notice.



      (1)   If facts exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a
permit under this chapter, the City Controller shall notify the applicant or
permittee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke
the permit, including the grounds therefor, by personal delivery or certified
mail.



      (2)   The notification shall be directed to the most current
business address on file with the City Controller.



      (3)   Within five working days of receipt of such notice, the
respondent may provide to the City Controller, in writing, a response that
shall include a statement of reasons why the permit should not be denied,
suspended or revoked.



      (4)   Within three days of the receipt of respondent's written
response, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall notify respondent in
writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension or revocation
proceeding.



   (B)   Hearing. Within ten working days of the receipt of
respondent's written response, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall
conduct a hearing, at which respondent shall have the opportunity to be
represented by counsel, and to present evidence and witnesses on his or her
behalf.



   (C)   Decision.



      (1)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall issue a
written opinion and decision within five days of the hearing.



      (2)   (a)   If a response is not received by the Board of
Public Works and Safety in the time provided or, if after a hearing, the
Board of Public Works and Safety finds that grounds as specified in this
chapter exist for denial, suspension or revocation, then the denial,
suspension or revocation shall become final five days after the Board of
Public Works and Safety sends, by certified mail, written notice that the
permit has been denied, suspended or revoked.



         (b)   The notice shall include a statement advising the
applicant or permittee of the right to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.



      (3)   If the Board of Public Works and Safety finds that no
grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, then within
five days after the hearing, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall
withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the permit, and shall so
notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of the action, and shall
contemporaneously issue the permit.



   (D)   Appeal and provisional permit.



      (1)   When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a permit
becomes final, the applicant or permittee (aggrieved party) whose application
for a permit has been denied, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked,
shall have the right to appeal the action to a court of competent
jurisdiction.



      (2)   Upon the filing of any court action to appeal,
challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial,
suspension or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved
party a provisional permit.



      (3)   The provisional permit shall allow the aggrieved party
to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue
employment as a sexually oriented business employee, as the case may be, and
will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's
action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's
enforcement.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.12  MINORS NOT PERMITTED ON PREMISES.



   A person who operates a sexually oriented business shall not allow a
person under the age of 18 years of age to be in or remain upon the business
premises.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.13  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   A sexually oriented business shall not be open for business between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any particular day.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.14  EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS ON PREMISES.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, and who exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than
150 square feet of floor space, films or videos characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply
with the following requirements.



   (A)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms.



      (1)   A manager's station shall not be greater than 32 square
feet in area.



      (2)   Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.



      (3)   If the premises has two or more manager's stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view, from at least one of the manager's
stations, of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose.



      (4)   The view required in this division must be by direct
line of sight from the manager's station.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the permittee to ensure that, at all
times, the view area specified in division (A) remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials.



   (C)   No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one
person at any time.



   (D)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access, at an illumination of not less than five footcandles, as
measured at the floor level.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the permittee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.



   (F)   No permittee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.15  CULPABLE MENTAL STATE REQUIRED TO ESTABLISH LIABILITY.



   (A)   Where any provision or offense herein fails to state a
necessary level of culpability to establish a violation or liability, the
offense shall be established upon a showing that the person acted knowingly
or recklessly with regard to the predicate act.



   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of
this chapter, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the sexually oriented
business permittee to establish a violation of this chapter, or to deny,
suspend or revoke a license, only if a permittee allowed, either knowingly or
recklessly, a violation of this chapter to occur.



   (C)   It shall be a defense to liability that the sexually oriented
business permittee was powerless to prevent the violation.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.16  FAILURE OF OFFICIAL TO MEET TIME FRAME NOT TO RISK RIGHTS OF
APPLICANT OR PERMITTEE.



   (A)   In the event that a government official is required to take an
act or to do a thing pursuant to this chapter within a prescribed time, and
fails to take such act or to do the thing within the time prescribed, the
failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an
applicant or permittee.



   (B)   If the act required of the official under this chapter, but
not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s)
necessary for the city's approval of an application for a sexually oriented
business permit (including a renewal), the applicant or permittee shall be
deemed to have satisfied the condition(s) for which approval was sought.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   A person who violates this chapter shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $2,500.



      (2)   Each day the violation is committed, or permitted to
continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be fined as such.



   (B)   A person who violates this chapter is subject to a suit for
injunction.



   (C)   Nothing in this section, and no action taken thereunder, shall
be held to exclude or prevent such criminal or other civil proceedings as may
be authorized by other state or local law.



(Ord. G-04-10, passed 3-18-2004)



CHAPTER 122:  TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   122.01   Sanitary operation of tattoo parlors



   122.02   Definitions



   122.03   Operator training responsibilities



   122.04   Operator responsibilities



   122.05   Operator policies



   122.06   Tattoo artist and body piercer minimum training and
certification requirements



   122.07   Patron records



   122.08   Illness



   122.09   Handwashing



   122.10   Personal protective equipment



   122.11   Tattooing equipment



   122.12   Needles



   122.13   Reusable equipment



   122.14   Dyes or pigments



   122.15   Work environment



   122.16   Infectious waste containment



   122.17   Treatment and transport of infectious waste



   122.18   Permits and licenses



   122.19   Inspections



   122.20   Procedures when violations are noted



   122.21   Permit or license suspension/revocation



   122.22   Other permit or license revocation, suspension and
immediate closure orders



   122.23   Hearing



   122.24   Appeal



   122.25   Enforcement



   122.26   Violations



   122.27   Prohibited acts



   122.28   Injunction



   122.29   Expense



   122.30   Cumulative



 



   122.99   Penalty



§ 122.01  SANITARY OPERATION OF TATTOO PARLORS.



   All places, individuals and businesses that offer to affix any type of
permanent tattoo or body piercing to a person shall be regulated by this
chapter and shall maintain the premises in which tattoos or body piercings
are performed and equipment used in the tattoo or body piercing process in a
sanitary manner.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:



   BLOOD. Human blood.



   BLOOD BORNE PATHOGENS. Pathogenic microorganisms that are present in
human blood and can cause disease in humans. These PATHOGENS include, but are
not limited to, the following:



      (1)   HBV - hepatitis B virus



      (2)   HCV - hepatitis C virus



      (3)   HIV - human immunodeficiency virus.



   BODY PIERCER.  Any person who performs body piercing on an individual.



   BODY PIERCING.  The perforation of any human body part other than ear
lobe for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration or for some
other non-medical purpose.



   CLEANED. Removal of all visible dust, soil, or any other foreign
material.



   CONTAMINATED.  The presence or reasonably anticipated presence of
blood or OPIM (other potentially infectious materials) on an item or surface.



   DECONTAMINATED.  The use of physical or chemical means to remove,
inactivate, or destroy blood borne pathogens on a surface or item which does
not require sterilization to the point where they are no longer capable of
transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe
for handling, use, or disposal.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Floyd County Health Department.



   FACILITY.  A tattoo parlor or a body piercing facility, or both, which
is any room or space that is mobile or stationary where tattooing or body
piercing, or both, is provided or where the business of tattooing or body
piercing, or both, is conducted.



   HBV.  The hepatitis B virus.



   HCV.  The hepatitis C virus.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The duly appointed Health Officer as set forth in
I.C. 16-20-2-16.  The Floyd County HEALTH OFFICER or designee shall be
designated as the official in charge of enforcing this chapter. The HEALTH
OFFICER may designate a representative in the Health Department to perform
those duties and responsibilities of the HEALTH OFFICER.



   HIGH LEVEL DISINFECTION.  A process that destroys all micro-organisms,
with the exception of high numbers of bacterial spores.



   HIV. The human immunodeficiency virus.



   INFECTIOUS WASTE.  Waste that epidemiologic evidence indicates is
capable of transmitting a dangerous communicable disease. INFECTIOUS WASTE
includes, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Contaminated sharps or contaminated objects that could
potentially become contaminated sharps.



      (2)   Infectious biological cultures, infectious associated
biologicals, and infectious agent stock.



      (3)   Pathological waste.



      (4)   Blood and blood products in liquid and semi-liquid form.



      (5)   Carcasses, body parts, blood, and body fluids in liquid
and semi-liquid form, and bedding of laboratory animals.



      (6)   Other waste that has been intermingled with infectious
waste.



   INTERMEDIATE LEVEL DISINFECTION.  A process that inactivates:



      (1)   Mycobacterium tuberculosis;



      (2)   Vegetative bacteria;



      (3)   Most viruses; and



      (4)   Most fungi;



but does not necessarily kill bacterial spores.



   MOBILE FACILITY.  A tattoo parlor or a body piercing facility, or
both, which is any moveable room or space where tattooing or body piercing,
or both, is provided or where the business of tattooing or body piercing, or
both, is conducted.



   OPERATOR. Any person who controls, operates, manages, or owns any
facility.



   OTHER POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIALS OR OPIM.



      (1)   Human body fluids as follows:



         (a)   Semen.



         (b)   Vaginal secretions.



         (c)   Cerebrospinal fluid.



         (d)   Synovial fluid.



         (e)   Pleural fluid.



         (f)   Pericardial fluid.



         (g)   Peritoneal fluid.



         (h)   Amniotic fluid.



         (i)   Saliva in dental procedures.



         (j)   Any body fluid that is visibly contaminated with
blood.



         (k)   All body fluids where it is difficult or
impossible to differentiate between body fluids.



      (2)   Any unfixed tissue or organ, other than intact skin,
from a human, living or dead.



      (3)   HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, and HIV or
HBV-containing culture medium or other solutions; and blood, organs, or other
tissues from experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV.



   PARENTERAL.  Piercing the mucous membranes or the skin barrier through
such events as needle sticks, human bites, cuts, or abrasions.



   PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT.  Specialized clothing or equipment worn
for protection against contact with blood or OPIM.



   SECURE AREA.  An area that is designated and maintained to prevent the
entry of unauthorized persons.



   SEMI-LIQUID BLOOD, BLOOD PRODUCTS.  Blood, blood products that have
intermediate fluid properties and are capable of flowing in a manner similar
to liquid.



   STERILIZE.  The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores.



   STORE.  The containment of infectious waste in such a manner as not to
constitute collection, treatment, transport, or disposal.



   TATTOO.



      (1)   Any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol, or
other mark placed with the aid of needles or other instruments; or



      (2)   Any design, letter, scroll, figure, or symbol done by
scarring upon or under the skin; or



      (3)   Any piercing of the mucous membranes or the skin through
which needles or other items are inserted for temporary or permanent
placement upon a person.



   TATTOO ARTIST.  Any person who provides a tattoo to an individual or
who performs any type of piercing of the mucous membranes or the skin through
which needles or other objects are inserted for temporary or permanent
placement.



   UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS.  An approach to infection control in which all
human blood and certain human body fluids are treated as if known to be
infectious for HIV, HBV, HCV, and other blood borne pathogens.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.03  OPERATOR TRAINING RESPONSIBILITIES.



   An individual or entity that is an operator shall comply with the
following training responsibilities:



   (A)   Ensure that the training described in the Indiana Occupational
Safety and Health Administration’s Bloodborne Pathogens Standard (as found
in 29 CFR 1910.1030) is provided to all tattoo artists and body piercers,
anyone employed by the facility, or anyone acting on behalf of the facility,
who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or
parenteral contact with blood or OPIM.



   (B)   Ensure that training on the handling of infectious waste is
provided to all tattoo artists and body piercers, anyone employed by the
facility, or anyone acting on behalf of the facility who has a reasonably
anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with
blood or OPIM.



   (C)   Ensure that a record of training described in subdivisions (A)
and (B) is maintained, as required under the Indiana Occupational Safety and
Health Administration’s Bloodborne Pathogens Standard (as found in 29 CFR
1910.1030) of an individual’s participation in the training that is
provided. The record shall be made available to the department for inspection
upon request.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.04  OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The operator shall ensure that tattoo artists, body piercers,
anyone employed by the facility, or anyone acting on behalf of the facility
who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or
parenteral contact with blood are provided personal protective equipment and
expendables needed to implement the precautions required by this rule and the
Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s Bloodborne
Pathogens Standard (as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030).



   (B)   The operator shall require tattoo artists, body piercers,
anyone employed by the facility, or anyone acting on behalf of the facility
who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or
parenteral contact with blood to provide evidence of compliance with the
universal precautions education requirements contained in § 122.06.



   (C)   The operator shall display a description of compliance with
the requirements contained in division (D).



   (D)   The operator shall display written materials prepared or
approved by the Department explaining universal precautions and patrons’
rights under this rule. These materials shall include information on how to
report violations of universal precautions and shall include information
regarding the Department’s duties to investigate.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.05  OPERATOR POLICIES.



   The operator shall develop a written policy in compliance with this
rule and the requirements of the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health
Administration’s Bloodborne Pathogen Standard (as found in 29 CFR
1910.1030) that:



   (A)   Requires the use of universal precautions when performing
tattooing or body piercing and any activity or duty that includes any
reasonably anticipated skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with
blood or OPIM;



   (B)   Requires disinfection or sterilization of contaminated
reusable items;



   (C)   Includes the safe handling of infectious waste;



   (D)   Provides sanctions, including discipline and dismissal, if
warranted, for failure to use universal precautions and/or handle infectious
waste safely; and



   (E)   Prohibiting of medical procedures; tongue splitting, tattoo
removal, and uses of anesthesia.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.06  TATTOO ARTIST AND BODY PIERCER MINIMUM TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All tattoo artists, body piercers, anyone employed by the
facility, and anyone acting on behalf of the facility who has a reasonably
anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with
blood or OPIM shall complete the training program that is required under the
requirements of the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s
Bloodborne Pathogen Standard (as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030). The programs
under this section shall be as follows:



      (1)   A blood borne pathogen training session provided by the
operator meeting the requirements under the Indiana Occupational Safety and
Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogens Standard (as found in 29 CFR
1910.1030).



      (2)   Any bloodborne pathogen continuing education program
accredited by a health care licensing entity.



   (B)   All tattoo artists, body piercers, anyone employed by the
facility, and anyone acting on behalf of the facility who has a reasonably
anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with
blood or OPIM must be trained in the facility’s policies on the handling of
infectious waste.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.07  PATRON RECORDS.



   (A)   Records.  Records of each patron shall be maintained for two
years. The record shall include the following:



      (1)   Patron’s name.



      (2)   Address.



      (3)   Age.  Age must be verified by two items of
identification, one of which must be a valid government issued identification.



      (4)   Date of the tattoo or body piercing.



      (5)   Design of the tattoo or body piercing.



      (6)   Location of the tattoo or body piercing on the
patron’s body.



      (7)   The name of the tattoo artist or body piercer who
performed the work.



      (8)   Jewelry or other decoration used.



   (B)   Tattooing and body piercing of minors prohibited.  No person
shall tattoo any person under the age of 18 years, except in the presence of
and with the written permission of a properly identified parent or legal
guardian of such person. Under no circumstances shall any person tattoo or
body pierce a person under the age of 16.  A person providing tattoo or body
piercing services shall conspicuously post a notice stating that it is
illegal to tattoo or body pierce any person under the age of 18 without the
parent or legal guardian's consent and without the parent or legal guardian
present and that it is illegal to ever tattoo or body pierce any person under
the age of 16 years old.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.08  ILLNESS.



   Tattoo artists or body piercers who are experiencing symptoms of acute
disease that include, but are not limited to:



   (A)   Diarrhea;



   (B)   Vomiting;



   (C)   Fever;



   (D)   Rash;



   (E)   Productive cough;



   (F)   Jaundice; or



   (G)   Draining (or open) skin infections, boils, impetigo, or
scabies;



shall refrain from providing tattoos or body piercing.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.09  HANDWASHING.



   (A)   Handwashing facilities shall be readily accessible in the each
work station where tattooing or body piercing is provided.



   (B)   Hands shall be washed with soap and running water immediately
before putting on gloves and after removal of gloves or other personal
protective equipment.



   (C)   Only single use towels shall be used.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.10  PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT.



   Appropriate personal protective equipment shall be worn as follows:



   (A)   A clean protective clothing layer shall be worn whenever there
is a reasonably anticipated risk of contamination of clothing by blood or
OPIM.



   (B)   Masks, in combination with eye protection devices such as
goggles or glasses with a solid side shield or chin length face shield, shall
be worn whenever splashes, spray, splatter, or droplets of blood or OPIM may
be generated and eye, nose, or mouth contamination can be reasonably
anticipated.



   (C)   Disposable gloves, such as surgical or examination type, shall
worn during the tattooing or body piercing process. Gloves shall be changed
and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the
application of the tattoo or body piercing, when the gloves become torn or
punctured, or whenever the ability to function as a barrier is compromised.
Disposable gloves shall not be reused.



   (D)   Gloves shall be worn when decontaminating environmental
surfaces and equipment.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.11  TATTOOING EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Only single use razors shall be used to shave the area to be
tattooed.



   (B)   All stencils shall be properly disposed of after a single use.



   (C)   If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be
applied with a single use article only.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.12  NEEDLES.



   (A)   Needles shall be individually packaged and sterilized prior to
use.



   (B)   Needles shall be single use only.



   (C)   Needles shall be discarded in sharps containers immediately
after use.



   (D)   Contaminated needles shall not be bent or broken or otherwise
manipulated by hand.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.13  REUSABLE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Heating procedures capable of sterilization must be used when
heat stable, nondisposable equipment is sterilized.



   (B)   Equipment that is to be sterilized shall be put in single-use
packaging.



   (C)   Records must be maintained to document the following:



      (1)   Duration of sterilization technique.



      (2)   Determination of effective sterility, such as use of a
biological indicator, is performed monthly.



      (3)   Equipment is maintained as recommended by the owner’s
manual and proof is available that the owner’s manual recommendations are
reviewed monthly.



      (4)   Reusable contaminated equipment shall not be stored or
processed in a manner that requires any person to reach by hand into the
containers where these sharp items have been placed.



      (5)   Reusable contaminated equipment shall be:



         (a)   Placed in puncture-resistant containers which are:



            1.   Labeled with the biohazard symbol; and



            2.   Leakproof on both sides and bottom.



         (b)   Stored in a manner that does not require reaching
by hand into the container where the equipment is stored until cleaning prior
to sterilization.



      (6)   Contaminated reusable equipment shall be effectively
cleaned prior to sterilization or disinfection.



      (7)   Any reusable contaminated equipment that comes into
direct contact, or is likely to come into direct contact, with an instrument
that penetrates the skin other than a piercing gun shall be effectively
cleaned and sterilized prior to use.



      (8)   All sterilized equipment shall not be removed from
wrappers or sterilizer packaging until immediately prior to use.



      (9)   Any reusable equipment that comes into contact with
mucous membranes shall be effectively cleaned and sterilized prior to use.



      (10)   Piercing guns shall be cleaned and undergo, at a
minimum, high level disinfection after each use and whenever visibly
contaminated.



      (11)   All reusable equipment that has contact with intact
skin shall undergo, at a minimum, intermediate level disinfection.



      (12)   All other equipment used during the tattooing or body
piercing procedure shall be single use, including corks.



      (13)   All body piercers and tattoo artists shall comply with
all other equipment manufacturer’s recommendations.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.14  DYES OR PIGMENTS.



   (A)   All dyes or pigments in tattooing shall be from professional
suppliers specifically providing dyes or pigments for the tattooing of human
skin.



   (B)   In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by tattoo artists,
only non-toxic sterile materials shall be used. Single use or individual
portions of dyes or pigments in clean, single-use containers shall be used
for each patron.



   (C)   After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in single
use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container.



   (D)   Any object placed under the skin shall be sterile.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.15  WORK ENVIRONMENT.



   (A)   No tattooing or body piercing shall be conducted in any room
used as living quarters or in any room that opens directly into living or
sleeping quarters.  All work-stations shall be at least ten feet by ten feet
and have working sink area to prevent cross contamination.



   (B)   All facilities shall have a dry storage and sterilization room
separate from work areas and not accessible by the public. Each sterilization
room shall have adequate room for proper sterilization technique that shall
include separation of contaminated and sterilized storage area.



   (C)   Live animals shall be excluded from areas where tattooing or
body piercing is being conducted. This exclusion does not apply to the
following:



      (1)   Patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers.



      (2)   Guide dogs accompanying the following:



         (a)   Blind persons.



         (b)   Partially blind persons.



         (c)   Physically disabled persons.



         (d)   Guide dog trainers.



         (e)   Persons with impaired hearing.



   (D)   Eating, drinking, smoking, applying cosmetics, or handling
contact lenses shall not be allowed in work areas where there is a likelihood
of exposure to blood or OPIM.



   (E)   Food and drink shall not be kept in areas where there is a
reasonably anticipated risk of exposure to blood or OPIM.



   (F)   All equipment and environmental surfaces shall be cleaned and
disinfected after contact with blood or OPIM.



   (G)   Environmental surfaces and equipment not requiring
sterilization, that have been contaminated by blood, shall be cleaned and
disinfected.



   (H)   All work surfaces shall be:



      (1)   Nonabsorbent;



      (2)   Easily cleanable;



      (3)   Smooth; and



      (4)   Free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits and
similar imperfections.



   (I)   Disinfectant solutions shall be:



      (1)   Hospital grade, tuberculocidal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) registered disinfectant; or



      (2)   Sodium hypochlorite, 0.5% concentration, by volume
(common household bleach is 10% concentration in water); the solution shall
be dated and shall not be used if it is more than 24 hours old.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.16  INFECTIOUS WASTE CONTAINMENT.



   (A)   Contaminated disposable needles or instruments shall be: 
stored in leak-resistant, puncture-resistant containers, tightly sealed to
prevent expulsion, labeled with the biohazard symbol, and effectively treated
in accordance with this rule prior to being stored in an unsecured area and
sent for final disposal.



   (B)   Infectious wastes that are contaminated sharps or objects that
could potentially become contaminated sharps shall be placed in containers
that:



      (1)   Shall be impervious to moisture;



      (2)   Shall be of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent
expulsion;



      (3)   Shall be secured to prevent leakage expulsion;



      (4)   Shall be labeled with the biohazard symbol; and



      (5)   Shall be effectively treated in accordance with this
rule prior to being placed in an unsecured area and sent for final disposal.



   (C)   If infectious waste is stored prior to final disposal, all
persons subject to this rule shall store infectious waste in a secure area
that:



      (1)   Is locked or otherwise secured to eliminate access by or
exposure to the general public;



      (2)   Affords protection from adverse environmental conditions
and vermin; and



      (3)   Has a prominently displayed biohazard symbol.



   (D)   Infectious waste shall be stored in a manner that preserves
the integrity of the container and is not conducive to rapid microbial growth
and putrefaction.



   (E)   Disinfect reusable containers for infectious waste each time
that they are emptied unless the surfaces of the reusable containers have
been protected from contamination by disposable liners, bags, or other
devices that are removed with the infectious waste.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.17  TREATMENT AND TRANSPORT OF INFECTIOUS WASTE.



   (A)   All operators shall ensure that infectious waste is either
treated on-site in accordance with this rule or transported off-site for
treatment in accordance with this rule.



   (B)   A treatment is effective if it reduces the pathogenic
qualities of infectious waste for safe handling, is designed for the specific
waste involved, and is carried out in a manner consistent with this rule.
Effective treatment may include:



      (1)   Incineration in an incinerator designed to accommodate
infectious waste;



      (2)   Steam sterilization;



      (3)   Chemical disinfection under circumstances where safe
handling of the waste is assured;



      (4)   Thermal inactivation;



      (5)   Irradiation; or



      (6)   Discharge in a sanitary sewer or septic system that is
properly installed and operating in accordance with state and local laws.



   (C)   All persons subject to this rule shall:



      (1)   Transport infectious waste in a manner that reasonably
protects waste haulers and the public from contracting a dangerous
communicable disease; and



      (2)   Effectively treat infectious waste in accordance with
this rule before it is compacted.



   (D)   The operator shall ensure that infectious waste, effectively
treated or not, is transported off-site in compliance with 410 I.A.C. 1-3.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.18  PERMITS AND LICENSES.



   (A)   Business. Each tattoo/body piercing facility operation shall
obtain a permit from the Floyd County Health Department. The permit shall
provide the name and address of the owner of the business and the name and
address of each tattoo artist and body piercer employed at each location. The
cost for this permit shall be $300 and shall not be transferable. The permit
expires on December 31 of each year. Should an establishment fail to obtain
the permit prior to the opening of a tattoo and/or body piercing facility or
should any permittee fail to renew his or her permit on or before the
expiration date of December 31, then the fee shall be the annual fee plus 50%
of the annual fee set forth above for the Tattoo and/or Body Piercing
facility. Any holder of a permit shall be subject to inspection as set forth
herein. The Floyd County Health Department shall provide the appropriate
forms for this permit. The permit shall be posted at the facility in the area
where the tattoo or body piercing services are performed and shall be clearly
visible to the public.  The permit will only license the permanent
establishment whose address appears on the permit. Businesses wanting to
conduct a tattoo event off-site must obtain a temporary event permit.



   (B)   Temporary facility. Each temporary tattoo/body piercing
facility operation shall obtain a permit from the Floyd County Health
Department. The permit shall provide the name and address of the owner of the
business and the name and address of each tattoo artist and body piercer
operating at each location. The cost of this permit shall be $180 and shall
not be transferable. The permit expires on December 31 of each year. Should
an establishment fail to obtain the permit prior to the opening of a mobile
tattoo and/or body piercing facility or should any licensee fail to renew his
or her license on or before the expiration date of December 31, then said fee
shall be the annual fee plus 50% of the annual fee set forth above for the
tattoo and/or body piercing facility. Any holder of a permit shall be subject
to inspection as set forth herein. The Floyd County Health Department shall
provide the appropriate forms for this permit.  The permit shall be posted
at the mobile facility in the area where the tattoo or body piercing services
are performed and shall be clearly visible to the public. In addition, the
date, time, and location of the event where the mobile facility will be used
shall be submitted at least three business days prior to the start time of
the event to the Floyd County Health Department.



   (C)   Tattoo artist or body piercer.  Every person that desires to
perform any tattoo or body piercing shall obtain a “Tattoo Artist
License,” “Body Piercer License” or a “Tattoo Artist-Body Piercer
License” from the Floyd County Health Department. Each applicant must be at
least 18 years of age. This license must be obtained before any tattoos are
affixed or body piercing done to any person and after the requisite training.
The applicant must satisfy the minimum requirements as set forth herein in §
122.07. The cost of said license shall be $50 and shall not be transferable.
The license expires on December 31 of each year. Should a tattoo artist or
body piercer fail to obtain the license prior to performing any tattoo or
body piercing or should any licensee fail to renew his or her license on or
before the expiration date of December 31, then said fee shall be the annual
fee plus 50% of the annual fee set forth above for the tattoo artist or body
piercer. Any holder of a license shall be subject to inspection as set forth
herein. The Floyd County Health Department shall provide the appropriate
forms for this license. The licenses shall be posted at the facility in the
place where the tattoos or body piercing are performed and shall be clearly
visible to the public.



   (D)   Owner/operator.  In the event that a tattoo/body piercing
facility is a sole proprietorship and the owner shall also perform tattooing
or body piercing for their business, the owner shall only be required to
obtain a business permit as described in this section.



   (E)   Guest tattoo artist or body piercer.  Every person that
desires to perform any tattoo or body piercing services within Floyd County
on a temporary basis shall obtain a “Guest Tattoo Artist License,”
“Guest Body Piercer License” or a “Guest Tattoo Artist-Body Piercer
License” from the Floyd County Health Department. This license must be
obtained before any tattoos are affixed or body piercing is done to any
person and after the required training. The applicant must satisfy the
minimum requirements as set forth herein in § 122.07.  The cost of said
license shall be $25 for a 30-day license and shall not be transferable. The
permit shall expire 30 days after the date of issuance. Any holder of a
permit shall be subject to inspection as set forth herein. The Floyd County
Health Department shall provide the appropriate forms for this permit. The
permits shall be posted at the facility in the area where the tattoo or body
piercing services are performed and shall be clearly visible to the public.



   (F)   Pro-rating of fees. In the event that a business, mobile
facility, tattoo artist and/or body piercer shall apply for a permit any time
prior to July 1 of any year, they shall be responsible for the total annual
fee as described in this chapter. In the event that a business, mobile
facility, tattoo artist and/or body piercer shall apply for a permit any time
after or on July 1 of any year, they shall be required to pay one-half of the
annual fee. All permits, however, shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which they were issued.



   (G)   Temporary events. 



      (1)   Temporary studios at locations such as fairs, festivals,
or flea markets, shall comply with all requirements for a certified studio in
accordance with §§ 122.01 through 122.17 in their entirety. The event
organizer or studio owner for the event shall be responsible for ensuring
that the event is run in a manner that is safe for the body piercer, tattoo
artist, and general public. The event organizer or studio owner shall provide
a list of all participating artist/piercer at the event and with the Floyd
County Health Department. This information shall include the following
information for each participating artist/piercer.



         (a)   Name;



         (b)   Date of birth;



         (c)   Home address;



         (d)   Business name;



         (e)   Business address;



         (f)   Home and work telephone numbers;



         (g)   Email address (if available);



         (h)   Description of procedures to be performed at the
event; and



         (i)   Copy of current artist/piercer registration.



      (2)   The event coordinator or studio owner shall provide a
layout of the event floor to the Floyd County Health Department before being
granted a permit.



      (3)   Each participant who performs shall bring enough
presterilized instruments and supplies to last the whole event.



      (4)   The event coordinator or studio owner shall provide a
separate cleaning and sterilization room as a back up for use by participants
who have used all the presterilized instruments and were brought to the
event. If used, the cleaning and sterilization room shall be disinfected at
the close of the event.  Presterilized instruments and equipment shall not
be reused.



      (5)   The event coordinator or studio owner shall provide an
approved autoclave that has a negative spore test within 30 days prior to the
event.



      (6)   The event coordinator or studio owner shall provide for
pick up and disposal of contaminated waste in accordance with this chapter
and administrative rules.



      (7)   Each artist/piercer at the temporary event must either
have an annual or guest license. In addition to the license each tattoo/body
piercing facility or workstation at the temporary event shall obtain a permit
from the Floyd County Health Department. The permit shall provide the name
and address of the owner of the business and the name and address of each
tattoo artist and body piercer employed at the event. The cost for the
temporary event permit shall be $20 per day, not to exceed $100 for a maximum
of fourteen consecutive days.  All fees shall be paid prior to the event.



      (8)   Temporary workstations shall meet the following minimum
conditions:



         (a)   Be at least ten feet by ten feet and be
constructed in a manner to separate the artist/piercer from the public in
such a way as to protect the procedure area from contamination, and prevent
accidental exposure of the potentially infectious material created during
such procedures.



         (b)   Have a floor and sides that are smooth, nonporous
and easy to clean;



         (c)   Have at least 100 foot-candles of light available
at the level where the tattoo or body piercing is conducted;



         (d)   Be equipped with a hand-washing facility. A
hand-wash facility at the minimum shall consist of liquid antibacterial or
antimicrobial soap, single use paper towels, and an insulated five-gallon
container with a level-type spigot. Filled with warm potable water
101-120ºF, and a bucket to catch the wastewater. The water container shall
be placed at least 30 inches off the floor to allow for easy use, and shall
be filled regularly to ensue an adequate supply of warm water for hand
washing.



         (e)   Waste water shall be disposed of into a public
sewage system, if available. If a public sewage system is not available,
disposal shall be made into a private system designed, constructed and
operated pursuant the to the requirements of Rule 410 IAC 6-8.1 of Indiana
State Administrative Codes; and



         (f)   Shall be supplied with an adequate supply of paper
or plastic barrier film to protect equipment and any other item that must be
protected to prevent cross-contamination.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.19  INSPECTIONS.



   The Floyd County Health Department shall conduct inspections of each
and every facility and mobile facility located in Floyd County, Indiana. The
Floyd County Health Department shall conduct a minimum of two  inspections
per year for facilities and one inspection per year for mobile facilities.
Additional inspections may be conducted by the Floyd County Health Department
as it determines and/or in response to complaints submitted. The results of
the inspections shall be provided to each operator. Violations noted by the
Floyd County Health Department shall be corrected immediately. The Department
shall conduct follow-up inspections to determine compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.20  PROCEDURES WHEN VIOLATIONS ARE NOTED.



   (A)   If, during the inspection of any facility, the Health Officer
discovers the violation of any provision of this chapter, he or she shall
issue a written report listing such violations and the remedial action(s) to
be taken. A copy of the report shall be delivered to the permittee and/or
licensee by hand delivering the report to him or her on-site, or mailing the
notice by certified mail to the address listed by the permittee and/or
licensee as his, her or its mailing address on the permit application.



   (B)   A copy of the written order shall be filed in the records of
the Department after appropriate review by supervisory personnel and then
shall be made available to the public.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.21  PERMIT OR LICENSE SUSPENSION/REVOCATION.



   The Health Officer may order the suspension or revocation of any permit
or license issued for a facility or artist, which order shall include the
prohibition of any further operation for the following reasons:



   (A)   Interference with the Health Officer, or his or her authorized
representatives, in the performance of his or her duties.  Interference
shall be defined as the process of obstructing, hampering or blocking the
Health Officer in the performance of his or her duties.



   (B)   As a result of the willful and/or continuous violation of any
provision of this section.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.22  OTHER PERMIT OR LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND IMMEDIATE
CLOSURE ORDERS.



   (A)   Except as set forth in division (B), no suspension or
revocation shall be ordered by the Health Officer except after a hearing held
pursuant to § 122.23(A).



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A), whenever the
Health Officer, or his or her authorized representatives find unsanitary or
other conditions, involving the operation of any facility or artist which, in
his or her reasonable belief, constitutes an imminent health hazard, he or
she shall without notice or hearing, issue and serve a written order upon the
permittee or licensee requiring the immediate closure of its operations,
shall cite the existence of said unsanitary conditions and shall specify the
corrective actions to be taken.



      (1)   Such order shall be effective immediately.



      (2)   Upon written request to the Health Officer, the
permittee or licensee shall be afforded a hearing on the next business day as
set forth in § 122.23(A).



      (3)   The Health Officer shall make a reinspection upon the
request of the permittee or licensee. When the Health Officer determines that
the necessary corrective action(s) have been taken, operation of the facility
may be resumed.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.23  HEARING.



   (A)   All hearings required under this section, except those set
forth in § 122.24(A), shall be held only upon at least ten days’ written
notice to the permittee or licensee of time, place and nature thereof. The
notice of hearing shall be served upon the permittee or licensee by leaving,
or mailing by certified mail, the notice to the address listed on the permit
application as the permittee’s or licensee’s mailing address or such
other address as the permittee or licensee shall designate in writing to the
Health Officer.



   (B)   At any hearing required under this chapter, the Hearing
Officer shall be the Health Officer or the Health Officers designee. Every
person who is a party to such proceedings shall have the right to submit
evidence, to cross-examine witnesses and to be represented by legal counsel.
All such hearings shall be conducted in an informal manner, but irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitive evidence may be excluded.



   (C)   Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
enter a final order, subject to the right of appeal in accordance with §
122.24(A).



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.24  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any permittee or licensee aggrieved by any final order of the
Health Officer shall be entitled to a review of the final order before the
Floyd County Board of Health (Board) by filing a written request therefore
with the Secretary of the Board within 15 days after such final order is
issued.



   (B)   Upon the Health Officer’s receipt of such request, the Board
shall hear the matter de novo in an open hearing after at least ten days’
written notice of the time, place and nature thereof. (The Health Officer and
permittee or licensee may agree to a shorter period of time, if requested by
either party.) The notice shall be issued by the Secretary of the Board to
the permittee or licensee filing the request.



   (C)   The notice of hearing shall be served upon the permittee or
licensee by leaving or mailing by certified mail, the notice to the address
listed on the permit application as the permittee’s or licensee’s mailing
address or such other address as the permittee or licensee shall designate in
writing to the Secretary of the Board.



   (D)   At such hearing, the same rules of procedure shall apply as
set forth in § 122.23(B), provided, that upon written request by the
permittee/licensee or the Health Officer, the Board shall cause the
proceedings before it to be recorded by a reporter employed for such purpose,
and the same, together with all papers and documents filed therein, shall, at
the request of either party, be reproduced by said Board in the form of a
transcript, a copy of which shall be available to any party.



   (E)   The expense of such proceedings shall be charged to the
permittee/licensee who applied for the review, except that copies of
transcripts shall be at the expense of the party requesting the same. At the
time the transcript is requested, the Board may require the
permittee/licensee to pay a deposit in an amount determined by the Board to
be necessary to secure such expense(s).



   (F)   The Board shall make written findings of facts and shall enter
its final order or determination of the matter in writing.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.25  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.  Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter shall be null and void. A violation of an order issued by the
Health Officer or Board shall be considered to be a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.26  VIOLATIONS.



   Whenever the Health Officer determines that any facility/artist or any
other person, is in willful violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the Health Officer shall furnish evidence of said willful violation
to the Prosecuting Attorney of Floyd County, Indiana or the attorney for the
Board who shall seek all appropriate legal remedies against the person(s)
violating said provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.27  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   Prohibiting of any medical procedures; but not limited to
tongue splitting, tattoo removal, and uses of anesthesia.



   (B)   Home tattoo parties and mobile tattoo parlor.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.28  INJUNCTION.



   The Health Officer may bring an action for an injunction in the Circuit
or Superior Court of Floyd County, Indiana, to restrain any person from
violating the provisions of this chapter, to cause such violation(s) to be
prevented, abated or removed.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.29  EXPENSE.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to the Floyd County Health Department for the expense, loss or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation, including reasonable attorney’s
fees and costs.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.30  CUMULATIVE.



   The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative, and not
exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



§ 122.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each violation. Each day
of the existence of any violation of this chapter shall be considered to be a
separate offense.



(Ord. G-10-15, passed 4-15-2010)



CHAPTER 123:  SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS PROHIBITED



Section



   123.01   Sale prohibited



   123.02   Burning prohibited



 



   123.99   Penalty



§ 123.01  SALE PROHIBITED.



   Products containing synthetic cannabinoids such as K2/Spice, or similar
products which contain one or more of the following chemical compounds:



   (A)   (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymehtyl)-6, 6
dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-a-ol,
also known as HU-210;



   (B)   l-Pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole, also known as JWH-018;



   (C)   l-butyl-3-(l-napthoyI)indole, also known as JWH-073; or



   (D)   Any other equivalent compound or derivative



   shall not be sold, marketed, or offered for sale within the City of New
Albany, Indiana.



(Ord. G-10-35, passed 11-1-2010)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.02  BURNING PROHIBITED.



   Products containing synthetic cannabinoids may not be burned,
incinerated or ignited in any public place or on any property owned, leased
or controlled by the city.



(Ord. G-10-35, passed 11-1-2010)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Persons or entities violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by:



      (1)   A fine of $50 for the first violation;



      (2)   A fine of $150 for the second violation;



      (3)   A fine of $300 for the third violation; and



      (4)   A fine of $1,000 for fourth and subsequent violations.



   (B)   All penalties shall be processed through the City Clerk;



   (C)   If, after multiple violations by the same person or entity,
the City Attorney and the Police Department have reasons to believe that the
imposition of fines will not be effective in enforcing this chapter, the
city's Legal Department shall be empowered to seek any other remedies
provided by law.



(Ord. G-10-35, passed 11-1-2010)



CHAPTER 124:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   124.01   Definitions



   124.02   Minimum operating requirements for pools and spas



   124.03   Permit and fee requirements



   124.04   Inspection of pools and spas



 



   124.99   Penalty



§ 124.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions contained in 410 I.A.C 6-2.1-1 et seq. are adopted
herein and made a part hereof.  For the purpose of this chapter the
following additional definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFIED POOL OPERATOR (CPO) or CERTIFIED POOL TECHNICIAN (CPT). 
Someone who has passed the certified pool-spa operator test by the National
Swimming Pool Foundation or Aquatic Training Institute.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Floyd County Health Officer, or his or her
authorized representative.



(Ord. G-13-01, passed 1-7-2013)



§ 124.02  MINIMUM OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR POOLS AND SPAS.



   (A)   All persons owning or operating a public pool or semi-public
pool in Floyd County shall comply with the minimum sanitation and operation
requirements specified by the Indiana State Board of Health as now provided
in 410 I.A.C. 6-2.1 or as the same may be hereafter changed or amended.  The
regulation and any changes and amendments thereto which may be hereafter
adopted or promulgated are by reference incorporated herein and made part
hereof, two copies of which are on file in the office of the Floyd County
Health Department, for public inspection.



   (B)   Each public pool or semi-public pool facility shall have at
least one employee who is a certified pool operator (CPO) or if a third-party
service company provides routine maintenance, the outside service technician
must be a CPO.  Any individual who makes changes to the water quality, or
performs routine maintenance of the swimming pool/spa system components, must
also be a certified pool operator.



(Ord. G-13-01, passed 1-7-2013)



§ 124.03  PERMIT AND FEE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permit.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
public/semi-public swimming pool, wading pool, spa, or hot tub in Floyd
County who does not possess a valid permit from the Health Officer.  The
permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the swimming
pool, wading pool, spa, or hot tub.  Only persons who comply with the
applicable provisions of the chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain
a license.



      (1)   The  permits shall be for a term of one year, to be
renewed annually on or prior to April 30.



      (2)   Any permit issued by the Health Officer shall contain
the name and address of the person to whom a license is issued and other data
as the Health Officer deem necessary.



   (B)   Permit fees.  Public/semi-public swimming pools, wading
pools, spas or hot tubs operating less than six months per year shall pay to
the Floyd County Health Department, a license fee of $30 per pool, spa,
wading pool, hot tub, and the like, each year, submitted with the initial or
annual permit renewal application, due on or before April 30.



      (1)   All license fees shall be payable on or before April 30,
and shall be subject to the addition of a late penalty charge of $30 per
pool, if submitted after the permit expiration date of that year.



      (2)   Public/semi-public swimming pools, wading pools, spas
and hot tubs operating year round, or for periods of six months or longer in
Floyd County shall pay the Floyd County Health Department, a permit fee of
$60 each year per pool, spa, wading pool, hot tub and the like.  All license
fees shall be payable on or before April 30, and shall be subject to the
addition of a late penalty charge of $60 per pool, if submitted after the
permit expiration date of that year.



      (3)   Tax supported units of government and schools shall be
exempt from the payment of the above-described fees.



(Ord. G-13-01, passed 1-7-2013)



§ 124.04  INSPECTION OF POOLS AND SPAS.



   (A)   Authority to inspect and to copy records.  The person
operating or owning any public pool, semi-public pool and/or spa in Floyd
County shall, upon the request of the Health Officer, permit the Health
Officer or his or her authorized representative access to all pool and/or spa
facilities and shall permit the Health Officer or his or her authorized
representative to collect evidence and/or exhibits and to copy any and all
records relative to the enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   Inspection of facilities.  The Floyd County Health Officer
and/or his or her designated representative shall implement a regular program
of inspecting facilities permitted under this chapter.  If upon an
inspection, the Health Officer or his or her designated representative finds
that the permitted facility is violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, then and in that event, the Health Officer or his or her designated
representative may promptly issue a written order to the permittee of the
facility to appear at a certain time, no later than ten  days from the date
of the second inspection, and at a place in Floyd County fixed in the
notification to show cause why the permit issued under the provision of this
chapter should not be revoked.  The Health Officer upon such hearing if the
permittee should fail to show cause, shall revoke the permit and promptly
give written notice of the action to the permittee.  The Health Officer
shall maintain a permanent record of his or her proceedings filed in the
office of the Floyd County Health Department.



   (C)   Suspension of permit.



      (1)   Any permit issued under this chapter may be temporarily
suspended by the Health Officer without notice of hearing for a period not to
exceed 30 days, for any of the following reasons pursuant to 410 I.A.C.
6-2.1-43:



         (a)   Unsanitary or other conditions which in the Health
Officer's opinion endanger the public health;



         (b)    Interference with the Health Officer or any of
his or her authorized representatives in the performance of their duties;



      (2)   Provided, however, that upon written application from
the permittee, served upon the Health Officer with 15 days after the
suspension, the Health Officer shall conduct a hearing upon the matter after
giving at least five days written notice of the time, place and purpose
thereof to the suspended permittee, provided further, that any  suspension
order shall be issued by the Health Officer in writing and served upon the
permittee by leaving a copy at his or her usual place of business or by
delivery of certified or registered mail to such address.  Any person whose
permit has been suspended may at any time make application to the local
Health Officer for the reinstatement of his or her permit.



(Ord. G-13-01, passed 1-7-2013)



§ 124.99  PENALTY.



   Upon finding a violation of this chapter, the violator shall be
punished for the first offense by a fine of not more than $500, for the
second offense by a fine of not more than $1,000, and for a third offense and
each subsequent offense by a fine of note more than $2,500.  Each day of
operation of a permitted facility in violation of this chapter or after the
expiration of the time limit for abating unsanitary conditions or in
completing improvements or any other violations as described in 410 I.A.C.
6-2.1-1 et seq. to abate the conditions as ordered by the Health Officer
shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.



(Ord. G-13-01, passed 1-7-2013)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS




CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Posting signs, bills or advertising



   130.02   Disobeying order or interfering with Fire Department



   130.03   Loitering about school buildings



Toxic Glue



   130.20   Definition



   130.21   Selling toxic glue to minor prohibited; exception



   130.22   Sale of toxic glue restricted



   130.23   Toxic glue to be kept where unavailable to customer



   130.24   When provisions shall not be applicable



Nuisance Behavior and Public Nuisance Locations



   130.30   Definitions



   130.31   Violations



   130.32   Enforcement



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Aggressive panhandling prohibited, see § 117.50



   Soliciting or collecting donations in public roadways prohibited, §
99.39



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  POSTING SIGNS, BILLS OR ADVERTISING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, paste or post any bill or
bills, sign or signs or advertising matter in the public rights-of-way in the
city or on any building or structure belonging to the city or on any
structure in the public rights-of-way. Any bill or bills, sign or signs, or
advertising matter placed in the city's rights-of-way may be removed and
discarded by agents authorized by the city.



(Ord. 4063, passed 8-17-1936; Ord. G-11-30, passed 10-3-2011)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99



§ 130.02  DISOBEYING ORDER OR INTERFERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse
to remove and remain such distance from any fire or burning building as the
Chief Engineer of the Fire Department or his or her assistants may order
during any fire.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any disturbance
or breach of the peace during any fire, or to cause any injury to any
property belonging to the Fire Department of the city.



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  LOITERING ABOUT SCHOOL BUILDINGS.



   No person shall loiter or remain in or about a school building or
grounds, or within 1,000 feet thereof, either afoot or in any vehicle whether
moving or parked, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of
or responsibility for a pupil then enrolled in the school, or any other
specific or legitimate reason for being there, and not having written
permission from a school administrator of the school, unless the person is
enrolled then in the school.



(Ord. G-70-426, passed 12-7-1970)  Penalty, see § 130.99



TOXIC GLUE



§ 130.20  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TOXIC GLUE. Any glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, plastic solvent or
other adhesive containing ingredients having the property of releasing toxic
vapors or fumes, including, but not limited to, the following: acetate,
acetone, benzene, butyl alcohol, ether alcohol, methyl alcohol, isopropyl
alcohol, ethylene dichloride, hexane, methyl ethyl ketone, pentachlorophenol,
petroleum ether, toluene, tricresyl phosphate and xylene.



(Ord. G-68-341, passed 12-9-1968)



§ 130.21  SELLING TOXIC GLUE TO MINOR PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall sell or offer to sell, deliver, give or
transfer to any person under 18 years of age any toxic glue as defined in §
130.20.



   (B)   However, one tube of the glue may be sold to a person under 18
years of age; provided that, the tube is included in a kit of an unassembled
model, or that a kit not having such a tube included is sold in conjunction
with the sale of one tube of the glue.



(Ord. G-68-341, passed 12-9-1968)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.22  SALE OF TOXIC GLUE RESTRICTED.



   No person, except the person who is actually employed by or engaged in
operating a bona fide commercial establishment at a fixed location, shall
sell to any other person any toxic glue. All sales of the glue not made in or
from such an establishment are prohibited.



(Ord. G-68-341, passed 12-9-1968)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.23  TOXIC GLUE TO BE KEPT WHERE UNAVAILABLE TO CUSTOMER.



   All toxic glue being held for sale by a bona fide commercial
establishment at a fixed location shall be kept in such a place as to be
unavailable to any customer without the assistance of an employee or owner of
the establishment.



(Ord. G-68-341, passed 12-9-1968)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.24  WHEN PROVISIONS SHALL NOT BE APPLICABLE.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be applicable to the
transfer of any toxic glue from a parent to his or her child or a guardian to
his or her ward.



(Ord. G-68-341, passed 12-9-1968)



NUISANCE BEHAVIOR AND PUBLIC NUISANCE LOCATIONS



§ 130.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NUISANCE BEHAVIOR. Behavior that could be considered to be disruptive,
unacceptable to the general public and/or adverse to the health, safety and
general welfare of the public, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Public consumption of alcoholic beverages;



      (2)   Loud and/or boisterous behavior that interrupts the
peace of neighbors across property lines;



      (3)   Refusal to obey lawful police directives;



      (4)   Sale or use of illicit narcotics or controlled
substances; and/or



      (5)   Public gambling or prostitution.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any location at which nuisance behavior is
demonstrated.



(Ord. G-98-275, passed 11-2-1998)



§ 130.31  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person shall not exhibit nuisance behavior at any time. An owner of
real estate shall not allow any guest, tenant, invitee or other persons to
exhibit nuisance behavior on his or her premises at any time.



(Ord. G-98-275, passed 11-2-1998)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.32  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The New Albany Police Department shall issue citations to
individuals exhibiting nuisance behavior. All offenders shall be cited into
the Floyd County Court.



   (B)   During the City Attorney's prosecution of the citation, he or
she shall determine whether the nuisance behavior occurred upon real estate
owned by a person other that the person to whom the citation was issued.
Within ten days after the City Attorney holds an initial conference on a
citation, he or she shall send notice of the citation to the owner of the
real estate upon which the nuisance behavior occurred.



   (C)   A legal or equitable owner of real estate is deemed to have
knowledge of the nuisance behavior  upon receipt of the notice required
herein. For the purposes of this subchapter, an OWNER OF REAL ESTATE is
defined as any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others is
reflected as the owner of record in the office of the Floyd County Auditor.



   (D)   The New Albany Board of Works and Safety shall declare any
real estate a public nuisance if it finds, after written notice to the owner
and a hearing held not less than ten days after the owner's receipt of
notice, that nuisance behavior has been cited by the New Albany Police at
that location more than three times in any six-month period. The owner may
defend against such a public nuisance finding by showing that the Floyd
County court found that the alleged nuisance behavior did not occur. The City
Attorney shall notify the owner, in writing, of the Board's determination.



(Ord. G-98-275, passed 11-2-1998)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   An individual who violates §§ 130.30 through 130.32
by exhibiting nuisance behavior shall be cited into the Floyd County Court by
the Police Department and be assessed the following fines:



         (a)   First offense: $25, plus court costs;



         (b)   Second offense: $50, plus court costs; and



         (c)   Third and subsequent offenses: $100, plus court
costs.



      (2)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall assess the
following fines against any owner whose property has been declared a public
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter:



         (a)   First time property is declared a public nuisance:
$50, plus court costs; and



         (b)   Second and all subsequent offenses: $100, plus
court costs.



(Ord. G-98-275, passed 11-2-1998)



Editor's note:



   Division (B) of this section was contained in the old code as §
130.33, Fines. Old code § 130.33 has been moved to this section, at the
editor's discretion, during the 2008 recodification for consistency purposes.



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS





         151.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION





         152.   RESERVED





         153.   RESERVED





         154.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL





         155.   VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES





         156.   ZONING CODE





         157.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS





         158.   PERMIT FEES AND COSTS FOR BUSINESS REGULATIONS





         159.   RENTAL HOUSING




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Building Code; General Provisions



   150.001   Title



   150.002   Scope



   150.003   Purpose



   150.004   Approval of alternate type of construction and/or materials



   150.005   Relationship to other codes involving land usage and
building regulation



Building Code; Standard Codes



   150.010   Adoption of regulations by reference



Building Code; Administration



   150.020   Administrative authority



   150.021   Qualifications of Building Commissioner



   150.022   Compensation and bond



   150.023   Stop work order



   150.024   Right to enter premises



   150.025   Selection of Building Commissioner, Inspectors



   150.026   Appointment of Building Commission members



   150.027   Term



   150.028   Filling vacancies



   150.029   Powers and duties of Building Commission



   150.030   Commission meetings, compensation; license examinations



   150.031   Authority to revoke license



Building Code Licenses



   150.039   License application procedure



   150.040   Liability insurance



   150.041   Electrical license



   150.042   Supervising electrician licenses: duties and qualifications



   150.043   Heating, ventilation and air conditioning contractor
license



   150.044   Plumbing contractor license



   150.045   Commercial contractor license



   150.046   Residential contractor license



   150.047   Temporary homeowner contractor



   150.048   License fees, terms



   150.049   Continuing education



Building Code Permits and Certificates



   150.060   Building permit required



   150.061   Fees



   150.062   Permits to erect part of buildings



   150.063   When permits not required



   150.064   Permit for moving buildings



   150.065   Revocation of permits



   150.066   Permit for electrical work



   150.067   Reserved



   150.068   Electrical permits and inspection fees



   150.069   Temporary service



   150.070   Connection without approval of Inspector



   150.071   Disconnection of service



   150.072   Reinspection; notice of defects



   150.073   Permits required for plumbing



   150.074   Permit required for heating, ventilation and air
conditioning



   150.075   Certificate of completion



   150.076   Issuance of certificate of occupancy for buildings



Enforcement



   150.084   Fines, revocation or suspension of license



   150.085   Marking plans and specifications



   150.086   Abatement of nuisances



Housing Code



   150.095   Scope



   150.096   Definitions



   150.097   Sanitary fixtures, water supply, sewage disposal and
sanitation



   150.098   Heating, lighting and ventilation



   150.099   Building maintenance



   150.100   Occupancy



   150.101   Cleanliness of premises



   150.102   Minimum standards for rooming houses



   150.103   Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings



   150.104   Conflict of rules and regulations; effect of partial
invalidity



   150.105   Hardship



   150.106   Inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises



Comprehensive Plan



   150.115   Comprehensive Plan adopted



   150.116   Repeal of Master Plan



Unsafe Buildings



   150.120   Establishment



   150.121   Adoption by reference; scope



   150.122   Unsafe buildings declared a public nuisance



   150.123   Powers of the Building Commissioner



   150.124   Limits of the Building Commissioner's powers



   150.125   "Unsafe building" defined



   150.126   "Substantial property interest" defined



   150.127   Standards of workmanship



   150.128   Unsafe Building Fund



   150.129   Prohibitions



Ordinance Enforcement



   150.140   Ordinance Enforcement Officer



   150.141   Duties and responsibilities



   150.142   Hiring process



   150.143   Qualifications



   150.144   Citation process



   150.145   Records



 



   150.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Permit fees and costs for business regulations, see Ch. 158



BUILDING CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  TITLE.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be known as the "Building Code" for the
city, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as this code.



   (B)   Any provisions of Ord. G-69-351 in conflict with the
provisions of Ord. G-85-67 are repealed to the extent that they conflict
therewith.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969; Ord. G-85-67, passed 6-3-1985)



§ 150.002  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter apply to the construction,
alterations, repair, use, occupancy, additions to all buildings and
structures other than fences, industrialized building systems or mobile
structures certified under I.C. 22-15-4 in the city.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969; Ord. G-85-67, passed 6-3-1985; Ord. G-88-112,
passed 4-21-1988)



§ 150.003  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, limb, health, environment, public safety and welfare and
for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings
and structures.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969; Ord. G-85-67, passed 6-3-1985)



§ 150.004  APPROVAL OF ALTERNATE TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION AND/OR MATERIALS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the use of any
material or method of construction whether or not specifically provided for
in this subchapter, if, upon presentation of plans, methods of analysis, test
date or other necessary information to the Building Commissioner by the
interested person or persons, the Building Commissioner is satisfied that the
proposed material or method of construction complies with specific provisions
of, or conforms to the intent of this subchapter. Materials or methods of
construction which have been tested and approved shall be used and installed
in accordance with the terms of the approval.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969)



§ 150.005  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CODES INVOLVING LAND USAGE AND BUILDING
REGULATION.



   (A)   The standards and requirements contained herein shall not
amend, abrogate or rescind any standards or requirements contained in the
Zoning Code, the Subdivision Control Code, the Housing Code or any other
applicable development code.



   (B)   If the standards and requirements contained herein are
inconsistent or in conflict with those of any other development code, the
standard or requirement posing the greatest restriction shall apply.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-93-159, passed 8-30-1993)



BUILDING CODE; STANDARD CODES



§ 150.010  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the
Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by reference in this code
and shall include later amendments to those articles as the same are
published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed therein:



      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes:



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards;



         (b)   Indiana Building Code;



         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards; and



         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code.



      (2)   Article 14 - One and Two Family Dwelling Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Residential Code; and



         (b)   Standard for Permanent Installation of
Manufactured Homes.



      (3)   Article 16 - Plumbing Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Plumbing Code; and



         (b)   1997 Uniform Plumbing Code - Appendix H - Grease
Interceptors.



      (4)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code; and



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.



      (5)   Article 18 - Mechanical Codes: Indiana Mechanical Code;



      (6)   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code; and



         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code.



      (7)   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Codes: Indiana Swimming Pool
Code.



   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on
file in the office of the city's Building Commission.



(Ord. G-88-112, passed 4-21-1988; Ord. G-02-39; passed 10-17-2002)



BUILDING CODE; ADMINISTRATION



§ 150.020  ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.



   The Building Commissioner is authorized and directed to administer and
enforce all of the provisions of this subchapter. Whenever, in the building
regulations, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner or any other officer of
the city's Plan Commission, this shall be construed to give the officer only
the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards established by
ordinance have been complied with; and no provisions shall be construed as
giving any officer discretionary powers as to what the regulations, codes or
standards shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by this
subchapter or ordinances or to enforce the provisions of this code or
ordinances in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. Any variances from
adopted building rules are subject to approval under I.C. 22-13-2-7(b). All
persons shall have the right to appeal any order of the Building Commissioner
first through the Building Commission of the city and then to the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission of the state in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 22-13-2-7 and I.C. 4-21.5-3-7.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969; Ord. G-85-67, passed 6-3-1985; Ord. G-88-112,
passed 4-21-1988)



§ 150.021  QUALIFICATIONS OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   No person will be considered for the position of Building
Commissioner who has any business, financial or pecuniary interest, either
directly or indirectly, in the sale or the manufacture of any material,
process or device used in connection with building construction, demolition
or any transactions related to real estate subject to construction or
demolition.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner should be generally informed about
the quality and strength and methods of building construction and should be
physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections
required by his or her duties.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.022  COMPENSATION AND BOND.



   The Building Commissioner and any Inspectors shall receive such
compensation for their services, as may be set by the Mayor with the approval
of the Common Council, and each shall give a bond payable to the city before
entering upon the duties of his or her office, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his or her office, in the penal sum of $1,000.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969)



§ 150.023  STOP WORK ORDER.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter, the Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing the work to be
done. The person shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the
Building Commissioner to proceed with the work. The Building Commissioner
shall be directly responsible to the Board of Public Works and Safety in the
performance of his or her duties.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969; Ord. G-85-67, passed 6-3-1985)



§ 150.024  RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or
his or her duly authorized representative may enter, at reasonable times, any
building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon
him or her by this subchapter.



(Ord. G-69-351, passed - -1969; Ord. G-85-67, passed 6-3-1985)



§ 150.025  SELECTION OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER, INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Building Commissioner. The Mayor shall select the Building
Commissioner.



   (B)   Inspectors. The Inspectors shall be selected as follows. The
Board of Public Works and Safety shall nominate the candidates for Inspector.
The Common Council shall approve the Inspectors and the Mayor shall appoint
them after he or she has received Council approval. The Inspector shall serve
with removal only for just cause. If an Inspector is removed for cause, the
Inspector may appeal the removal to the full Building Commission. He or she
shall stand suspended during the appeals process. Should he or she be
reinstated, it may or may not be with back pay. If the contract is not
renewed, the successor shall be selected as specified above.



   (C)   Required testing and training procedures.



      (1)   The Building Commissioner and Inspectors shall be
required to take the appropriate test sections of the National Certification
Program for Construction Code Inspectors. They shall successfully pass the
exam or retake it each year until a passing grade is obtained. The fee shall
be paid by the city's Building Commission budget for the first testing. If a
passing grade is not obtained on the first testing, the Inspector and the
Building Commissioner shall pay for any additional testing required to comply
with this section. The Building Commissioner shall annually review these test
scores and may require the individuals to attend training and update seminars
or recommend to the Board of Public Works and Safety temporary or permanent
suspension until compliance is obtained.



      (2)   The Commissioner and Inspectors shall attend training
and update seminars made available by state's Building Commission or national
code updates. The Building Commission budget shall allot monies to cover the
cost of these seminars and expenses relating to the seminars.



   (D)   Oath. The Building Commissioner and all Inspectors shall take
an oath of office to uphold the duties of their positions. A violation of
this oath shall be grounds for dismissal. The oath of office shall be written.



   (E)   Interpretation of chapter. The Building Commissioner or
Inspectors shall answer any relevant questions concerning, or give any
desired information in respect to, the meaning, intent or application of the
regulations and rules of this subchapter.



   (F)   Plumbing licensing. The Plumbing Inspector must be a licensed
plumber with the state.



   (G)   Electric licensing. The Electrical Inspector must be a
licensed electrician with the city.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-93-159, passed 8-30-1993; Ord.
G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.026  APPOINTMENT OF BUILDING COMMISSION MEMBERS.



   The Building Commission shall consist of seven voting members. There
shall be one electrical contractor, one general contractor, one mechanical
contractor, one representative of the Fire Marshal, one architect, one public
utility member and one member of the general public. The Building
Commissioner and all Inspectors shall serve as advisory members with no vote.
The voting members shall be selected as follows:  The Board of Public Works
and Safety shall submit nominees to the Common Council. The Common Council
will then vote on approval and the Mayor shall appoint the Commission members
after they have received Common Council approval.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.027  TERM.



   The seven Commission members shall be appointed for a term of three
years, except that of the seven members, when first appointed, three shall be
for one year, two for two years and two for a term of three years.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.028  FILLING VACANCIES.



   In the event of a vacancy on the Commission, a new member shall be
appointed within 60 days, using the same procedure described in this
subchapter, with the same qualifications, and he or she shall serve the
balance of the unexpired term of the member. Any vacancy that exists after 60
days may be filled by the Common Council.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.029  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Building Commission shall provide for rules and
regulations to control the administrative operations of the Commission,
subject to the approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Building Commission shall be responsible to review
complaints from the Building Commissioner regarding job performance of the
Inspectors and shall act in the capacity of a merit board for this purpose.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.030  COMMISSION MEETINGS, COMPENSATION; LICENSE EXAMINATIONS.



   (A)   The Building Commission shall meet in regular sessions after
appointment. Each member of the Commission, including the Building
Commissioner and the Inspectors, shall receive $50 for each regular session
that he or she attends. However, the Board may meet without pay at any other
time in the discretion of the members thereof. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum.



   (B)   The Building Commission shall review applications for
examination for license, where required, and upon completion of all
requirements, submit the name of the applicant to the Inspector for
examination. The examination shall be practical and elementary in character,
but sufficiently strict to test the qualifications of the applicants. A fee
shall be charged for each examination. The license shall not be transferable.
Should an applicant fail the examination, he or she shall be eligible to be
retested in 60 days. The applicant shall be entitled to review his or her
test in the presence of at least two Commission members.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.031  AUTHORITY TO REVOKE LICENSE.



   The Commission shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any
license granted under this subchapter for violation thereof upon the
recommendation of the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



BUILDING CODE LICENSES



§ 150.039  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Application. Any person who desires to procure a commercial
contractor's, residential contractor's, electrical contractor's or a heating,
ventilation and air conditioning contractor's license as required by this
subchapter shall make application to the Building Commissioner. The applicant
shall be required to furnish upon applicable forms the following information:



      (1)   A statement of the applicant's proposed business;



      (2)   The type of license being applied for;



      (3)   The name, residence and business address of the
applicant. If the applicant is a firm, the name and business address of the
firm or the name and residence of the applicant's president, managing member,
managing partner or owner if a sole proprietorship with the information
contained above. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity registered
with the Indiana Secretary of State, then a certificate of incorporation or
authority shall be submitted;



      (4)   A test given by the Building Commission or a
certification from an approved testing facility indicating that the applicant
has received an average of not less than 70% on the written examination
relative to his or her license application. A testing fee of $25 must be paid
to the city prior to a test being given by the Building Commission; and



      (5)   The applicant shall be required to complete a notice of
disclaimer. This form allows the Building Commission Office to proceed with a
criminal records check, as allowed by law, in coordination with the Police
Department.



   (B)   Application rejection. The Building Commission may reject any
application if it finds the applicant has been convicted of a crime
involving, but not limited to, fraud, deceit, dishonesty or moral turpitude.



   (C)   Grandfathering of contractor's license.



      (1)   Commercial contractors and residential contractors in
business at the time the new licensing program is established are to be
issued a license in their respective category, upon submittal and approval of
the license application, as outlined herein; provided that, a building permit
has been obtained during the calendar years 1999, 2000, 2001 or 2002.



      (2)   This licensing procedure will expire on November 18,
2004.



      (3)   No additional licenses for grandfathering will be issued
after this date.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002; Ord.
G-04-72, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 150.040  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   (A)   An applicant for a commercial contractor or residential
contractor shall, before being granted a license, make, execute and deliver
to the Building Commissioner proof of general liability insurance in an
amount of not less than $1,000,000 with good and sufficient surety insuring
all users of the license and indemnifying and holding harmless those persons
sustaining loss or damage resulting from any and all work done under that
license.



   (B)   An applicant for an electrical contractor, heating,
ventilation and air conditioning contractor license shall, before being
granted a license, make, execute and deliver to the Building Commissioner
proof of general liability insurance in an amount of not less than $300,000
with good and sufficient surety insuring all users of the license and
indemnifying and holding harmless those persons sustaining loss or damage
resulting from any and all work done under that license.



(Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.041  ELECTRICAL LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or carry on any business or activity
coming within the scope or definition of any of the classes mentioned in this
section without having a license to do so as directed in this subchapter.



   (B)   There shall be two classes of electrical licenses as follows.



      (1)   Any person, firm or entity who engages in the business
of installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical wiring
equipment, apparatus or fixtures, in or about buildings in the city, is
required to have an electrical contractor license.



      (2)   Any person, except a service company holding a
franchise, who directs, supervises or controls the installation, or
apparatus, is required to have a supervising electrician's license.



   (C)   A licensee, in any of the foregoing classes, shall display or
post the license in a conspicuous place in his or her place of business.



   (D)   A license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
not be transferable.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.042  SUPERVISING ELECTRICIAN LICENSES: DUTIES AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Applicants for an electrical license as supervising
electrician shall file with the Building Commission an application containing
an affidavit setting forth that the applicant is not less than 21 years of
age, and has had not less than five years of experience in the installation,
alteration, repair or maintenance of electrical equipment, wires, and
apparatus under the supervision of a qualified licensed contractor or
supervisor. He or she shall submit to an examination before the Building
Commission touching upon his or her fitness and qualifications pertaining to
the installation of electrical wiring and apparatus. Upon approval,
applicants shall be required to receive an average of not less than 70% on
the written examination. A certificate of graduation from, or an affidavit of
attendance at a recognized technical school or college, may at the discretion
of the Building Commission be credited as part of the required four years of
experience.



   (B)   The supervising electrician shall obtain from the Building
Commission a license empowering him or her to sign applications for
electrical permits, and to perform or direct electrical work authorized by
the permits for the current calendar year. The name of the person, firm or
entity for whom electrical permit applications are countersigned shall be set
forth on the electrical permit.



   (C)   The supervising electrician may be relieved from further
responsibility under any electrical permit countersigned by him or her, if
notice in writing to that effect is at once filed with the Electrical
Inspector, in which case the permit becomes void.



   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter concerning supervising
electrician licenses and electrical  licenses shall not apply to persons,
firms or entities installing, maintaining and servicing electrically
controlled heating units using fuel other than electricity at a point
extending from a separate fused switch box to and including the heating
apparatus. This subchapter shall require electrical inspection of all newly
installed heating equipment by the Electrical Inspector under permit.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.043  HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING CONTRACTOR LICENSE.



   (A)   No person, firm or entity shall act, engage in, advertise or
otherwise represent himself, herself or itself as a warm air heating and air
conditioning contractor, unless an authorized representative of the person,
firm or entity shall first obtain a warm air heating and air conditioning
license as provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   No person, firm or entity shall install, erect, alter, repair,
service, reset, or replace any warm air heating and air conditioning system,
or parts or appurtenances thereto, as defined in the warm air heating and air
conditioning code, unless the person or some member of the firm or entity
shall first have obtained a warm air heating contractor license hereunder, or
unless the person, firm or entity has regularly and steadily in his or her or
its employ a holder of a warm air heating contractor license, who shall be
the authorized representative of the person, firm or entity in all matters
pertaining to this subchapter. The authorized representative who is the
holder of a contractor license may not apply for permits for more than one
person, firm or entity.



   (C)   In case of a person, firm or entity employing a warm air
heating and air conditioning contractor license holder, both the person, firm
or entity, and the warm air heating and air conditioning licensee, shall be
responsible for all violations under this subchapter.



   (D)   An applicant for a warm air heating and air conditioning
contractor license shall be at least 21 years of age; a citizen of the United
States of America; and shall have had at least four-years' practical
experience in warm air heating as defined in this subchapter, or shall have
satisfactorily completed a course of study in warm air heating given by a
recognized school, plus three years of practical experience in warm air
heating, or shall be a graduate mechanical engineer.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.044  PLUMBING CONTRACTOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Registration required. It shall be unlawful for any plumbing
contractor, journeyman plumber or apprentice plumber, as these terms are
defined by the laws of the state, to operate or engage in the business of
plumbing within the city without first registering with the city in the
manner provided in this subchapter, in order that the Plumbing Inspector have
the records necessary to inspect the work of the persons registered hereunder.



   (B)   License required. No person, firm, partnership or entity shall
operate or engage in the plumbing  business within the city unless and until
each person or all members of the firm or partnership, or each officer, agent
or employee of the entity shall be duly licensed as a plumbing contractor,
journeyman plumber or apprentice plumber with the state, as provided by
statute, and unless and until the same shall be duly registered according to
the terms and provisions of this subchapter, and shall have the certificate
of registration duly issued in the name of the person, firm, partnership or
entity as provided hereafter.



   (C)   Application. A person requesting the issuance of a certificate
of registration for himself or herself or in the name of a firm, partnership
or entity shall, on the application, in addition to listing the names and
addresses of all members of the firm or partnership and the name and address
of the officers of the entity, list the dates of issuance of the state
license and the type of license issued to each such person or officer. Any
change in location of the place of business or any change in the membership
of any firm or partnership shall be reported to the Building Commissioner
within five days after the change occurs. The application and all provisions
of this subchapter relating thereto, shall be binding upon all members of the
firm or partnership and upon the person or entity, as the case may be.



   (D)   Certificates of registration.



      (1)   No certificates of registration shall be issued or
renewed during any period a registrant is under citation by the appropriate
state agency for violation of state laws or rules or regulations. However,
the registrant shall be entitled to the issuance of a certificate of
registration at all times that the registrant is validly licensed by the
agency as a plumber contractor, journeyman plumber or apprentice plumber.



      (2)   Each certificate of registration issued under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the
site of the business for which it was issued. The registration number shall
be placed on the front door of each vehicle used in the business.



      (3)   The certificate of registration provided for by this
subchapter shall be issued by the Building Commissioner.



   (E)   Expiration of registration certificates. All registration
certificates issued under the terms of this subchapter shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which the registration certificates shall be
issued. No registration shall be issued for a longer period than one calendar
year. No registration certificate shall be issued or reissued until the
applicant has first filed an application in due form, and paid the proper
fees. No registration certificate issued under this subchapter shall be
transferable to any other person, firm or entity.



   (F)   Revocation. In the event the plumbing license issued by the
state to any registrant shall, at any time, be revoked or suspended by the
Commission, then the certificate of registration held by the registrant shall
become void and of no effect and shall remain void until the registrant is
again the holder of a valid license from the Commission.



   (G)   Licensee terminating employment; grace period. If the
authorized representative holder of any license issued by the Commission
should terminate his or her employment or partnership with the person, firm
or entity, a new authorized license must be obtained within 60 days
thereafter, unless the Commission grants an extension. This extension shall
not exceed 30 days.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.045  COMMERCIAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person, firm or entity engaged in the business of
constructing, installing, repairing, remodeling or servicing any structural
or non-structural portions of any multi-family residential, commercial or
industrial building or accessory buildings thereto shall be required to
obtain a commercial contractor license.



   (B)   No person, firm or entity shall act, engage in, advertise or
otherwise represent themselves as a building contractor, unless an authorized
representative of the person, firm or entity shall first obtain a building
contractor license as provided in this subchapter.



   (C)   The holder of a commercial contractor license shall not apply
for permits on behalf of other persons, firms or entities.



   (D)   The commercial license holder shall be responsible for all
violations under this subchapter.



(Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.046  RESIDENTIAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person, firm or entity engaged in the business of or
holding themselves out to the public as engaged in the business of
constructing, installing, repairing, remodeling or servicing any structural
or non-structural portions of any one- or two-family dwelling or accessory
building thereto shall be required to obtain a residential contractors
license.



   (B)   No person, firm or entity shall act, engage in, advertise or
otherwise represent himself, herself or itself as a residential contractor,
unless an authorized representative of the person, firm or entity shall first
obtain a residential contractor's license as provided in this subchapter.



   (C)   The holder of a residential contractor license shall not apply
for permits on behalf of other persons, firms or entities.



   (D)   The residential license holder shall be responsible for all
violations under this subchapter.



(Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.047  TEMPORARY HOMEOWNER CONTRACTOR.



   (A)   An individual who is not a licensed residential contractor may
obtain a permit for purposes of installation, alteration, repair, service or
replacement of a single-family residence. The individual must be both the
owner and occupant (or intended occupant) of the residence.



   (B)   If the Building Commissioner or his or her agent determines
that the owner or immediate family is incapable of performing, or if the
character of any work performed indicated the owner or immediate family
members are not qualified or capable of doing the work, the Inspector may
require a portion or all of the work be installed, changed, altered or
repaired by a qualified contractor. If a homeowner disputes a determination
by the Building Commissioner, or his or her agent, then an appeal may be made
to the Building Commission.



(Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-02)



§ 150.048  LICENSE FEES, TERMS.



   (A)   Fees. For current building license fees, see § 158.01,
Building Permits.



   (B)   Term. All licenses shall be for the calendar year or fraction
thereof, shall be obtained on or before January 15 of each year and shall
expire at midnight, January 14. Any license renewal not secured by January 15
shall be revoked.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.049  CONTINUING EDUCATION.



   (A)   All commercial building license holders, residential building
license holders and electrical license holders shall hereby be required to
perform six hours of continuing education per calendar year.



   (B)   All continuing education courses shall apply to the license
issued to the contractor. In the event that one contractor holds multiple
licenses that contractor shall perform six hours of continuing education for
each license held.



   (C)   The full Building Commission shall reserve the right to refuse
any continuing education course it feel do not apply to the license held.



   (D)   The Building Commissioner is duly authorized to accept from
all participants of continuing education courses a signed certificate of
completion issued from the course instructor.



(Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



BUILDING CODE PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES



§ 150.060  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A building permit shall be obtained before beginning
construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure, using the
forms furnished by the Building Commissioner. All building permits shall be
issued by the Building Commissioner and all fees provided herein shall be
paid to the city's Plan Commission. No building permit shall be issued for
the foregoing purposes, unless the application for the building permit is
accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed location showing lot
boundaries, and by plans and specifications showing the work to be done.



   (B)   All plans for building construction under the authority of the
Department of Fire Prevention and Building Safety of the state must also be
filed with the Council. No local building permits shall be issued until a
copy has been received by the Building Commissioner of the "design release
for construction" from the office of the Indiana State Building Commissioner.



   (C)   Should any person, co-partnership or entity begin work of any
kind such as set forth in this chapter or for which a permit from the
Building Commissioner's Office is required by ordinance, without having
secured the necessary permit therefor from the Building Commissioner's Office
either previous to or during the day of commencement of any such work, or in
the next succeeding day where due to an emergency repair the work is
commenced on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, he or she shall, when
subsequently securing a permit, be required to pay double the fees in
addition to a flat rate fee of $100 hereinbefore provided for the permit in
this chapter and shall be subject to all penal provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Should any person, co-partnership or entity begin work of any
kind such as set forth in this chapter or for which a license is required by
ordinance from the Building Commissioner's office, without having secured the
necessary license previous to any work being performed shall be required to
pay: $100 for the first offense, $250 for the second offense and $1,000 for
the third and subsequent offenses. These amounts are a flat rate fee and the
person, co-partnership or entity shall be subject to all penal provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.061  FEES.



   The fees to be charged for building permits are to be fixed from time
to time by the Board of Public Works and Safety and approved by the Common
Council. For current building permit fees, see § 158.01, Building Permits.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.062  PERMITS TO ERECT PART OF BUILDINGS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the Building
Commissioner from issuing a building permit for the building of any part of a
building where plans and detailed statements have been presented for the
same, and before the entire plans and detailed statements of the building
have been submitted. However, a complete set of all plans and specifications
as required by this subchapter shall be placed on file before the foundation
wall is brought to grade or to a height to receive the first tier of beams,
girders or joists.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.063  WHEN PERMITS NOT REQUIRED.



   No building permits shall be required for minor interior repairs or for
alteration to or in buildings which do not involve any change in their
supporting walls, members or structural parts, or in their stairways or other
means of communication or ingress or egress, or light or ventilation where
the cost of the alteration or repair does not exceed a cost of $1,000.
Painting, exterior siding, flat concrete installation, window and door
replacement and roof covering replacement do not require a permit provided
that no structural work is involved.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.064  PERMIT FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   When any person wants to move a building, he or she shall
apply to the Building Commissioner for a permit to do so. Before the permit
is issued, the Building Commissioner shall inspect the building within 48
hours after the application. If he or she finds the building can be safely
moved in the manner proposed, he or she shall then issue a permit to the
applicant for a fee as designated by ordinance.



   (B)   All equipment for moving buildings, except that provided with
rubber treads, shall, during its use on streets, roads or other public
thoroughfares, be provided with means to prevent the picking up of asphalt
from the pavements. If the Building Commissioner finds that the means are not
in use when necessary, or are ineffective, he or she shall immediately order
the work stopped until the necessary precautions are taken to prevent damage.



   (C)   Before any permit is issued allowing the moving of any
building along any route, the applicant must furnish a bond in an amount and
with surety to the approval of the Building Commissioner. The bond shall
provide for the payment of any damages which may happen to any tree,
pavement, street or sidewalk, any pole of telephone, telegraph or light wire,
or for the repair of which the city may be held responsible, whether the
damage shall be inflicted by the person or his or her agents, employees or
workers. The person shall agree to hold  the city harmless against any
liability, judgment, damages, costs and expenses which may, in any way,
accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of the permit or the
performance of any work thereunder. No building shall be permitted to stand
on any road, highway, street or public ground for a period longer than eight
hours.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.065  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   If actual construction work is not commenced within three
months after building material of any kind is delivered on the site or, if
during the course of construction, work has been suspended for three months,
the permit shall be immediately revocable, and notice to that effect shall be
served on the owner or holder of the permit. This notice shall set forth that
within five days the owner shall furnish satisfactory proof that building
operations are to be started or recommended and carried out to completion. If
the owner shall fail to furnish this proof, or having furnished same, failed
to begin or resume work, then it shall be the further duty of the Building
Commissioner to revoke the permit. Written notice of the revocation shall be
served on the owner or shall be posted on the premises, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to perform any work in or about the building or
structure after the revocation of the permit and the posting of the notice
thereof.



   (B)   The owner shall be required to effectively protect any
dangerous or unsanitary condition that may exist on the premises.



   (C)   If the work is begun or resumed in accordance with the
agreement, then the original permit shall continue in effect.



   (D)   When the work for which a permit was issued is not being
performed in conformity with the detailed statement or plans upon which the
permit was issued, or is in violation of any provision of this subchapter, it
shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to notify the owner, or the
owner's agent, in writing, by posting a notice on the building for which the
permit is issued. The notice shall state that the work is being constructed
in violation of the permit and that the work must be suspended until a permit
for deviation from the detailed statement of plans be obtained, or that the
work shall be made to conform to the detailed statement or plans upon which a
permit therefor was issued. If the owner or the owner's agent fails to comply
with the notice or the posting thereof, it shall be the further duty of the
Building Commissioner to revoke the permit.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.066  PERMIT FOR ELECTRICAL WORK.



   (A)   Before any electrical work covered by this subchapter may be
installed, altered or repaired, an electrical permit shall be secured from
the Electrical Inspector's office. However, no electrical permit needs be
obtained in connection with the installation of meters and service wires
noted in division (B) below. No electrical permit shall be required for minor
repair work. Minor repair work shall be defined as replacement of fixtures
and devices.



   (B)   Electrical permits shall not be required for the installation
of meters and service wires, or installation of central service or
substations owned, maintained or operated by a serving agency operating under
franchise.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.067  RESERVED.



§ 150.068  ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTION FEES.



   Permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city. Current charges
are listed in § 158.01, Building Permits.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-08, passed 4-18-2002)



§ 150.069  TEMPORARY SERVICE.



   (A)   A letter requesting temporary service from the owner or agent
of any occupancy must be filed with the Electrical Inspector.



   (B)   Where an urgent necessity for the use of electrical current in
any installation is shown to exist, the Inspector may grant permission for
the temporary current to any wiring, apparatus or fixtures for a period not
exceeding 90 days, if the wiring, apparatus or fixtures are in the condition
that the electrical current may safely be used thereon without danger to life
or property. Permission may be obtained for temporary use of electrical
current during the construction or alteration of any building.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.070  CONNECTION WITHOUT APPROVAL OF INSPECTOR.



   No person shall make any electrical connection to any electrical
equipment, except small plug-in appliances, until the Electrical Inspector
has given approval. The Inspector is authorized to disconnect any electrical
installation or equipment which has been connected before the approval for
service has been given. He or she shall thereupon attach notice, which shall
state that the wiring or apparatus has been disconnected by the Inspector.
Any person removing the notice or reconnecting the wiring of apparatus before
it has been approved by the Inspector shall be liable to the penalties of
this subchapter.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.071  DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.



   The Electrical Inspector is empowered to disconnect or order the
discontinuance of electrical service  to any conductors or apparatus found
to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, or which have been installed
without permit, or not in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
He or she shall thereupon attach a notice which states that the conductors or
apparatus have been disconnected.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.072  REINSPECTION; NOTICE OF DEFECTS.



   (A)   The Electrical Inspector is empowered to reinspect all
existing wiring, appliances, devices and equipment coming within the scope of
this subchapter.



   (B)   When the installation or any wiring, appliances, devises and
equipment is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person, firm
or entity owning, using or operating the same shall be notified in writing.



   (C)   The person shall make the necessary repairs or changes
required to place the wiring, appliances, devices and equipment in a safe
condition, and have the work completed within 15 days after notification
thereof, or within such reasonable time as may upon request be prescribed.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.073  PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PLUMBING.



   (A)   Any person, partnership or entity engaged in the plumbing
business shall, before doing any plumbing work, either for himself or herself
or for others in the city, first obtain a permit from the Building
Commissioner under the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   Permits for connections to the city water mains and sewers
shall be issued only to a licensed plumbing contractor. Permits for
excavations and backfills other than those on owners' premises shall be
issued only to licensed plumbers.



   (C)   (1)   Permits for installation of plumbing and drainage
within houses and buildings of all types within the city are required. When
these installations do not require new or additional connections to the city
water mains and additional connections to sewers, permits shall be issued to
the building owner on application. The cost of the permit shall depend on the
number of fixtures installed and in accordance with the schedule hereinafter
set forth.



      (2)   Permits for repairs or replacements on plumbing within
building shall not be required. Repairs shall be taken to mean repairing or
replacing of an old fixture by a new one, to be used for the same purpose,
forcing out wastes and repairing leaks in waste pipes. These repairs or
alterations shall not be construed to include additional fixtures, relocating
fixtures, connecting storage tanks, heating plants or apparatus to water
systems, running new lines to sewer, water soil waste or vent or leader pipes.



   (D)   The minimum charges for a permit to alter or change any
existing plumbing or pipe work within any building shall be as set forth in
the current charges, available for inspection in the Building Commission
office.



(Ord. G-85-16, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



§ 150.074  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING.



   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm or entity shall construct or
install any warm air heating equipment or appurtenances, such as are subject
to the provisions of this subchapter, in or for any building; or alter or
repair any existing warm air heating equipment or appurtenances as are
subject to the provisions of this subchapter, without the holder of a warm
air heating license first making written application for and securing a
permit therefor, setting forth the nature of the work to be performed.



   (B)   Fees. The current fees for permits shall be as set forth in §
158.01, Building Permits.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-86-125, passed 3-3-1986; Ord.
G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.075  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.



   Each certifying architect or engineer shall submit at the completion of
the construction a letter certifying that the structure has been built in
accordance with the plans and specifications, approved by the Building
Commissioner, and is in accordance with all rules and regulations. The letter
of certification must be received prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.076  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR BUILDINGS.



   A certificate of occupancy for buildings will be issued after final
inspections have been performed and approved by the Building Commissioner's
Office, the Fire Department and the Wastewater Treatment Department.
Residential single-family dwellings do not require an inspection from the
Fire Department.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall issue a certificate of
occupancy within five working days after written application therefor,
provided the building or structure has been built in compliance with
applicable Indiana Building Code. No building or structure shall be occupied
other than occupancy under a temporary certificate of occupancy until the
certificate is issued. If a building or structure is occupied without a
certificate of occupancy a flat rate fine will be imposed. One hundred
dollars for residential construction and $1,000 for commercial or industrial
construction will be charged to the person, firm or entity on record as the
building permit holder. Each day constitutes a separate violation and in
addition shall be subject to all penal provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Alterations to existing structures where the square footage of
remodeled area does not exceed 1,000 square feet shall not require a
certificate of occupancy. Unattached residential garages shall not require a
certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 150.084  FINES, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Revocation or suspension after hearing.



      (1)   Upon a complaint filed by the Building Commissioner as
to violations of this subchapter by the holder of any contractor license
issued under this chapter, the Building Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized representative shall upon repeated violations of this chapter
issue fines not to exceed $25 for the first violation, $50 for the second
violation; the issuance of the third violation shall be $100 and immediately
cause written notice of the complaint to be mailed to the licensee. The
notice shall state the nature of the complaint and the time which the
Commission has fixed for a hearing thereon. If, after the hearing, the
Building Commission is of the opinion that the complaint is justified, it
shall have the power to revoke or suspend the license of the licensee.



      (2)   In addition to any penalty provided under this
subchapter, after a license has been revoked, a new license shall not be
issued to the applicant until all violations theretofore committed have been
corrected, unless the applicant is prevented from correcting them by
inability to secure the consent of the owner of the property or other causes
beyond his or her control.



   (B)   Automatic suspension. Failure on the part of any commercial
contractor, residential contractor, electrical or heating, ventilation and
air conditioning contractor to correct any defect, error or deficiency in any
work within 15 calendar days after notification thereof, or within such
further reasonable time as may, upon request, be prescribed, shall
automatically and without further notice, stop the issuance of permits to the
licensee until the corrections have been made, inspected and approved. The
Building Commissioner shall be promptly notified upon the correction of any
defect, errors or deficiency.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.085  MARKING PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   A set of plans and specifications showing the approval of the
Building Commissioner must be kept at the site of the construction of the
building for which a permit has been issued at all times.



   (B)   No changes shall be made in any plans or specifications after
they have been filed with the Building Commissioner unless he or she first
gives his or her consent to the changes. If a permit holder desires to make
changes in a building during construction that will make the building
different from the plans and specifications filed with the Building
Commissioner, he or she shall first obtain the consent of the Building
Commissioner.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



§ 150.086  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.



   (A)   Any building or structure built or demolished in violation of
any provisions of these building regulations is declared to be a common
nuisance, and the nuisance may be abated under existing law. All the
provisions of these building regulations or orders of the Building
Commissioner or the Building Commission may be enforced by injunction or
other proceedings according to law.



   (B)   Whenever the Building Commissioner is satisfied that any
provision of this code is being violated, is about to be violated or that any
order or direction made in pursuance of the enforcement of this code has not
been complied with or is being disregarded; and whenever he or she is
satisfied that civil proceedings are necessary for the enforcement of this
code, to restrain or correct the violation thereof or to prevent the
occupancy, building, demolishment or use of any building or structure that is
being built or demolished in violation of this code, shall, upon the approval
of the Board of Public Works and Safety, institute civil proceedings. The
civil proceedings shall be brought in the name of the city.



   (C)   Nothing in this section and no action taken thereunder shall
be held to exclude such civil penalties as may be authorized by law, or to
exempt anyone violating this code or any part of the laws from any civil
penalties which may be incurred.



(Ord. G-85-116, passed 12-2-1985)



HOUSING CODE



§ 150.095  SCOPE.



   All persons, as defined in § 150.096, shall be subject to the
requirements of this subchapter, and shall conform to its provisions and be
subject to the penalties imposed by it.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-16-10, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 150.096  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APARTMENT. Same as DWELLING UNIT, as defined in this section.



   BASEMENT. A portion of the building located partially underground, but
having less than 60% of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.



   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The legally designated Building Commissioner of
the city, or his or her authorized representative.



   CELLAR. A portion of the building located partially or wholly
underground, and having 60% or more than 50% of its clear floor to ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.



   DWELLING. Any building which contains a dwelling unit as defined in
this section; and dwelling shall also include rooming houses, as defined in
this section; provided that, temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall
not be regarded as a DWELLING.



   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms, located within a building
and forming a single housekeeping unit with facilities which are used or
designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food and similar animal and vegetable
refuse.



   HABITABLE ROOM.A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.



   HEALTH OFFICER. The legally designated health authority of the city or
his or her authorized representative.



   LESSEE. Any person who by written contract or lease, or by any
week-to-week or month-to-month tenancy agreement shall have the right to
occupy a dwelling or dwelling unit.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.Any dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit.



   NUISANCE. A public nuisance as known at common law or in equity.
Anything that is dangerous to human life or health in, under, over, around or
about a dwelling or dwelling unit, or that renders the air of human food or
drink therein unwholesome. Any dwellings or units, or parts thereof, that are
not sufficiently supported, ventilated, drained, cleaned or lighted, are also
NUISANCES.



   OCCUPANCY. The term in which one is an occupant.



   OCCUPANT.Any person, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having
actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   OPERATOR. Any person having charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER. Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such
person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with
provisions of this subchapter imposed upon the owner.



   PERSON. Shall include any individual or individuals, firm, corporation,
association, or partnership, acting together in the ownership of a real
estate.



   PLUMBING. Shall include all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: Gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, closets, sinks, dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower
baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drain vents and any
other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines.



   REAL ESTATE. Property consisting of land and/or buildings.



   RENTAL UNIT. Any rented dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   ROOMING HOUSE.Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the occupant to three or more
persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father,
sister or brother of the occupant.



   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   RUBBISH. Combustible or noncombustible waste materials except garbage.
The term shall include residue from the burning of wood, coal and coke.



   RUBBISH STORAGE FACILITIES and GARBAGE STORAGE FACILITIES. Outside
containers in which rubbish and garbage are temporarily stored for collection.



   SUPPLIED.Paid for, furnished or provided by control of the owner or
operator.



   TENANT. See LESSEE above.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to
the ground, to another structure or to any utility system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   UNFIT DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling
unit, guest room or suite of  rooms, or the premises on which the same is
located, in which there exists any condition that endangers life, limb,
health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-16-10, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 150.097  SANITARY FIXTURES, WATER SUPPLY, SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND SANITATION.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements.



   (A)   There shall be a safe and potable supply of running water into
each dwelling unit.



   (B)   Each dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy
to a person within the room, and is equipped with an inside flush water
closet and lavatory basin. Every dwelling unit shall also contain a kitchen
sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a bathtub or shower installed in a
room affording privacy. Every flush water closet shall be connected to cold
water lines and an approved sewer or approved  individual sewage system.
Every kitchen sink, every lavatory basin, every bathtub and every shower
shall be connected to hot and cold water lines, and to an approved sewer or
approved individual sewage disposal unit. All plumbing fixtures and fittings
shall be in good working condition. Sufficient water shall be piped to all
plumbing fixtures for the proper operation of the fixtures.



   (C)   Every dwelling unit shall be furnished with water heating
facilities capable of heating water to such temperature as to permit an
adequate quantity of water to be drawn in each fixture at a temperature of
not less than 120°F. Water heating facilities shall be properly connected to
hot and cold water lines. If gas is used as a fuel, it shall be vented to the
atmosphere.



   (D)   Every dwelling unit shall have a single-flush water closet, a
single lavatory basin and a single bathtub or shower.



   (E)   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate
garbage/rubbish storage facilities and garbage/rubbish disposal, the type and
location of which shall be in accordance with regulations prescribed by the
Building Commissioner. In the case of dwellings consisting of four or more
dwelling units, rubbish storage facilities shall be supplied by the owner,
unless the rental agreement provides otherwise. In the case of dwellings
consisting of fewer than four units, the rubbish storage facilities shall be
supplied by the occupants, unless the rental agreement provides otherwise.



   (F)   A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be
provided from the interior of a dwelling to the exterior of a street, a yard,
court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade. Every rental
unit shall have access directly to the outside or to a common corridor, and
every sleeping room shall have an approved direct means of egress to the
outside. All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily openable
from the inner side. Exits from multiple dwelling units shall not lead
through other such units, or through toilet rooms or bathrooms.



   (G)   When service from a public or semi-public sewage and water
system is not available or feasible, an individual system of water supply and
sewage disposal may be considered adequate, provided it is installed in
accordance with the  requirements of the  Board of  Health. When an
approved sewer is not available and where conditions are such as to prevent
safe and sanitary subsurface disposal of waterborne sewage, then at the
discretion of the Board of Health, certain variances in the requirements of
this section may be permitted.



   (H)   All courts, yards or other areas on the premises of every
dwelling shall be properly graded and drained.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-16-10, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 150.098  HEATING, LIGHTING AND VENTILATION.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the following requirements.



   (A)   Every habitable room in a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
contain a window or windows or a door opening directly to the outside air.
The total area of the window, windows or door shall not be less than 10% of
the floor area of the room.



   (B)   Every bathroom and every water closet compartment shall have a
window or skylight facing directly to the outside, having a total window area
of no less than 10% of the floor area, and providing an openable area of 5%
of the floor area; except where there is supplied some other device affording
equivalent mechanical ventilation vented to the outside atmosphere, which is
acceptable to the Health Officer.



   (C)   All window sash shall be glazed and provided with suitable
hardware and shall open to the extent of not less than 5% of the floor area
of the room affording adequate ventilation and approved. This requirement may
be waived in dwelling units which are so designed and equipped as to be
dependent upon mechanical ventilation, heating and cooling, except in a
bedroom.



   (D)   Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be
weather-proofed and capable of being adequately and safely heated. The
heating equipment in every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be properly vented
and shall be maintained in good order and repair by the occupant unless the
rental agreement provides otherwise. The heating equipment shall be capable
of maintaining the unit at 70°F.



   (E)   Every habitable room and nonhabitable room in a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall be furnished with electric power, and shall be wired in
accordance with the National Electric Code in place at the time of
construction.



   (F)   Every public hallway and stairway shall be provided with a
safe and adequate type of artificial light controlled by convenient switches.
Where the public hallways and stairways of a dwelling or dwelling unit are
not provided with windows opening directly to the outside air, the owner
shall keep a proper light burning in the hallway near the stairways, upon
each floor, from sunrise to sunset. The owner shall keep a proper light
burning in the public hallways and stairways of every dwelling and dwelling
unit near the stairs, upon the ground floor, every night from sunset to
sunrise throughout the year and upon all other floors and stair halls from
sunset till 10:00 p.m.



   (G)   At the beginning of an occupancy, every dwelling unit shall be
provided with suitable screens for protection against insects at every window.



   (H)   The basement of every dwelling shall be dry and ventilated,
and shall be kept free from rubbish and garbage accumulation and rodent and
insect infestation.



   (I)   No room in any basement shall be occupied as a habitable room
unless:



      (1)   The clear inner height is at least seven feet; and



      (2)   The floors and walls are water-proof and damp-proof in
accordance with accepted building methods and standards.



   (J)   Every basement habitable room must, in all cases, comply with
all of the minimum standards set out in this subchapter.



   (K)   No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
and shall be kept free of accumulated garbage and rubbish and rodent and
insect infestation.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-16-10, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 150.099  BUILDING MAINTENANCE.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another person for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the following requirements.



   (A)   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodent-proof; shall be capable of
affording privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.



   (B)   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodent-proof; shall be capable of
affording privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.



   (C)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every
appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that the normal use may cause to be placed thereon;
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (D)   Every plumbing fixture and waste water pipe within a
single-family dwelling unit and used principally by occupants of the dwelling
unit shall be maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions by the occupant of the dwelling unit. Every
supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this
subchapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely
and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (E)   The floor and walls of every water closet compartment shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water, and
so as to permit the floor and walls to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.



   (F)   No person shall occupy or let to any other person for
occupancy, any vacant dwelling or dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary
and fit for human occupancy. If in the opinion of the Building Commissioner a
dwelling or dwelling unit has been erected, altered or occupied contrary to
law; or if a dwelling or dwelling unit is infected with a contagious disease
or is dangerous to life or health by reason of want of repair or defects in
drainage, plumbing, ventilation or construction, or by reason of the
existence on the premises of a nuisance, the Building Commissioner may
require all persons to vacate the dwelling or dwelling unit within not less
than 24 hours or more than ten days, for reasons set out in his or her order.
In case that order is not complied with, the Building Commissioner then may
cause the dwelling or dwelling unit to be vacated until such time as the
condition upon which the order is based has been corrected.



   (G)   Every roof of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be equipped
with adequate gutters and downspouts capable of carrying off normal rainfall.
The roof, gutters and downspouts shall be kept in good repair and free from
obstruction by the owner, unless otherwise provided by the rental agreement.



   (H)   All dwellings, fences and outbuildings in a dilapidated or
unsafe condition shall be removed or repaired. All yard structures, privies,
fences and rubbish, as well as abandoned automobiles incapable of operation,
inoperable appliances of any sort, materials or supplies which obstruct light
and air, harbor rats and vermin, and create an undesirable environment shall
be removed.



   (I)   All occupants shall keep every dwelling and yard clean and
free from accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish or similar matter, and shall
keep same free from vermin and rodent infestation. This shall apply to that
portion of the property which the occupant occupies or over which the
occupant has exclusive control.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.100  OCCUPANCY.



   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with
the following requirements.



   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square
feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof. The floor space
shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.



   (B)   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by an occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet for each
occupant thereof.



   (C)   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the
room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.



   (D)   Where more than two persons occupy any dwelling unit, food
shall not be prepared or cooked in any room used for sleeping purposes unless
where so originally architecturally designed.



   (E)   No residence building or dwelling unit containing two or more
sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or
water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor
shall the room arrangement be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
only by going through another sleeping room, bathroom or water closet
compartment.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.101  CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES.



   (A)   Responsibilities of owners and occupants. Every owner of a
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the dwelling units and the
shared or public area of the dwelling premises thereof. Every occupant of a
dwelling containing less than two dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public area of
the dwelling and premises thereof, unless otherwise provided for by the
rental agreement.



   (B)   Responsibility of every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling
unit. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, facilities, yard
and otherwise, all of the premises which he or she and his or her family
occupies, uses and controls.



   (C)   Municipal department responsible for administration. Unless
specifically stated elsewhere in this chapter, the Building Commissioner
shall be responsible for the administration of actions taken under this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the issuance of notices to the
landowners and other persons, the issuance of certificates of cost to the
County Auditor and the administration of the appeals procedure.



   (D)   Maintaining premises free of debris, trash, litter, garbage,
refuse, junk and abandoned vehicles.



      (1)   The owner of any lot or parcel of real estate within the
city shall maintain the premises, including the real estate, or any alley or
sidewalk abutting the real estate, free of all debris, trash, rubbish,
litter, garbage, refuse, junk and abandoned vehicles, when the material is
within view of any public premises, public alley, street, highway or adjacent
property, to such an extent that the premises is a hazard to public health,
safety and welfare.



      (2)   The presence of debris, trash, rubbish, litter, garbage,
refuse, tires, junk and abandoned vehicles is injurious to the public welfare
and is a nuisance.



      (3)   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is at least three
model years old, mechanically inoperable, and left on private property
continuously for more than 20 days (I.C. 9-13-2-1). See division (7) to
definition provided in § 90.05.



   (E)   Inspection and notice of violations.



      (1)   To determine compliance with this chapter, the Building
Commissioner is entitled to enter upon the premises of any real property
within the city.



      (2)   If the Building Commissioner determines there is a
violation of this section, he or she shall have a notice which may be served
by a law enforcement officer, the Building Commissioner himself or herself or
designee in person, by certified mail to the owner, or by a “notice”
placard conspicuously posted on the property which contains the address of
the property, date of notice, the nuisance and the corrective action
necessary to bring the property into compliance, address and telephone number
of Board of Public Works and Safety, a warning that if the nuisance is not
removed within ten calendar days from the date of notice the city may take
action to abate such nuisance, and that the person has the right to appeal
the violation to the Board of Public Works and Safety but must do so before
the expiration of the time to abate, and that the time period for removing
the material and/or vehicles is ten calendar days from notice.  Notice shall
also be sent via first class mail to any person holding a substantial
interest in the real estate (hereinafter “landowner”), requiring removal
of the material and/or vehicles within ten days.



      (3)   The notice must also inform the landowner that failure
to comply will result in the city removing and disposing of the material and
vehicles at the landowner’s expense.



      (4)   The notice must also inform the landowner of his or her
right to appeal the Building Commissioner’s determination, according to the
procedure set forth herein.



      (5)   The Building Commissioner will determine the
landowner’s identity and address from the duplicate records of the County
Auditor.



   (F)   Failure to remove and notice of abatement.



      (1)   If the landowner fails to remove the material and
vehicles within the time prescribed, the Building Commissioner shall cause
the city or its agent to remove and dispose the material and vehicles, as
allowed under I.C.36-1-6-2, as amended.



      (2)   The Building Commissioner must then prepare a certified
statement of the actual cost the city incurred in removing and disposing of
the material and vehicles, plus any additional administration costs incurred
in the city’s effort to enforce this section.



      (3)   The certified statement of costs shall be mailed to the
landowner of the property.



      (4)   The landowner must pay the amount specified in the
certified statement to the City Clerk within 30 days after receiving the
statement.



      (5)   If the landowner fails to pay the amount within the
required time, a certified statement of the landowner’s failure to pay the
cost will be filed with the Office of the County Auditor.



      (6)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-10.1-4, as amended, the Auditor
will then place the amount claimed on the tax duplicate against the property
affected by the work. The amount will thereafter be collected and disbursed
to the General Fund of the city as other property taxes.



   (G)   Lien upon property.



      (1)   In addition to the above procedures, if the landowner
fails to remove the material and vehicles within the time specified in the
notice provided herein, and the city or its agent must remove the material
and vehicles, the Building Commissioner shall file with the County Recorder a
lien against the property, which lien may be foreclosed as are other similar
liens.



      (2)   Any additional costs created by the city’s need to
remove and dispose of the material and vehicles, and to foreclose the liens,
may be added to the cost of enforcing compliance with this section.



   (H)   Notice of appeal.



      (1)   Any landowner may appeal to the Board of Public Works
and Safety with regard to any action under this chapter.



      (2)   An appeal of the removal and disposal of material and
vehicles, or the costs associated with their removal, must be submitted in
writing, and must be received within ten days of the initial notice of
violation, or within ten days of receipt of a certified statement of costs.



      (3)   The Board of Public Works and Safety will review an
appeal of any notice of violation or statement of costs under this chapter at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-04-23, passed 5-20-2004; Ord.
G-09-26, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 150.102  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES.



   (A)   Every rooming house and every room unit shall be in compliance
with the following: Minimum standards for lighting, sanitary fixtures, water
supply, sewage disposal and premises sanitation, heating and ventilation,
occupancy and minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance.



   (B)   Every rooming house shall be equipped with at least one flush
water closet, one lavatory basin and one bathtub or shower for each eight
persons or fraction thereof within the rooming house, including the members
of the family of the owner or operator if they share the use of the
facilities.



   (C)   Every water closet, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower shall be
located within the rooming house in a room or rooms which:



      (1)   Afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms;



      (2)   Are accessible from a public hall and without going
outside the rooming house; and



      (3)   Are not more than one story removed from the rooming
unit of any occupant intended to share the facilities.



   (D)   Where bedding, bed linen or towels are supplied, the owner or
operator shall maintain the bedding in a clean and sanitary manner, shall
furnish clean bed linen and towels at least once each week and prior to the
letting of any room to any occupant.



   (E)   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house.
He or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the
entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied
by the operator.



   (F)   Every provision of this subchapter which applies to rooming
houses shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such
provision may be found in conflict with the laws of the state or with the
lawful regulations of any state board or agency.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.103  ENFORCEMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICES AND ORDERS; HEARINGS.



   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer or the Building Commissioner
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, he or she shall give notice of the violation to the
person or persons responsible therefor, as herein provided. The notice shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Include a list of the violations found;



      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act
it requires; and



      (4)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent, or the
occupant as the case may require; provided that, the notice shall be deemed
to be properly served upon the owner or agent or upon the occupant if a copy
thereof is served upon him or her personally, if a copy thereof is sent by
registered mail to his or her last known address, or if service is effected
by any other method authorized under the laws of the state. For properties
registered under Chapter 159, Rental Housing, notices shall be deemed
properly served upon the agent and/or owner as listed on the registration,
upon confirmation of receipt and/or delivery of the notice.



   (B)   Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of this subchapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals; provided that, the person
shall file in the office of the Board of Appeals a written petition
requesting the hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
thereto within ten days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of
the petition, the Board of Appeals shall set a time and place for the hearing
and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why the
notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not
later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed. Upon
application of the petitioner, the Board of Appeals may postpone the date of
the hearing for a reasonable time beyond the ten-day period, if in its
judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for the
postponement.



   (C)   After the hearing, the Board of Appeals shall sustain, modify
or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the
provisions of this subchapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of Appeals sustains or
modifies the notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to division (A)(4) of this section, shall automatically become an
order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Board of Appeals within ten days after the notice is served.



   (D)   The proceedings at the hearing, including the findings and
decision of the Board of Appeals, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Health Officer or
Building Commissioner. The record shall also include a copy of every notice
or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Board of Appeals may seek relief therefrom in any court of
competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the state.



   (E)   Whenever the Building Commissioner or Health Officer finds an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health
or safety, he or she may, without notice or hearing, issue  an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that the action be
taken as is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the
other provisions of this section, the order shall be effective immediately
upon being served as provided in division (A)(4) above. Any person to whom
the order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition
to the Board of Appeals shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
After the hearing, depending upon his or her findings as to whether the
provisions of this subchapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Board of Appeals shall continue
the order in effect, or modify it or revoke it.



   (F)   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for
human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of the
unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the
following requirements.



      (1)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to
have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human
habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the Building
Commissioner or Health Officer:



         (a)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the
health or safety of the occupants or of the public;



         (b)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or
sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public; or



         (c)   One which because of its general condition or
location is unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous to the health of the occupants
or of the public.



      (2)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for
human habitation, and so designated and placarded by the Health Officer, or
Building Commissioner shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by
the Health Officer or Building Commissioner.



      (3)   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned
and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human
habitation until written approval is secured from, and the placard is removed
by, the Health Officer or Building Commissioner. The Health Officer or
Building Commissioner shall remove the placard whenever the defect or defects
upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated.



      (4)   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any
dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human
habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in division (F)(3) of
this section.



      (5)   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to
the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for
human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Board of Appeals.



   (G)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall serve as the Board
of Appeals for any alleged violations or appeals with respect to § 150.101,
Cleanliness of Premises.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-09-24, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. G-16-10,
passed 10-3-2016)



§ 150.104  CONFLICT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS; EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.



   (A)   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to
be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or
health ordinance or code of the city or laws of the state, existing on the
effective date of this subchapter, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this subchapter is
found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of
the city, existing on the effective date of this subchapter which establishes
a lower standard for the promotion and protection of this subchapter, the
higher standard shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or
codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found
in conflict with these sections.



   (B)   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this subchapter should be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
subchapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the
provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be severable.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969)



§ 150.105  HARDSHIP.



   Where the literal application of the requirements of this subchapter
would cause undue hardship, an exception may be granted upon written
application, subject to approval by the Board of Appeals. The orders of
exception shall be made only when it is clearly evident that the reasonable
safety and sanitation is assured, and such orders may be conditioned in such
a manner as to achieve that end. The conditions may include restrictions not
generally specified by this subchapter.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969)



§ 150.106  INSPECTION OF DWELLINGS, DWELLING UNITS, ROOMING UNITS AND
PREMISES.



   (A)   The Health Officer and Building Commissioner are hereby
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition and
compliance with all applicable city ordinances of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises located within the city, in order that they may
perform their duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of
dwellings and of the general public.



   (B)   For the purpose of making the inspections, the Health Officer
and Building Commissioner are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey,
at all reasonable times, all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming  units and
premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Health Officer and
Building Commissioner free access to the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit and its premises at all reasonable times, for the purpose of the
inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling
unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to
any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit of the premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making the repairs or alterations as are necessary
to effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, or with any
lawful rule or regulation adopted, or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Unless waived by either the owner or tenant, the following
procedure shall be used to obtain entry to real estate for the purpose of
inspection. The Building Commissioner shall cause written notice to be mailed
to the owner of the rental unit or premise, or his or her agent, setting
forth a time period with date and time for an inspection on an inspection
confirmation form provided by the Building Commissioner. The owner or his or
her agent shall have ten days from the notice issuance date in which to
submit the complete inspection confirmation form, which shall confirm the,
date and time for the inspection.



   (D)   The owner and/or tenant shall be responsible for granting the
Building Commissioner access to the real estate property. In the event the
owner and/or tenant refuses entry to any given rental unit or premise for
inspection pursuant to this chapter, the appropriate county court shall be
utilized by the city to obtain a warrant for entry and inspection as provided
in this chapter. If the owner and/or tenant does not consent, the Building
Commissioner or designee shall request a warrant of entry from a court of
appropriate jurisdiction to conduct an inspection of the rental unit to
determine whether it complies with this chapter or other city ordinances. The
Building Commissioner or designee shall conduct an inspection, as authorized
by such warrant of entry.



   (E)   The Common Council has determined that the inspections
provided in this chapter for all real estate constitutes a reasonable method
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens.



   (F)   In the event of an inspection and notice of violations being
sent to a person owning a dwelling unit, the person may provide the Building
Commissioner with documentation substantiating completion of repairs required
as part of the notice. If the Building Commissioner is not satisfied with the
documentation, he or she may conduct a re-inspection of the real estate
property. Any subsequent inspection after a re-inspection shall be assessed a
fee of $75, unless exempted by state statute. The Building Commissioner shall
file with the County Recorder/Auditor a lien against the property, which may
be foreclosed as other similar liens, for any inspection fee that remains
unpaid for 90 days after legal notice of the fee is served upon the person
owning the real estate.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-16-10, passed 10-3-2016)



COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



§ 150.115  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-509, the "New Albany-Fringe Area
Comprehensive Plan 2000", dated April 1982, is adopted as the official
comprehensive plan of the city, subject to the resolution of the Common
Council amending the "New Albany-Fringe Area Comprehensive Plan 2000", passed
on August 2, 1982.



   (B)   The Comprehensive Plan shall be used as the policy basis for
future amendments to, or the creation of various regulatory mechanisms for
its enforcement, including the city's Zoning Code and Subdivision Control
Ordinance.



(Ord. Z-82-945, passed 8-2-1982)



§ 150.116  REPEAL OF MASTER PLAN.



   Upon completion of all revisions to the city's Zoning Code and
Subdivision Control Ordinance as necessitated by this Comprehensive Plan, the
city's Master Plan, adopted on March 7, 1960, and all amendments thereto are
repealed.



(Ord. Z-82-945, passed 8-2-1982)



UNSAFE BUILDINGS



§ 150.120  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, there is hereby established the
city's Unsafe Building Law.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.121  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE; SCOPE.



   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28 is hereby adopted by reference as the
city's Unsafe Building Law. All proceedings within the city for the
inspection, repair and removal of unsafe buildings shall be governed by that
law and the provisions of this subchapter. In the event the provisions of
this subchapter conflict with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through
36-7-9-28, then the provisions of the state statute shall control.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.122  UNSAFE BUILDINGS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   All buildings or portions thereof within the city which are determined
after inspection by the Building Commissioner or a registered architect or
registered engineer employed under I.C. 36-7-9-14(c)(2), to be unsafe as
defined in this subchapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.123  POWERS OF THE BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   The Building Commissioner shall be authorized to administer and to
proceed under the provisions of state law in ordering the repair or removal
of any buildings found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified in
this subchapter.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.124  LIMITS OF THE BUILDING COMMISSIONER'S POWERS.



   Wherever in the building regulations of the city or the city unsafe
building law, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner this shall be construed
to give that officer only the discretion of determining whether the rules and
standards established by ordinance have been complied with; and no such
provisions shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as
to what those regulations or standards shall be, power to require conditions
not prescribed by ordinance, or to enforce ordinance provisions in an
arbitrary or discretionary manner.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.125  "UNSAFE BUILDING" DEFINED.



   The description of an unsafe building contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is
hereby supplemented to provide minimum standards for building conditions or
maintenance in the city by adding the following definition.



   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any or all the
conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an UNSAFE
BUILDING; provided that, these conditions or defects exist to the extent that
life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered:



      (1)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times
the working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location;



      (2)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before that catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;



      (3)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is
likely to fall, to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby
injure persons or damage property;



      (4)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength of stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so
as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding
the working stresses permitted for the buildings;



      (5)   Whenever any portion thereof has wrecked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in
the case of similar new construction;



      (6)   Whenever the building, structure or any portion thereof,
because of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the
removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purpose of supporting the building; the deterioration, decay or
inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or
completely collapse;



      (7)   Whenever, for any reason, the building structure, or any
portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used;



      (8)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of
the base;



      (9)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings;



      (10)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated so as to become an attractive nuisance to children, or freely
accessible to persons for the purpose of committing unlawful acts;



      (11)   Whenever any building or structure has been
constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific
requirements or prohibition applicable to the building or structure provided
by the building regulations of the city, or of any law or ordinance of the
state or city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;



      (12)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or
not erected in accordance with all applicable laws or ordinances has in any
nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member, or portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location;



      (13)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to
be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined by the County
Health Department or its officers to be unsanitary, unfit for human
habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or
disease;



      (14)   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration,  damage, inadequate
exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric
wiring, gas connections, heating apparatus or other cause, is determined by
the concerned Fire Department to be a fire hazard; and



      (15)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains
on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute that building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.126  "SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST" DEFINED.



   The definition of SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST set forth in I.C.
36-7-9-2 is hereby incorporated by reference herein as if copied in full.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.127  STANDARDS OF WORKMANSHIP.



   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike
manner according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade. The
provisions of the rules pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical and one- and two-family dwellings, promulgated by the
Administrative Building Council of Indiana, shall be considered standard and
acceptable practice for all matters covered by this subchapter or orders
issued pursuant to this subchapter by the city's Building Commissioner.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.128  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   (A)   An Unsafe Building Fund is hereby established in the operating
budget of the city's Board of Works and Safety in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-14.



   (B)   All monies now budgeted or appropriated in the operating
budget of the Board for demolition are to be transferred to the Unsafe
Building Fund.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)



§ 150.129  PROHIBITIONS.



   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or
occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or
cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of
the provisions of this subchapter or any order issued by the Building
Commissioner.



(Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984)  Penalty, see § 150.999



ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT



§ 150.140  ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The position of Ordinance Enforcement Officer is established as a
full-time employee to perform code enforcement of the ordinances in the City
of New Albany. This position will report to the City Attorney/Corporate
Attorney.



(Ord. G-05-01, passed 1-20-2005)



§ 150.141  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It is the duty and responsibility of the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer to inspect and cite violations of any ordinance in effect for the
City of New Albany, including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Environmental violations, such as:



         (a)   Uncollected trash and garbage, litter and debris;
and



         (b)   Fallen trees, stumps, dead trees and cut brush.



      (2)   Demolition remains;



      (3)   Appliances or furniture in yard or sidewalk;



      (4)   Auto parts and scrap metal;



      (5)   Grass and yards which violate city ordinance;



      (6)   Portable signs;



      (7)   Abandoned vehicles as defined by city ordinance and the
Indiana Code;



      (8)   Yard parking and illegal parking as per city ordinance;
and



      (9)   Other city ordinances pertaining to cleanliness of
property.



   (B)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall:



      (1)   Have visible photo identification worn and visible while
in performance of all duties;



      (2)   Handle complaints from citizens, businesses and city
officials in a timely and professional manner; and



      (3)   Appear and testify in court on behalf of the City of New
Albany upon request and/or subpoena from the City Attorney's office.



(Ord. G-05-01, passed 1-20-2005)



§ 150.142  HIRING PROCESS.



   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall be selected as follows.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall nominate the
candidates for Ordinance Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   The Common Council shall approve the Officer and the Mayor
shall appoint him or her after he or she has received Council approval.



(Ord. G-05-01, passed 1-20-2005)



§ 150.143  QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall have:



      (1)   High school diploma or equivalent; and



      (2)   Ability to operate a variety of automatic office
machines, including computer, copier, fax machine and digital camera.



   (B)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer should but is not required
to have one to two years of relevant work experience.



(Ord. G-05-01, passed 1-20-2005)



§ 150.144  CITATION PROCESS.



   (A)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall refer any issues
relating to unsafe or unsuitable homes and/or buildings to the Building
Commissioner for further action.



   (B)   All written citations will be reviewed on a periodic basis by
the City Attorney and/or designee.



   (C)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall note violations and
issue citations.



      (1)   Minor violations shall be documented because they may
lead to more serious problems.



      (2)   Citations shall be issued according to § 150.101.



      (3)   Appeals shall be made to the New Albany Board of Works
and Safety according to § 150.101(H), and if not resolved, then on to County
Court.



   (D)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall have full authority to
issue citations and to follow the procedures listed in the city's ordinances,
specifically but not limited to § 150.101 and any other applicable
section/ordinance.



   (E)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall review each violation
and shall send a registered or certified letter to the property owner stating
the following (in addition to any other requirements established by the
city's ordinance):



      (1)   A description of the property;



      (2)   The condition which is the violation and the
corresponding violation section of the city's ordinances;



      (3)   Request that the violation be corrected within a
determined time frame as dictated by ordinance or policy of the City
Attorney's Office; and



      (4)   Advise the owner that if no action is taken then other
avenues will be pursued including possible fines, liens and/or legal action.



   (F)   If the compliance of the violation is not achieved then
complaint shall be forwarded to the City Attorney's Office for enforcement.



(Ord. G-05-01, passed 1-20-2005)



§ 150.145  RECORDS.



   (A)   Enforcement records (such as citations and noted minor
violations) shall be maintained and recorded in a computer program and a
back-up shall be performed on a regular basis.



   (B)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall make quarterly reports
available to the Common Council upon request.



(Ord. G-05-01, passed 1-20-2005)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of these building
regulations, or who shall interfere or hinder any officer in the discharge of
his or her duties provided hereunder, shall be guilty of a class A infraction
and shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $1,000. Each day a
violation of this code shall continue shall be and constitute a separate
offense.



   (B)   The owner of a building, structure or portion thereof or of
the premises where anything in violation of these building regulations shall
be placed or shall exist; and an architect, engineer, building contractor,
agent, person or entity employed in connection therewith, and who may have
assisted in the commission of the violation shall each be guilty of a class A
infraction. For each separate offense, upon conviction thereof, each shall be
fined not less than $100, nor more than $1,000.



   (C)   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Board of Public Works and Safety from instituting an appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful building or demolishment, or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent use of occupancy of a
building, structure or portion thereof or of the premises; or to prevent an
illegal act, conduct business or use in or about the premises.



   (D)   Any violation of §§ 150.095 through 150.106, or of any rule
or regulation promoted by the Board of Health or Building Commissioner, or of
any order made by either or both of these, directing the abatement of a
nuisance, source of filth or cause or probable cause of sickness, is hereby
declared a violation. Any person, firm, entity or member of a firm or officer
or director of an entity, upon conviction thereof, may be fined up to $50 per
day for each offense. If any offense is continued for more than one day, each
day upon which the offense occurs or is continued, shall be considered and
shall constitute a separate offense and a separate fine may be imposed
therefor, with the maximum amount for the violations not to exceed $4,500 due
to that original notice of violation.



   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 150.127 and
150.129 or I.C. 36-7-9-28 shall commit a class C infraction for each day the
violation continues.



   (F)   (1)   Fines shall be according to the listed penalty in
each corresponding section of the ordinance for the particular violation,
and/or as listed in this section, as may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   Fines shall be collected by the City Attorney's Office.



      (3)   If the City of New Albany is required to expend
resources and monies to remedy a violation after notice and opportunity for
the property owner to remove or correct the violation, then the Enforcement
Officer and/or the City Attorney's Office should file liens upon the property
for the expenses as permitted by city ordinance, (see § 150.101(G)), and/or
any other applicable ordinance.



(Ord. G-69-352, passed 3-7-1969; Ord. G-84-8, passed 4-2-1984; Ord. G-85-116,
passed 12-2-1985; Ord. G-02-39, passed 10-17-2002; Ord. G-05-01, passed
1-20-2005; Ord. G-16-10, passed 10-3-2016)



CHAPTER 151:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



   151.01   Purpose and definitions



   151.02   Historic Preservation Commission: establishment and
organization



   151.03   Powers and duties of the Preservation Commission



   151.04   Historic districts, conservation districts and guidelines



   151.05   Interim protection



   151.06   Certificates of appropriateness



   151.07   Staff approvals



   151.08   Visual compatibility



   151.09   Preservation of historic and architectural character upon
alteration or relocation mandated



   151.10   Appeal provisions



   151.11   Maintenance



   151.12   Relationship with zoning districts



   151.13   Paint colors



   151.14   Interested parties



   151.15   Enforcement, penalties and judicial review



   151.16   Summary report



   151.17   Legal representation



§ 151.01  PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Purpose of historic preservation and protection. In order to
promote the educational, cultural and general welfare of the citizens of New
Albany and to ensure the harmonious and orderly growth and development of the
municipality; to maintain established residential neighborhoods in danger of
having their distinctiveness destroyed; to enhance property values and
attract new residents and businesses; to ensure the viability of the downtown
and other historic commercial districts and to enhance tourism within the
City of New Albany; it is deemed essential by the City of New Albany that
qualities relating to its history and outward appearance of its structures be
preserved. This purpose is advanced through the restoration and preservation
of historic areas and buildings, the construction of compatible new buildings
where appropriate, and the maintenance and insurance of compatibility in
regards to style, form, proportion, texture and material between historic
buildings and those of contemporary design. It is the intention of the City
of New Albany, through this chapter, to preserve and protect historic and
architecturally-worthy buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes
and neighborhoods, which impart a distinct aesthetic quality to the city and
serve as visible reminders of New Albany's historic heritage and building
traditions.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALTERATION. Any material or color change in the external
architectural features of any building, structure or site within a historic
district.



      CITY. The City of New Albany, Indiana.



      CLASSIFICATION. The evaluation of buildings, structures, and
sites included in the Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory: City
of New Albany, Interim Report, and defined historically as follows:



         (a)   CONTRIBUTING. The "C" classification means the
property is at least 40 years old, but that it does not meet the criteria for
an "O" or "N" classification. The resources are important to the density or
continuity of the area's historic fabric. Contributing structures can be
listed in the National Register only as part of a historic district.



         (b)   NON-CONTRIBUTING. The "NC" classification is not
included in a historic sites inventory unless it is located within the
boundaries of a historic district. The properties may be less than 50 years
old, or they may be older structures that have been altered in such a way
that they have lost their historic character, or they may be otherwise
incompatible with their historic surroundings. These properties are not
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.



         (c)   NOTABLE. The "N" Classification means that the
property does not merit the outstanding rating, but is still above-average in
its importance. A "Notable" property may be eligible for listing in the
National Register.



         (d)   OUTSTANDING. The "O" Classification means that the
property has sufficient historic or architectural significance that it is
listed, or is eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic
Places. Outstanding resources may be of local, state or national importance.



      DEMOLITION. The complete or substantial removal of any building,
structure or site located in a historic district.



      HISTORIC DISTRICT. A single building, structure, object or site,
or a concentration of buildings, structures, objects, spaces or sites, the
boundaries of which are described or delineated on a map approved in an
ordinance adopted under this chapter.



      INTERESTED PARTY OR PARTIES. One or more of the following:



         (a)   The Mayor of the Civil City of New Albany, Indiana;



         (b)   The Common Council of the Civil City of New Albany
(the "Common Council");



         (c)   The City Plan Commission, Redevelopment Commission
and/or the Board of Zoning Appeals;



         (d)   A neighborhood association, whether incorporated
or unincorporated, a majority of whose members are residents of a historic
district designated by an ordinance adopted under this chapter;



         (e)   An owner or occupant of property located in a
historic district established by an ordinance adopted under this chapter;



         (f)   Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana, Inc., or
any of its successors or assigns; and



         (g)   The state's Historic Preservation Officer
designated under I.C. 14-21-1-19.



      PRESERVATION GUIDELINES. The criteria, locally developed, which
identify local design concerns in an effort to assist property owners in
maintaining the character of the designated district or buildings during the
process of rehabilitation or new construction.



      PRIMARY AREA. The principal area of historic and/or architectural
significance within a historic district as delineated on the map establishing
the boundaries of the historic district.



      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. Work for which no certificate of
appropriateness is required.



      SECONDARY AREA. An area that is adjacent to a primary area and
that has a visual relationship to the primary area and in which alterations
to sites, structures, buildings, objects or spaces could affect the
preservation of the primary area. The purpose of designating a secondary area
is to assure its compatibility and harmony with the adjacent primary area.



      STREETSCAPE. The appearance from a public way, the distinguishing
characteristics of which are created by the width of the street and
sidewalks, their paving materials and color, the design of street furniture
(e.g. street lights, trash receptacles, benches and the like), use of plant
materials such as trees and shrubs, and the set back, mass and proportion of
those buildings that enclose the street. STREETSCAPE also includes public
art, statuary and other fixtures found in, or adjacent to, the public
rights-of-way.



      VISUAL COMPATIBILITY. Those elements of design that meet the
guidelines set out in § 151.08 of this chapter.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.02  HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION: ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established the Historic
Preservation Commission of the City of New Albany, Indiana (hereinafter
referred to as the "Preservation Commission").



   (B)   Composition. The Preservation Commission shall consist of not
less than three, nor more than nine, voting members. The membership may be
expanded beyond the maximum nine members only upon amendment of this chapter
by the Common Council. The voting members shall be residents of the city who
are interested in the preservation and development of historic areas. Each
designated historic district shall nominate a member from its Board of
Directors to serve as a full voting member of the Preservation Commission.
The member shall enjoy the same privileges and responsibilities as any other
member of the Preservation Commission. No voting member of the Preservation
Commission may transfer his or her right to vote by proxy to any other
individual. The members of the Preservation Commission should include
professionals in the disciplines of architectural history, planning and other
disciplines related to historic preservation, to the extent that those
professionals are available in the community. Nonvoting, advisory members may
be appointed to the Preservation Commission by the Mayor with the approval of
the Common Council. Preservation Commission members shall serve without
compensation, except for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties.



   (C)   Term. Voting members shall serve for a term of three years;
however, the initial terms of the members shall be for one year, two years
and three years, in order for the terms to be staggered. The term for
nonvoting, advisory members shall be three years. A vacancy shall be filled
within 90 days for the duration of the vacated membership.



   (D)   Commission Administrator. An Administrator designated by the
Mayor shall serve as the ex-officio Administrator of the Preservation
Commission. The Administrator shall also provide staff assistance to the
Preservation Commission, act as the Commission's Secretary and issue
certificates of appropriateness as directed by the Preservation Commission.



   (E)   Officers. The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect
from its voting membership a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary (if
the Commission is without an Administrator) who shall serve for one year and
who may be re-elected.



   (F)   Rules. The Preservation Commission shall adopt rules
consistent with the chapter for the transaction of its business. The rules
must include the time and place of regular meetings and a procedure for the
calling of special meetings.



   (G)   Meetings. It shall be necessary for the Historic Preservation
Commission to have a quorum to conduct any official business. A quorum shall
consist of a simple majority of the total number of the members of the
Preservation Commission. The Preservation Commission meetings must be open to
the public in accordance with Indiana's Open Door Law, being I.C. 5-14-1.5,
and a public record shall be kept of the Preservation Commission's
resolutions, proceedings and actions. The Preservation Commission shall hold
regular meetings, at least monthly, except when it has no business pending.
Special meetings may be called in a manner determined by the Preservation
Commission and its rules.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Preservation Commission shall be concerned with those
elements of development, redevelopment, rehabilitation and preservation that
affect visual quality in a historic district, which include, but are not
limited to, viewsheds, landscapes and streetscapes of historic importance.
The Preservation Commission may not consider details of design, interior
arrangements or building features if those details, arrangements or features
are not subject to public view, and may not make any requirement except for
the purpose of preventing development, alteration or demolition in the
historic district obviously incongruous with the historic district.



   (B)   The Preservation Commission shall conduct surveys and
establish historic districts in accordance with the provisions of § 151.04.



   (C)   The Preservation Commission may adopt preservation guidelines
for architectural review. If adopted, preservation guidelines shall be
published and made readily accessible to the public.



   (D)   The Preservation Commission has the authority to receive funds
in order to promote its stated purpose.



   (E)   The Preservation Commission shall promote public interest in
historic preservation by initiating and carrying on a public relations and
community education program.



   (F)   The Preservation Commission, through this chapter, may:



      (1)   Acquire by purchase, gift, grant, bequest, devise or
lease, any real or personal property, including easements, that is
appropriate for carrying out the purposes of the Preservation Commission;



      (2)   Hold title to real and personal property; and



      (3)   Sell, lease, rent or otherwise dispose of real or
personal property at a public or private sale on the terms and conditions
that the Preservation Commission determines best.



   (G)   The Preservation Commission shall establish procedures that it
must follow in acquiring and disposing of property, which procedures must be
in conformance with applicable rules of the Indiana Code.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.04  HISTORIC DISTRICTS, CONSERVATION DISTRICTS AND GUIDELINES.



   (A)   All recommendations for the establishment of a historic
district shall be in the form of a written report and must be based on the
criteria outlined in this section. A recommendation for establishing a
historic district may be initiated from either of the following two sources:



      (1)   Based on its survey, the Historic Preservation
Commission may draw and submit maps for Common Council approval; and



      (2)   Owners of property in fee simple wishing to establish a
historic district that includes their property may petition the Historic
Preservation Commission to consider drawing or submitting a map or maps of
said property to the Common Council for its approval. The Historic
Preservation Commission may establish in its rules criteria to be met before
it considers a petition.



   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend, and the
Common Council may provide, that the establishment of a historic district may
occur in two phases. During the first phase, which continues for a period of
three years from the date the ordinance is adopted, a certificate of
appropriateness is required for the following activities: the demolition of
any building; the moving of any building; and, the new construction of any
principal building or accessory building or structure subject to view from a
public way.



      (1)   At the expiration of the initial three-year period, the
first phase of a conservation district continues and the second phase becomes
effective unless a majority of the property owners in the district object to
the Historic Preservation Commission, in writing, to the requirement of a
certificate of appropriateness for the following activities:



         (a)   A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of
historic buildings by additions, construction, alteration or maintenance
involving exterior color changes;



         (b)   A change in walls or fences or construction of
walls or fences, if along public ways; and



         (c)   A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of
non-historic buildings subject to view from a public way by additions,
reconstruction, alteration or maintenance involving exterior color change.



      (2)   The objections of a majority of the property owners must
be received by the Historic Preservation Commission not earlier than 180 days
or later than 60 days before the third anniversary of the adoption of the
ordinance. The Historic Preservation Commission shall prescribe the method of
conducting and/or receiving the objections of the majority of owners in the
Commission's rules.



   (C)   Historic Preservation Commission preparation of historic
district maps: in order to establish a historic district, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall first prepare a map describing the district in
accordance with the following.



      (1)   The map shall be based on a survey conducted by the
Historic Preservation Commission that identifies historic buildings,
structures and sites located within the city.



      (2)   A district may be limited to the boundaries of a
property containing a single building, structure or site.



      (3)   The map may divide the historic district into primary
and secondary areas, as follows:



         (a)   Primary area. The area adjacent to a primary area
that has a visual relationship to the primary area and could affect the
primary area. The purpose of designating a secondary area is to assure its
compatibility and harmony with an adjacent primary area.



         (b)   Secondary area. The area adjacent to a primary
area that has a visual relationship to the primary area and could affect the
primary area. The purpose of designating a secondary area is to assure its
compatibility and harmony with an adjacent primary area.



   (D)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall classify and
designate on the map all buildings, structures and sites within each historic
district described on the map. Buildings, structures and sites shall be
classified as historic or non-historic. Historic buildings, structures and
sites must possess identified historic or architectural merit of a degree
warranting their preservation. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
further classify and designate all buildings and structures within the
historic district as follows:



      (1)   Outstanding: O;



      (2)   Notable: N;



      (3)   Contributing: C;



      (4)   Non-Contributing: NC; and



      (5)   Non-historic-"Non-Contributing" buildings, structures
and sites are those not classified as historic. In lieu of other
classifications, the Preservation Commission may devise its own system of
further classification of historic buildings, structures and sites.



   (E)   Common Council approval of historic district maps: before a
historic district is established, and the building classifications take
effect, the map setting forth the district's boundaries and building
classifications must be submitted to, and approved in ordinance by, the New
Albany Common Council.



   (F)   The map establishing the boundaries of a historic district
shall be recorded in the office of the Floyd County Recorder.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.05  INTERIM PROTECTION.



   (A)   When submitting a map to the Common Council under § 151.04,
the Historic Preservation Commission may declare one or more buildings or
structures that are classified and designated as historic on the map to be
under interim protection.



   (B)   Not more than two working days after declaring a building,
structure or site to be under interim protection under this section, the
Preservation Commission shall, by personal delivery or first class mail,
provide the owner or occupant of the building, structure or site, with a
written notice of the declaration. The written notice must:



      (1)   Cite the authority of the Preservation Commission to put
the building, structure or site under interim protection under this section;



      (2)   Explain the effect of putting the building, structure or
site under interim protection; and



      (3)   Indicate that interim protection is temporary.



   (C)   A building or structure put under interim protection under
division (A) of this section remains under interim protection until the map
is:



      (1)   Submitted to the New Albany Common Council; and



      (2)   Approved in an ordinance or rejected by the Common
Council.



   (D)   While a building, structure or site is under interim
protection under this section:



      (1)   The building, structure or site, shall not be demolished
or moved; and



      (2)   The exterior appearance of the building, structure or
site may not be conspicuously changed by:



         (a)   Addition;



         (b)   Reconstruction; or



         (c)   Alteration.



   (E)   The Historic Preservation Commission may approve a certificate
of appropriateness at any time during the period of interim protection,
provided the proposed change meets the criteria for considering effect of
actions on a historic building, structure or site in § 151.06(D) and any
proposed preservation guidelines prepared for the building, structure or
site, but the certificate of appropriateness shall have no effect, and no
action may be taken pursuant thereto, unless the map including the building,
structure or site is approved by the Common Council.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.06  CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   A certificate of appropriateness must be issued by the
Preservation Commission before a permit is issued for, or work is begun on,
any of the following:



      (1)   (a)   Within all areas of a historic district:



            1.   The demolition of any building or structure;



            2.   The moving of any building or structure; or



            3.   A conspicuous change in the exterior
appearance of any historic building or any part of or appurtenance to the
building, including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving and signs,
by additions, reconstruction, alteration or maintenance involving exterior
color changes if cited by individual ordinance.



         (b)   Any new construction of a principal building or
accessory building or structure subject to view from a public way.



      (2)   Within a primary area of a historic district:



         (a)   A change in walls or fences, or the construction
of walls or fences along public ways; and



         (b)   A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of
a non-historic building subject to view from a public way by additions,
reconstruction, alteration and/or maintenance involving exterior color change.



      (3)   Within a conservation district:



         (a)   The moving of any building;



         (b)   The demolition of any building; or



         (c)   Any new construction of a principal building or an
accessory building or structure subject to view from a public way.



   (B)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
made in the office of the Historic Preservation Commission or its designee on
forms provided by that office. All applications shall be subject to the rules
and requirements established by the Historic Preservation Commission. Rules
may include, but are not limited to, filing deadlines and application
requirements such as sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions or other
information that the Preservation Commission requires to make a decision.



   (C)   The Historic Preservation Commission may approve or deny
certificates of appropriateness for any actions covered by this chapter. If
an application for a certificate of appropriateness is approved by the
commission, or is not acted on by the Preservation Commission within 30 days
after it is filed, a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued. The
Preservation Commission may grant an extension of the 30-day limit if the
applicant agrees in writing. The Preservation Commission must report its
findings and the reasons for its actions in written form, and supply the
applicant with a copy of its report. A copy of the certificate of
appropriateness must be submitted with the application for a building or
demolition permit; no building or demolition permit shall be issued unless a
copy of the certificate of appropriateness is provided by the applicant with
the application.



   (D)   The Historic Preservation Commission, in considering the
appropriateness of any reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or moving of a
historic building, structure or site, or any part or appurtenance to such
building or structure, including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving
and signs shall require that such work be done in such a manner that will
preserve the historic and architectural character of the building, structure
or appurtenance. In considering historic and architectural character, the
Preservation Commission shall consider, among other things, the following:



      (1)   Purposes of this chapter;



      (2)   Historic and architectural value and significance of the
building, structure, site or appurtenance;



      (3)   Compatibility and significance of additions,
alterations, details, materials or other non-original elements that may be of
a different style and construction date than the original;



      (4)   The texture, material, color, style and detailing of the
building, structure, site or appurtenance;



      (5)   The continued preservation and protection of original or
otherwise significant structure, material, and ornamentation;



      (6)   The relationship of buildings, structures, appurtenances
or architectural features similar to one within the same historic district;
including for primary areas, visual compatibility as defined in § 151.08(B);
and



      (7)   The position of the building or structure in
relationship to the street, public right-of-way and to other buildings and
structures.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.07  STAFF APPROVALS.



   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission may authorize the
Administrator of the Preservation Commission, on behalf of the Commission, to
grant or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness for certain
classifications of work in the historic districts.



   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall specify by rule the
types of applications for certificates of appropriateness that the
Administrator of the Preservation Commission is authorized to grant or deny.
The Administrator may not be authorized to grant or deny an application for a
certificate of appropriateness for any of the following:



      (1)   The demolition of a building, structure or site;



      (2)   The moving of a building or structure, either into, or
out of, any historic district;



      (3)   The construction of an addition to any building or
structure; and



      (4)   The construction of a new building or structure.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.08  VISUAL COMPATIBILITY.



   (A)   For new construction, contemporary design and non-historic
buildings. To preserve and encourage the integrity of historic buildings,
structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes and neighborhoods and to ensure
their compatibility with any new work, the construction of a new building or
structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, color change, major
maintenance or repair conspicuously affecting the external appearance of any
non-historic building, structure or appurtenance within the primary area must
be generally of a design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building
material, texture, color and location on a lot compatible with other
buildings in the historic district and with places that it is visually
related.



   (B)   Criteria for considering visual compatibility within historic
primary areas. Within the primary area of a historic district, new buildings,
structures, as well as buildings, structures and appurtenances that are
moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired or changed in color, must
be visually compatible with buildings and places to which they are visually
related generally in terms of the following visual compatibility factors.



      (1)   Height. The height of proposed buildings must be
visually compatible with adjacent buildings.



      (2)   Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship
of the width of a building to the height of the front elevation must be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.



      (3)   Proportion of openings within the facility. The
relationship of the width of the windows to the height of the windows in a
building must be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is
visually related.



      (4)   Relationship of solids to voids in front facades. The
relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a building must be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.



      (5)   Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The
relationship of a building to open space between it and adjoining buildings
must be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related.



      (6)   Rhythm of entrances and porch projections. The
relationship of entrances and porch projections of a building to sidewalks
must be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related.



      (7)   Relationship of materials, texture(s) and color(s). The
relationship of the materials, texture(s) and color(s) of the facade of a
building must be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.



      (8)   Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building must be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.



      (9)   Wall of continuity. Appurtenances of a building or site,
such as walls, wrought iron or wood fences, stone walls, landscape masses and
building facades must form cohesive walls of enclosure along the street, if
necessary to ensure visual compatibility of the site and building(s) to the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.



      (10)   Scale of the building. The size of the building, and
the building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, windows, door
openings, porches and balconies, must be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.



      (11)   Directional expression of front elevation. A building
must be visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related in its directional character, including vertical character,
horizontal character or non-directional character.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.09  PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER UPON
ALTERATION OR RELOCATION MANDATED.



   (A)   A historic building or structure or any part of or
appurtenance to such a building or structure, including stone walls, fences,
light fixtures, steps, paving and signs may be moved, reconstructed, altered
or maintained only in a manner that will preserve the historic and
architectural character of the building, structure or appurtenance.



   (B)   A historic building may be relocated to another site only if
it is shown that preservation on its current site is inconsistent with
division (A) above.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.10  APPEAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to preserve historic buildings
that are important to the education, culture, traditions and economic values
of the City of New Albany and to afford the city, historical organizations
and other interested persons the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for
preservation of these buildings.



   (B)   If a property owner shows that a historic building is
incapable of earning an economic return on its values, as appraised by a
qualified real estate appraiser, and the Commission fails to approve the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the building may be demolished.
However, before a demolition permit is issued or demolition proceeds, notice
of the proposed demolition must be given for a period fixed by the
Commission, based on the Commission's classification on the approved map, but
not less than 60 days nor more than one year. Notice must be posted on the
premises of the building proposed for demolition in a location clearly
visible from the street. In addition, notice must be published in a newspaper
of general local circulation at least three times before the demolition, with
the first publication not more than 15 days after the application for a
permit to demolish is filed, and the final publication at least 15 days
before the date of the permit.



   (C)   The Historic Preservation Commission may approve a certificate
of appropriateness at any time during the notice period hereunder. If the
certificate of appropriateness is issued by the Preservation Commission, a
demolition permit shall be issued without further delay.



   (D)   Any applicant wishing to appeal the decision or determination
of the Historic Preservation Commission's proposed action, fine, or
determination may elect to initiate a mediation process before filing suit.
The applicant may submit such notice of appeal and initiate the Mediation
Panel in writing to the Historic Preservation Commission under the following
conditions:



      (1)   Notice is given in writing by the applicant to the
Historic Preservation Commission within seven days after the decision is
issued;



      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission will notify the
Mediation Panel Chairperson or Secretary by phone or email to initiate the
mediation panel process;



      (3)   The Mediation Panel will review the complaint and
attempt to resolve the matter through the participation of the Mediation
Panel; and



      (4)   The Mediation Panel shall consist of five members as
follows:



         (a)   The presiding President of the New Albany Common
Council;



         (b)   The Common Council Member of the district that is
the subject of the complaint being filed, except:



            1.   If the Council Member from the district is on
the Plan Commission, then the elected Council representative on the
Redevelopment Commission shall serve instead.



            2.   The Common Council liaison to the Historic
Preservation Commission shall not serve on the Mediation Panel.



         (c)   The Chairperson of the Historic Preservation
Commission;



         (d)   The Administrator of the Historic Preservation
Commission; and



         (e)   The Building Commissioner of the City of New
Albany.



      (5)   The Mediation Panel cannot overrule the decision of the
Historic Preservation Commission and its purpose is to attempt in good faith
to mediate and settle contested decisions by the Historic Preservation
Commission so as to minimize lawsuits.



      (6)   The Mediation Panel will convene and attempt to mitigate
the decision and issue to the applicant its findings or any proposed
settlement within ten days of receiving a notice from the Historic
Preservation Commission.



      (7)   The Mediation Panel members will not receive
compensation for service in this capacity.



      (8)   At the first meeting of each year, the Mediation Panel
will select a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and Secretary to serve those
respective functions for the Mediation Panel.



      (9)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge or
interfere with either an applicant's or the Historic Preservation
Commission's rights and responsibilities.



      (10)   The mediation session shall be a closed door session
not open to the public.



      (11)   The information obtained during the mediation process
cannot be used at trial and no participant of the mediation panel may be
called to testify about anything divulged during the mediation discussion at
any later legal proceedings.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999; Ord. G-11-03, passed 3-7-2011)



§ 151.11  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Historic buildings, structures and sites shall be maintained
to meet the applicable requirements established under state statute for
buildings generally so as to prevent loss of historic structures, historic
materials and historic components, as well as the deterioration of important
character defining details and features.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent
the ordinary repairs and maintenance of any building, structure or site;
provided that, the repairs or maintenance do not result in a conspicuous
change in the design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building
material, texture, color, location or external visual appearance of any
structure, or part thereof.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.12  RELATIONSHIP WITH ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Zoning districts lying within the boundaries of the historic district
are subject to regulations for both the zoning district and the historic
district. If there is a conflict between the requirements of the zoning
district and the historic district, the more restrictive requirement(s) shall
apply.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.13  PAINT COLORS.



   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall require a
certificate of appropriateness for changes in exterior colors of buildings,
sites, structures and objects in the historic districts.



   (B)   Owners of structures in certain historic districts of New
Albany shall seek the guidance and assistance of the Historic Preservation
Commission prior to painting or coating buildings in certain historic
districts of the city. However, the Preservation Commission shall not
prohibit the use of any color or coating with the exception of the use of
black on the body of any building in the historic districts.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.14  INTERESTED PARTIES.



   (A)   An interested party (as defined in § 151.01(B)) has a private
right of action to enforce and prevent violation of provisions of this
chapter or an ordinance adopted by the city under this chapter, and with
respect to any building, structure or site within a historic district, and
has the right to restrain, enjoin or enforce by restraining order or
injunction, temporarily or permanently, any person from violating a provision
of this ordinance or an ordinance adopted under this chapter.



   (B)   The interested party does not have to allege or prove
irreparable harm or injury to any person or property to obtain relief under
this section.



   (C)   The interested party bringing an action under this section
does not have to post a bond unless the court, after a hearing, determines
that a bond should be required in the interest of justice.



   (D)   The interested party that brings an action under this section
is not liable to any person for damages resulting from bringing or
prosecuting the action unless the action was brought without good faith or
without reasonable belief that a provision of this chapter, or an ordinance
adopted by a unit under this chapter, had been, or was about to be violated.



   (E)   An interested party who obtains a favorable judgment in an
action under this section may recover reasonable attorney fees and court
costs from the person against whom the judgment was rendered.



   (F)   An action arising under this section must be brought in the
Circuit or Superior Court of Floyd County, Indiana, and no change of venue
from the county shall be allowed in the action.



   (G)   The remedy provided in this section is in addition to other
remedies that may be available at law or in equity.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.15  ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   Any person, whether as principal, agent, owner, lessee,
tenant, contractor, builder, architect, engineer, or otherwise, who violates
any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as follows, for each
offense:



      (1)   Not less than $10, nor more than $2,500, for demolition;
and



      (2)   Not less than $10, nor more than $300, for all other
offenses.



   (B)   Each day of existence of any violation of this ordinance shall
be a separate offense.



   (C)   The erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair,
demolition, color change, moving or maintenance of any building, structure or
appurtenance that is begun, continued or maintained contrary to any
provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and in
violation of this chapter and unlawful. The City of New Albany may institute
a suit for injunction in the Circuit Court or Superior Court of Floyd County,
Indiana, to restrain any person or government unit from violating any
provision of this chapter and to cause the violation to be prevented, abated
or removed. The action may also be instituted by any property owner who is
adversely affected by the violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (D)   The remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative
and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law.



   (E)   Any person or party aggrieved by a decision or action taken by
the Historic Preservation Commission shall be entitled to a judicial review
hereof in accordance with I.C. 4-21.5.



(Ord. G-99-334, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 151.16  SUMMARY REPORT.



   The Historic Preservation Commission shall issue to the New Albany City
Council a report summarizing the Commission's activities, findings,
decisions, and any legal action to the New Albany City Council not less than
once quarterly. If the Historic Preservation Commission receives notice of an
appeal pursuant to § 151.10 or of an impending lawsuit, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall notify the Mediation Panel and the New Albany
City Council President by phone and email immediately.



(Ord. G-11-03, passed 3-7-2011)



§ 151.17  LEGAL REPRESENTATION.



   The Historic Preservation Commission and the Mediation Panel should
retain an attorney within the City of New Albany for its legal representation.



(Ord. G-11-03, passed 3-7-2011)



CHAPTER 152:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 153:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



   154.01   Definitions



   154.02   Procedure



   154.03   Proposed or preliminary plat



   154.04   Provisions of plat necessary for approval specifications



   154.05   Final plat



   154.06   Development standards and requirements



   154.07   Requirements and certifications



   154.08   Fees



   154.09   Review of certification



   154.10   Enforcement by injunction



 



   154.99   Penalty



§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The words and terms used in this chapter shall have their usual
accepted meaning unless the context indicates otherwise. Words used in the
present tense include the future; words used singularly indicate the plural,
and words used plurally include the singular; the word "shall" is to be
considered as mandatory. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
particular words are defined as follows.



   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.



   BLOCK. A parcel of land consisting of a number of lots and abutting on
one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersections or
intercepting streets.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINES. A line on a plat between which line and the
adjacent street line, buildings or structures may not be erected.



   COMMISSION. The New Albany Plan Commission of New Albany, Floyd County,
Indiana.



   DEAD-END STREET. A street having but one outlet for vehicular traffic.



   LOT. A parcel of land within a subdivision, or a tract of land intended
as a unit, to be used and occupied by one building and necessary buildings
incidental thereto.



   PLAT. A map or drawing of which the subdivision plan or subdivision is
presented and which is submitted for approval and intending final form to
record.



   STREET. A public thoroughfare between property lines which provides the
principal vehicular access to the abutting property.



   SUBDIVISION. A division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel into
two or more lots or divisions of land for the purpose of immediate or future
of building development, including all changes in street or lot lines;
provided, however, that, division of land for agricultural purposes in
parcels of more than ten acres, not including new street or easement access,
shall not be considered a SUBDIVISION in the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



§ 154.02  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   A person desiring the approval of the plat for the subdivision
of land shall submit in writing application therefor with the Plan
Commission, together with six blueprints or photostatic copies of the
proposed plat. The application shall be submitted at least ten days before a
regular meeting of the Commission and shall contain information concerning
proposed land use of the subdivision, deed restrictions, drawings, elevation,
sewage disposal, public utilities facilities and such other information that
will assist the Commission to consider the application. The proposed plat
shall comply with all the minimum requirements provided for in § 154.03.



   (B)   Within a reasonable time thereafter, the Commission shall
consider the application and proposed plat, and if the same is not approved
the applicant shall be notified in writing of the action and the reasons
therefor by the Commission.



   (C)   If the Commission tentatively approves the application and
proposed plat, it shall set a date for the public hearing thereon, notify the
applicant in writing of the hearing by registered mail, and shall notify all
persons and governmental units having a probable interest in the proposed
subdivision of the hearing by one publication in the newspaper of general
circulation printed and published in Floyd County, Indiana, not less than ten
days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. The cost and expense of the
application publication shall be borne by the applicant.



   (D)   The approval by the Commission of the application and proposed
plat shall not be deemed final acceptance of the same, but shall constitute
approval only as to the general form and planned features thereof.



   (E)   Within six months after the approval of the application and
proposed plat, unless an extension of time has been granted by the
Commission, the final plat shall be submitted to the Commission and shall
conform with the requirements of a final plan as hereinafter provided for in
§ 154.05, and with all of the conditions which may have been specified by
the Commission upon approval of the application and proposed plat. In
addition thereto, the subdivider shall file with the Commission a certificate
of the City Engineer to the effect that the streets, sewers, water and other
utilities and facilities that have been required as a precedent to approval
have been agreed, improved and installed in accordance with the
specifications and this chapter. Unless the final plat and certificate is
submitted within the time as herein provided for or extended by the
Commission, the approval of the application and provided plat shall be null
and void and without force and effect.



   (F)   The Commission may approve the final plat of any subdivision
in which the improvements and installations have not been completed by the
ordinance or by the Commission for the approval of the final plat if the
subdivider or applicant provides a bond which shall:



      (1)   Run to the Board of Works;



      (2)   Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be
sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with
this chapter;



      (3)   Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission; and



      (4)   Specify the time for the completion of the improvements
and installations.



   (G)   Within a reasonable time after the submission of the final
plat and certificate of bond, the Commission shall approve or disapprove it.
If the Commission approves the plat, it shall affix the Commission's seal
thereon together with the certifying signatures of its President and
Secretary. If the Commission disapproves, it shall set forth its reasons in
its records and provide the applicant a copy.



   (H)   The Plan Commission shall review all proposed subdivisions to
determine whether the subdivision lies in the OS (fp), Open Space (flood
plain), district as designated by the Zoning Ordinance. If the Plan
Commission finds the subdivision to be located in the district, the Plan
Commission shall forward pertinent plans and materials to the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. The Plan Commission
may require appropriate changes and modifications in order to assure that it
is consistent with the need to minimize flood damages; all public utilities
and facilities, such as sewers, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage is
provided so as to reduce exposure to flood damage; and that on-site waste
disposal systems, if provided, will be so located as to avoid impairment of
them or contamination from them during the occurrence of the regulatory flood
as defined by the Zoning Ordinance. Submission of plans and materials to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment shall be for
the purpose of the Department determining whether the proposed subdivision is
located in the floodway as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the OS (fp)
district, and whether state permits are to be required; the Department may
also recommend certain stipulations to be placed upon the development of the
subdivision. At such time as the specific floodway has been determined for
the city in its entirety, then only proposals located in the floodway shall
be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956; Ord. Z-77-659, passed 6-6-1977)



§ 154.03  PROPOSED OR PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   The proposed or preliminary plat submitted with the application shall
disclose the following information:



   (A)   Proposed name of the subdivision;



   (B)   Name of the owner and subdivider and the names of the
registered engineer or land surveyor employed;



   (C)   Location by reference to survey, section, township and range;



   (D)   Date, scale and northpoint;



   (E)   Location of property line, existing public highway, water,
railroad and utility rights-of-way, names of the owners of adjoining land and
other existing features, including elevations at intervals of two feet;



   (F)   Layout and dimension of streets, alleys and utility easements
and proposed lots and blocks;



   (G)   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use, or
for use of the property owners in the subdivision;



   (H)   Building setback lines, showing dimensions; and



   (I)   Location and size of existing sewers, water and gas mains and
lines, if any accessible to the subdivision.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



§ 154.04  PROVISIONS OF PLAT NECESSARY FOR APPROVAL SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Plan Commission, in determining whether an application for
approval is granted, shall determine if the plat provides for:



      (1)   Coordination of the subdivision streets with existing or
planned streets and highways;



      (2)   Establishment of minimum width, depth and area of lot
with the subdivision; and



      (3)   Distribution of population of traffic in a manner
tending to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience and the
harmonious development of the country.



   (B)   As a condition of approval of a plat, the Commission may
specify:



      (1)   The manner in which streets and alleys shall be laid
out, graded and improved;



      (2)   Provisions for water, sewage and other utility services;
and



      (3)   Provisions for schools, essential municipal services and
recreational facilities.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



§ 154.05  FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   The final plat shall be submitted to the Plan Commission in
the form of an original drawing on linen tracing cloth of the size of 18
inches by 25 inches, and to the scale of 100 feet to the inch, unless the use
of the scale should cause the size of the plat to be in excess of the above
dimensions, then an approximate scale may be used to conform to the size. In
addition to the original drawing there shall be also submitted to the
Commission six blueprint or photostatic copies of same. The following shall
be disclosed in the final plat:



      (1)   Boundary lines of the subdivision tract and of adjoining
properties;



      (2)   An accurate metes and bounds description of the tract
and source of title;



      (3)   Northpoint, scale and data;



      (4)   The lines and curve data of all streets and alleys with
their names and widths;



      (5)   Lot lines and dimensions and lot and block numbers;



      (6)   Location of buildings setback lines and easements for
public utilities and their dimensions;



      (7)   Location and type of all permanent monuments;



      (8)   Restrictions of all types which run with the land;



      (9)   Name of subdivision, names of the subdividers;



      (10)   Certification by an Indiana-registered, professional
land surveyor;



      (11)   Certificate of dedication for public use;



      (12)   Certificate for approval of Commission; and



      (13)   Base flood elevations, when any part of the subdivision
lies within the flood plain. "Base flood elevation" and "flood plain" shall
be defined as in the Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   The final plat for subdivisions resulting in the creation of
no more than four lots and with no new public street may be prepared in the
form of a surveyor's plat which is consistent with applicable standards of
surveying practice contained in the 865 I.A.C. 1-12 and divisions (A)(1)
through (13) above. The plats are subject to all other procedures and
requirements contained herein. The plats may be recorded in the Floyd County
Recorder's Deed Records or Survey Record or in the Subdivision Plat Books.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956; Ord. Z-79-734, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. Z-93-171,
passed 10-21-1993)



§ 154.06  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   The minimum development standards and requirements for land
subdivisions are as follows.



   (A)   Streets, alley and utility easements.



      (1)   The minimum width for streets shall be 50 feet.



      (2)   The minimum width for utility easements shall be six
feet.



      (3)   A dead-end street, if permitted by the Plan Commission,
shall terminate in a circular right-of-way providing for a minimum outside
diameter of 80 feet.



      (4)   All streets and sewers within any subdivision must be
built in accordance with specifications of the city, and all plans and
specifications for the construction of any public improvement must have
approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Blocks.



      (1)   The minimum block lengths shall be not less than 400
feet and the maximum length shall be not to exceed 800 feet.



      (2)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to allow two tiers
of lots of appropriate depth.



   (C)   Lots.



      (1)   All lots shall abut on a street or public highway.



      (2)   The side lines of the lots generally shall be at right
angles to straight lines and radial to curved street lines.



      (3)   The minimum lot area required shall be 10,000 square
feet when septic tanks are used and 6,000 square feet where connected to a
sewer.



   (D)   Easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements shall be
provided for utilities. The easements shall generally be located along rear
side lot lines in which case a minimum width of six feet, three on either
side of the lot line shall be provided, or if the easement is within the lot,
the total minimum width shall be provided.



   (E)   Building setback lines.



      (1)   The building line of lots in a subdivision designed for
residential purposes shall conform to Ord. 4360, § 18.



      (2)   The building line of lots in a subdivision designed for
commercial purposes shall conform to Ord. 4360, § 15.



   (F)   Monuments. Monuments or markers shall be placed at each
outside corner of the subdivision or addition, and at the intersection of
street property lines, and at such other points as the Commission deems
necessary. The monuments may be of concrete, stone, iron pipe or other
permanent material.



   (G)   Sewer, water and storm drainage. Whenever there is within
reasonable distance a sanitary sewer outlet or outlets and a connection
infeasible the subdivision shall be provided with a complete public sewer
system which shall connect with the outlets. Similar requirements shall apply
to the provision for proper water supply for the subdivision. The subdivision
shall provide a storm sewer, if, in the opinion of the Commission, natural
surface drainage is inadequate.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



§ 154.07  REQUIREMENTS AND CERTIFICATIONS.



   The city's Plan Commission shall hereafter require in regard to
subdivision developments the following requirements and certifications to be
executed for the subdivision developer and other specified parties by state
registered land surveyors or professional engineers, except that the City
Engineer's certifications may be executed by the person serving as City
Engineer regardless of his or her registration status; the following
requirements and certifications shall be deemed complimentary and
supplementary to existing regulations.



   (A)   Final construction plans for subdivision site improvements
shall be certified to the Board of Public Works and Safety and/or City
Engineer, as the Board shall stipulate; certified shall minimally be the
degree to which designs meet city specifications and the accuracy of data and
statistical information on the plans.



   (B)   After approval of the final construction plans for subdivision
site improvements by the Board and/or City Engineer, one copy of approved
plans shall be certified by the City Engineer to the Plan Commission;
included in the certification shall minimally be the degree of acceptability
of the designs and the degree to which the designs meet city specifications.



   (C)   Final construction plans for subdivision site improvements as
certified by the City Engineer to the Plan Commission shall be considered
part of the final (or record) plat of a subdivision, and approval of a final
plat shall include said final construction plans as a stipulation of
approval; the recording of the final construction plans with the County
Recorder's office shall not be required.



   (D)   After approval and recording of the final plat, and after a
local building permit and an improvement location permit have been issued for
the construction of a dwelling in a subdivision, and after construction is
complete, but prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a
dwelling, the builder shall cause certification to be made to the Plan
Commission; it shall minimally be certified that the construction of the
dwelling and/or any site work does not deviate from the approved and
certified construction plans for subdivision site improvements.



(Res. 7-77-659, passed 6-7-1977)



§ 154.08  FEES.



   At the time of the filing of the application for the approval of a
proposed plat with the Plan Commission, the applicant shall pay to the
Commission a fee for the checking and verifying the proposed plat and for
other services in connection therewith. For current fees, see § 158.02,
Planning and Zoning Permits.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



§ 154.09  REVIEW OF CERTIFICATION.



   Any person or persons, firm or corporation aggravated by any decision
of the Plan Commission may have their case reviewed as provided by law.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



§ 154.10  ENFORCEMENT BY INJUNCTION.



   The Plan Commission may institute suit for injunction to restrain
individuals of this chapter as provided by law.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Persons who violate any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $10, and not
more than $300, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 4585, passed 12-3-1956)



CHAPTER 155:  VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES



Section



   155.01   Procedure for vacation



§ 155.01  PROCEDURE FOR VACATION.



   (A)   A petition may be filed by persons who own or are interested
in any lots or parts of lots and who wish to vacate all or parts of a public
way or public place in or contiguous to those lots or parts of lots.



   (B)   A petition shall be filed with the City Clerk in writing and
the applicant must provide the following information for inclusion therein:



      (1)   A legal description (including size and location) of the
public way or place to be vacated;



      (2)   A plat showing the exact location and size of the
applicant's property;



      (3)   The names and addresses of all owners of land that abut
that property proposed to be vacated;



      (4)   The circumstances and reasons why the way or place
should be vacated; and



      (5)   Whether any prior action for vacation has taken place.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall notify each owner of land that abuts the
property proposed to be vacated by certified mail of the petition to vacate
and the time and place of hearing thereon, and shall further cause notice of
the same to be published as required by state statutes, including the posting
of on-site notice.



   (D)   The Common Council of the city shall hold a public hearing on
the petition within 30 days after it is received. At the hearing, any person
aggrieved by the proposed vacation may object to it as provided by law. After
the hearing on the petition, the Common Council may, by ordinance, vacate the
public way or public place.



   (E)   All ordinances vacating public ways or places shall be
furnished to the County Recorder for recording and to the County Auditor by
the City Clerk.



   (F)   Any party aggrieved by the adoption of a vacation ordinance
may appeal the ordinance to the county's Circuit Court within 30 days after
its adoption.



   (G)   For the current fee required for filing a petition to vacate a
public way or place, see § 158.06(C).



(Ord. G-87-181, passed 3-2-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 36-7-3-12



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   156.001   Title



   156.002   Function of Zoning Code



   156.003   Interpretation



   156.004   Noninterference with greater restrictions



   156.005   Definitions



   156.006   Adoption of zoning map incorporated by reference;
objectives of maps



Land Use Goals



   156.020   Agricultural goals



   156.021   Residential goals



   156.022   Commercial goals



   156.023   Industrial goals



   156.024   Environmental goals



Policies



   156.035   General policies concerning land uses



   156.036   Residential land use policies



   156.037   Residential density



   156.038   Commercial land use policies



   156.039   Neighborhood shopping areas



   156.040   Community shopping area



   156.041   Regional shopping areas



   156.042   Industrial land use policies



District Regulations



   156.055   Establishment of districts



   156.056   Description of districts



   156.057   Boundaries of districts



   156.058   Use



   156.059   Height



   156.060   Yard, lot area and size of building



   156.061   Lots



   156.062   Vehicle parking space; loading and unloading berths



Authorized Uses and Requirements



   156.075   Primary permitted uses



   156.076   Residential uses



   156.077   Commercial and industrial requirements



   156.078   Industrial uses



   156.079   Additional provisions; exceptions



Special Exception Uses



   156.090   Certain special exception uses permitted



   156.091   Procedure for special exception



Conditional Uses



   156.095   Certain conditional uses permitted



   156.096   Procedure for conditional use



Planned Unit Development



   156.105   Purpose



   156.106   General requirements



   156.107   Planned Unit Development District approval process



   156.108   Content of plans



   156.109   Review considerations



Nonconforming Uses



   156.128   Nonconforming uses; specifications



Administration; Enforcement



   156.140   Zoning Officer; powers and duties



   156.141   Improvement location permits; application requirements



   156.142   Temporary improvement location permits



   156.143   Certificate of occupancy



   156.144   Temporary sign permits



   156.145   Board of Zoning Appeals



   156.146   Application for appeal



   156.147   Amendments; changes in zoning districts



   156.148   Filing fees



   156.149   Remedies



   156.150   Review by certiorari



 



   156.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.001  TITLE.



   (A)   This chapter and ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto
shall be known as "An Ordinance for the  Development Through Zoning of the
City of New Albany, Indiana, and the Contiguous Unincorporated Area within
the Jurisdiction of the New Albany City Plan Commission".



   (B)   This chapter, and ordinances supplemental or amendatory
thereto, shall be known and may be cited thereafter as the "Zoning Code of
the City".



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-72-485, passed 8-7-1972)



§ 156.002  FUNCTION OF ZONING CODE.



   (A)   The primary function of a zoning code is that of adopting a
procedure for assuring that the land use plan for the affected area will
become a reality.



   (B)   With the recent approval of a land use plan for the city and
county, clear guidelines for the Zoning Code have been established. However,
the plan consists of more than a graphic illustration of land use types and
can only fulfill its proper function with some explanation of the goals and
objectives on which it was based. Moreover, the plan requires interpretation
if it is to be a meaningful guide for the numerous decisions which will be
required in the establishment of appropriate zones and in their
administration.



   (C)   Such interpretations are frequently expressed as policies
affecting the use of land and its development. To lend substance and
guidance, policies as well as goals and objectives are made a part of this
code.



   (D)   More specifically the purpose of these regulations, to be
enforced in the various zoning districts, is to avoid congestion in streets;
to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate
light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision for traffic,
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout such
city and county with reasonable consideration to be given to the character of
any district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a
view to conserving the value of land, buildings and other structures; to
guide and accomplish a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development for
the city; and to promote the public health, safety, morals and the general
welfare.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.003  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Whenever the provisions of this chapter are interpreted and
applied they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general
welfare.



   (B)   "The Goals and Policies of the Land Use Plan - 1990 for New
Albany, Floyd County" as appearing herein in the preamble served as a basis
for determining the requirements contained in this chapter, as now
established or as may be proposed to be changed at a later date, and are made
a part hereof the same as if the goals and policies were set forth in length.



   (C)   It is not the intent of this chapter, nor should it be the
result of this chapter, that any usage of land existing at the time or prior
to the passage of this Zoning Code which was illegal or unlawful under former
zoning ordinances or regulations should become legal or lawful under the
terms of this chapter.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.004  NONINTERFERENCE WITH GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, or abrogate or
annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, nor to
interfere with, or abrogate or annul any ordinances, other than expressly
repealed hereby, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued,
and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Zoning Code, or which
shall be adopted or provided, except, that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of
buildings, or requires larger open spaces or greater lot area per family,
than are required or imposed by the easements, covenants or agreements
between parties, or by such ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.005  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   (B)   Words in the present tense include the future and vice versa.



      ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE.



         (a)   A building or use subordinated to another
structure or use located on the same lot and which does not change or alter
the character of the premises and which is not used for human occupancy.



         (b)   Public utility, communication, electric, gas,
water and sewer lines, their supports and incidental equipment.



      ADDICTION TREATMENT FACILITY.  A facility:



         (a)   Certified by the Indiana Family and Social
Services Administration, Division of Mental Health and Addiction as an
adjunct to an opioid treatment facility; and



         (b)   Where an opioid treatment program shall:



            1.   Not administer opioid treatment medication;
and



            2.   Provide:



               a.   Nonmedical services; and



               b.   Recovery services.



      AGRICULTURAL BUILDING.A structure utilized for the conduct of
farming operations, but not including a dwelling.



      ALLEY. A right-of-way, other than a street, road, driveway,
crosswalk or easement, designed to provide a secondary means of access for
the accommodation of the property it reaches.



      AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. A facility that provides preventive,
diagnostic and treatment services to persons who come to the facility,
receive services and depart from the facility on the same day.



      AUTOMOBILE WRECKING AREA.Any lot or structure or the use of any
portion of a lot or structure for dismantling or wrecking automobiles or
other motor vehicles, or for storing or keeping for sale parts and equipment
resulting from the dismantling or wrecking.



      BASEMENT DWELLING.A room or group of rooms, located partially
underground but having more than 50% of its clear floor to ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground, and forming a single
housekeeping unit with facilities which are used or designed to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



      BASIC LAND USE DISTRICT.The primary classification of land to
which an overlay zone is secondary. Any use permitted in the basic land use
district shall also be permitted in an overlay zone.



      BILLBOARD.All structures regardless of size and shape, used as an
outdoor display of any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, for
the purpose of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is
not on the property with the billboard.



      BLOCK. Property having frontage on one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest
intersection or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or
other barrier. In the absence of the preceding, a distance of 400 feet in
either direction from the subject site shall constitute a BLOCK.



      BOARDING HOUSE. A building not open to transients, where lodging
and meals are provided for at least three, but not more than 15 persons
regularly.



      BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls, for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals,
chattels or property. The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE and
vice-versa.



      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.The vertical distance measured from the lot
ground level to the highest point of the roof or coping for a flat roof; to
the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the plate height for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs.



      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated. Where a
substantial part of an accessory building is attached to the main building in
a substantial manner, as by a roof, the accessory building shall be counted
as a part of the principal building.



      BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of the
principal and accessory building, excluding open steps or terraces and
architectural appurtenances projecting not more than two feet.



      BUILDING LINE. The line nearest the front of and across a lot
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of
a building or structure and the street right-of-way.



      BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. Engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or
exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or services or the maintenance or
operation of offices or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.



      CAMP, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE. Any area or tract of land used or
designed to accommodate two or more travel trailers or two or more camping
parties, including cabins, tents or other camping outfits.



      CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such
CEMETERY.



      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate stating that the
occupancy and use of land or a building or structure referred to therein
complies with the provisions of this chapter.



      CERTIFICATION.  As used in relation of addiction treatment
facility and/or opioid treatment facility: the process used by the Indiana
Family and Social Services Administration, Division of Mental Health and
Addiction, to document an entity's compliance with the statutory and
regulatory requirements for operating as a provider of services, including if
the entity is found to comply with this chapter; Indiana Administrative Code
440 IAC Article 10: Minimum Standards for the Provision of Services by Opioid
Treatment Facilities and Programs as authorized by I.C. 12-23-1-6 and
12-23-1-8.



      CITY OF NEW ALBANY. Not only the city, but also the
jurisdictional area included by this chapter and amendments thereto.



      CLINIC or MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER. An establishment where patients
are admitted for special study and treatment by two or more licensed
physicians, dentists, chiropractors and their professional associates,
practicing medicine together.



      CLINIC, PAIN MANAGEMENT.



         (a)   A facility:



            1.   In which the primary component of practice at
the facility is the treatment of pain; or



            2.   That advertises for the treatment of pain; and



         (b)   The majority of patients at the facility are
prescribed controlled substances or other drugs.  A pain management clinic
operated at or by a public or private hospital is exempt from this definition.



      CONDITIONAL USE. The authorization of a use that is designated as
such by § 156.075 as being permitted in the district concerned if it meets
the requirements set out in §§ 156.095 through 156.096, and on application,
is specifically authorized by the Board.



      DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES (DNR). The Indiana Department of
Natural Resources or the Indiana Natural Resources Commission.



      DEVELOPMENT.



         (a)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate including, but not limited to:



            1.   Construction, reconstruction or placement of
a building or any addition to a building valued at more than $1,000 or
containing 400 or more square feet in floor area;



            2.   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



            3.   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of roads or similar projects;



            4.   Construction of flood control structures such
as levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements and the like;



            5.   Mining, dredging, filling, grading,
excavation or drilling operations;



            6.   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges
or culverts;



            7.   Storage of materials; or



            8.   Any activity that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



         (b)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as
the maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing, resurfacing of roads or gardening, plowing and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation or
the construction of permanent buildings.



      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. A food service establishment where food is
consumed on the premises outside of fully enclosed buildings or structures.



      DWELLING. A building or portion thereof used primarily as a place
of abode for one or more human beings, but not including, hotels, motels,
lodging or boarding houses or tourist homes.



      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A multi-family structure on a single lot
containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the
other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced
ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a
common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.



      DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling or a portion of a dwelling or of an
apartment used by one family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes.



      ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT.



         (a)   The opening or commencement of any sexually
oriented business as a new business; or



         (b)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or
not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.



      FAMILY. One or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit,
as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, motel, club, nurse's home or
fraternity or sorority house.



      FARM, CONFINEMENT FEEDING. Any operation involving the production
of livestock or fowl or related operations, indoors or outdoors, wherein more
than 100 head of livestock or 5,000 fowl are kept within buildings or
structures or in paved or unpaved feed lots, wherein five square feet or less
of feed lot area is provided per laying hen, or eight square feet or less per
hog weighing 225 pounds or less, or 15 square feet or less per lamb or ewe,
or 50 square feet or less per sow, or 50 square feet or less per feeder
steer, or 100 square feet or less per dairy cow; provided that, this
definition shall not apply to operations involved with the processing of
products of confinement feeding operations.



      FARM, GENERAL. An area used for agricultural operations,
including truck gardening, forestry, the operation of a tree or plant nursery
or the production of livestock and poultry, except as defined under FARM,
CONFINEMENT FEEDING;or the processing of farm products produced on the farm
by the resident owner or tenant, but not including commercial or custom
slaughtering.



      FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



      FLOOD PLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any
wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by
the regulatory flood. The FLOOD PLAIN includes both the floodway and the
floodway fringe districts.



      FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. The total area on all floors used
exclusively by one family for dwelling purposes, measured on horizontal
planes.



      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building with capacity for not more
than three motor vehicles per family, no more than one of which may be a
commercial vehicle. A garage designed to house two motor vehicles for each
family housed in an apartment shall be classified as a PRIVATE GARAGE.



      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building or premises, except those defined
herein as a private garage, used for the storage or care of motor vehicles,
or where the vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.



      GARBAGE. All putrescible animal solid, vegetable solid and
semi-solid wastes resulting from the processing, handling, preparation,
cooking, serving or consumption of food or food materials.



      GROUND FLOOR AREA. The area of a building in square feet, as
measured in a horizontal plane at the ground floor level within its largest
outside dimensions, exclusive of terraces, garages and exterior stairways.



      HEALTH CLUB. A facility for exercises and physical training
which, if private, is open only to members of a private club and their
invited guests; and if public, is open to the public for use of exercise or
physical training facilities.



      HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USE. Manufacturing, processing, extraction,
heavy repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of equipment, raw
materials, manufacturing products or wastes, in which operations, other than
transportation, may be performed in either open or closed areas.



      HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings in which lodging
is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to
transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding or lodging house.



      HOUSE OF WORSHIP. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.



      IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A permit stating that the proposed
erection, construction, enlargement or moving of a building or structure
referred to therein complies with the provisions of the Master Plan and this
chapter.



      JUNK YARD. An area or structure where discarded used material or
waste other than organic matter is accumulated or stored and is or may be
salvaged for re-use or resale, including, but not limited to, one or more
unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle or farm machinery or equipment of any
kind.



      KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises on which five or more
dogs or other domestic pets are kept for the purpose of raising, boarding or
training for a fee, or for sale.



      KENNEL, RESIDENTIAL. Any lot or premises on which no more than
four dogs or other domestic pets, owned by the occupant of the premises, are
kept for the owner's needs, with incidental sales.



      LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE. Manufacturing, processing, extraction,
heavy repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of equipment, raw
materials, manufactured products or wastes, in which all operations, other
than transportation, are performed entirely within enclosed buildings and for
which all loading and unloading facilities are shielded.



      LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS. The off-street area required for
the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, which is
in this chapter is held to be a 12-foot by 35-foot loading space, with
14-foot height clearance.



      LODGING HOUSE. A building, not available to transients, in which
lodgings are regularly provided for compensation for at least three but not
more than 15 persons.



      LOT.A parcel, tract or area of land that fronts on a street or
place. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which
is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or it may include parts of
or a combination of the parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one.
In determining lot and boundary lines, no part thereof within the limits of a
street shall be included.



         (a)   LOT CORNER. A lot at the junction of or abutting
two or more intercepting or intersecting streets.



         (b)   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area
covered by the building area.



         (c)   LOT, AREA. The total of the area, measured in a
horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot.



         (d)   LOT, GROUND LEVEL.



            1.   For buildings having walls adjoining one
street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at  the center of the wall
adjoining the street.



            2.   For buildings having walls adjoining more
than one street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center
of all walls adjoining the streets.



            3.   For buildings having no walls adjoining the
street, the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building.



         (e)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or
through lot.



         (f)   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two
parallel or approximately parallel streets.



         (g)   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, a
line separating the lot from the street or place; and in the case of a corner
lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the
street, except in cases where deed restrictions in effect specify another
line as the front lot line.



         (h)   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and
most distant from the front lot line.



         (i)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line not a front
lot line or a rear lot line.



         (j)   LOT WIDTH.The dimension of a lot, measured between
side lot lines at the building line.



      MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit designed and built in a
factory after June 14, 1976, which bears a seal certifying that it was built
in compliance with the federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Law of 1975 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.) and/or the One and Two
Family Dwelling Code. A manufactured home may be classified as "Class A" or
"Class B" as per § 156.079(J) of this chapter.



      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. An area of land on which two or more
Class B manufactured homes are regularly accommodated with or without charge,
including any building, utilities or other structure, fixture or equipment
that is used or intended to be used in providing that accommodation.



         (a)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXISTING. The construction
of facilities for servicing lots on which two or more Class B manufactured
homes are to be affixed with or without charge (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of this section.



         (b)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION. The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which two or more Class B manufactured homes are to be affixed with or
without charge (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



         (c)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, NEW. The construction of
facilities for servicing lots on which two or more Class B manufactured homes
are to be affixed with or without charge (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of this section.



      MASSAGE. Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the
body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking,
kneading or tapping with the hands or instruments.



      MASSAGE PARLOR.Any building, room, place or establishment, other
than a regularly licensed hospital or dispensary, where nonmedical and
nonsurgical manipulative exercises or massages are practiced on the human
body, with or without the use of mechanical or bath devices, by anyone not a
physician, osteopath, chiropractor, podiatrist or physical therapist duly
registered with and licensed by the state. The term shall also include any
school or therapy clinic following the same general description, which school
or therapy clinic is not duly registered with and licensed by the state.



      MINERAL EXTRACTION. Mining or quarrying, or removing earth
materials.



      MOBILE HOME.A vehicle or other portable structure that is
designed to move on the highway and designed or used as a dwelling, as
manufactured.



      MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land on which two or more mobile
homes are regularly accommodated with or without charge, including any
building utilities or other structure, fixture or equipment that is used or
intended to be used in providing that accommodation.



      MULTI-FAMILY COMPLEX. A lot or parcel to be developed for use
with two or more multi-family dwellings under one ownership.



      MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for or occupied by two
or more families, exclusively for dwelling purposes.



      NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.



      ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE. The nationally recognized model
building code adopted by the Indiana Administrative Building Council (ABC) as
a statewide code for the construction of one- and two-family dwellings in the
state and which includes those supplements and amendments promulgated by the
ABC.



      OPERATE or CAUSE TO OPERATE. To cause to function, or to put or
keep in a state of doing business.



      OPERATOR. Any person on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the
business, or who causes it to function or who puts or keeps it in operation.
A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually
oriented business, whether or not that person is an owner or part owner of
the business.



      OPIOID TREATMENT FACILITY.  The certified building and the
certified location at which an opiate treatment program provides the
following services:



         (a)   The administering of an opioid treatment
medication;



         (b)   A comprehensive range of medical and recovery
services to alleviate the adverse medical, psychological, or physical effects
incident to opioid addiction.



      OVERLAY ZONE. An additional secondary classification of land
which permits or restricts use of land.



      PARK. Any PARK used or designated as an area for recreational
activities, including but not limited to, playgrounds, nature trials,
swimming pools, athletic fields, basketball, baseball, tennis courts, walking
paths or similar public land within the city.



      PARKING AREA, PUBLIC.An open area, other than a street or alley,
designed for use or used for the temporary parking of more than four motor
vehicles, when available for public use whether free or for compensation as
an accommodation for clients or customers.



      PARKING SPACE (OFF-STREET, ONE). A space, other than on a street
or alley, designed for use or used for the temporary parking of a motor
vehicle, and being not less than ten feet wide and 20 feet long, exclusive of
passageways.



      PERMITTEE. A person whose name appears on the permit/application
to operate a sexually oriented business.



      PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.



      PLACE.An open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley,
permanently reserved for use as the principal means of access to abutting
property.



      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area of land that is under unified
control and is planned and developed as a whole and containing a single land
use or a mix of land uses in a single development operation or a definitely
programmed series of development phases. The development may include streets,
circulation ways, parking, utilities, buildings, open spaces and other site
features and improvements. A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT is built according to
approved general and detailed plans including a map showing the entire
development area, a text that establishes the uses and development standards
to be used and exhibits that further describe the development. A PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT includes a program for the provision, operation and maintenance
of any areas, facilities and improvements as will be for common use.



      PLAT.A map or chart that shows a division of land and is intended
to be filed for record.



      PRIVATE SCHOOL.Private preprimary, primary, grade, high or
preparatory school or academy.



      PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office for the following members of
recognized professions: accountants, architects, artists, attorneys-at-law,
chiropodists, chiropractors, dentists, insurance agents, landscape
architects, land surveyors, opticians, optometrists, osteopaths, physicians,
professional consultant services, real estate brokers, professional engineers
and surgeons.



      PROPERTY OWNER. Any person who has a legal or equitable interest
in the property or his or her authorized representative.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and, designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but
as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.



      REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid, and semi-solid
wastes, except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes,
abandoned automobiles, street cleanings, dead animals, offal and solid
commercial, industrial and institutional wastes.



      REFUSE DUMP. A lot, or any portion of a lot, where refuse is
placed.



      REGULARLY FEATURES. The consistent and repeated offering of the
identified goods or services to the public as one of the intended
profit-making objectives of the commercial enterprise, which enterprise
regularly holds itself forth to the public as a place where the goods or
services may be obtained.



      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A district which permits primarily
residential uses (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5).



      ROW HOUSE.Three or more attached dwellings separated by a party
wall or walls on one or more sides.



      RUBBISH. All nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, such as
cardboard, paper, plastic, metal or glass food containers, rags, waste metal,
yard clippings, small pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, crockery
and other waste materials that ordinarily accumulate around a home, business
or industry. It shall not include garbage, ashes, bulk refuse, dead animals,
hazardous refuse, industrial waste or building waste resulting from the
operation of a contractor.



      SANITARY LANDFILL. A lot or any portion of a lot which is used
for the disposal of refuse, utilizing the method of confining the refuse to
the smallest practical area, reducing it to the smallest practical volume,
and covering it with a layer of earth daily, or at more frequent intervals.



      SCHOOL. Any nursery school; day-care facility; preschool;
kindergarten school; public or private elementary, middle or secondary
school; special education school; vocational school, junior college or
college and university. SCHOOL includes all school grounds.



      SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel;
provided, the areola is not exposed, in whole or in part.



      SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genital organ or anus, or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, and shall include devices
such as dildos, vibrators and penis pumps, and shall also include other
devices with non-sex related utility, such as leather whips, straps and
ligatures, when the devices are marketed in a context suggesting sexual or
sadomasochistic purposes. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to
include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually
transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.



      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Those businesses defined as follows:



         (a)   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment that has a significant or substantial percent of its
stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial percent of its
revenue, or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration,
of any one of the following:  books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other visual representations that are characterized by the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



         (b)   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, juice bar,
restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, regardless of
whether alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who
appear semi-nude.



         (c)   ADULT THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions, which are characterized by the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, are regularly shown to persons for
any form of consideration. This definition shall include businesses that
regularly feature view booths or rooms of less than 150 square feet, wherein
such films are regularly shown.



         (d)   SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment
that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be
construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic or any
establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products
or services.



      SIGN. Any advertisement, announcement or communication produced
by the construction, erection, affixing or placing of a structure on any land
or upon any structure, or produced by painting on or painting or placing any
printed, lettered, pictured, figured or colored material upon any building,
structure or surface. All supports, poles, wires and other related parts
shall be defined as part of a sign and shall be referred to as sign apparatus.



         (a)   SIGN, BUSINESS.Any on-premises sign associated
with a commercial or industrial use, excepting any signs permitted through §
156.079(L)(4).



         (b)   SIGN, GROUND.A sign permanently attached to the
ground and where the supporting structure does not exceed six feet in height
from grade to sign face.



         (c)   SIGN, ON-PREMISES.A sign which directs attention
to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business located on, in or within the structure or piece of land which is
visible from any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk or other public
property.



         (d)   SIGN, POLE.A sign permanently attached to and
supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces placed in the ground with
clear space in excess of six feet from grade to sign face.



         (e)   SIGN, TEMPORARY.Any portable or mobile sign not
permanently attached to a building, foundation or pole or other structure
with foundation to the ground.



         (f)   SIGN, WALL.A sign permanently attached to an
exterior vertical surface of a building.



      SIGNIFICANT OR SUBSTANTIAL. Thirty percent or more.



      SPECIAL EXCEPTION. The authorization of a use that is designated
as such by § 156.075 as being permitted in the district concerned if it
meets the requirements set out in § 156.090, and, on application, is
specifically authorized by the Board.



      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Those lands within the jurisdiction of
the city that are subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of
the city are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of
the city prepared by the United States Department of Homeland Security and
dated December 4, 2012. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Floyd
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that
may be annexed into the city are also included in the Flood Insurance Rate
Map dated December 4, 2012.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



         (a)   The fondling or other intentional touching of
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



         (b)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;



         (c)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



         (d)   Excretory functions, as part of or in connection
with any of the activities set forth in divisions (a) through (c) above.



      STAND-ALONE DRIVE-UP AUTOMATED VENDING MACHINES.  Vending
machines, whether dispensing items manufactured on-site or off-site, that are
the principal use of the lot, together with any and all appurtenances thereto.



      STORY.That portion of a building between a floor and the next
floor above, or the roof.



      STREET.A dedicated public way or legally created private way for
the use of vehicular traffic.



      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof.



      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the
ground. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home
or a prefabricated building. The term also includes recreational vehicles to
be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



      SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT. Of a building or structure, the increase
of the exterior size, bulk or dimensions, of a building or structure. Such an
enlargement is considered to occur when the first significant alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural element of that building or
structure commences.



      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not include improvement of structures to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements or
any alteration of a historic structure; provided that, the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.



      TOURIST HOME.A building in which one but not more than five guest
rooms are used to provide or offer overnight accommodations to transient
guests for compensation.



      TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL.Secretarial or business school or
college when not publicly owned or not owned or conducted by or under the
sponsorship of a religious, charitable or nonprofit organization; or a school
conducted as a commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music,
dancing, barbering or hair dressing, mortuary science, drafting or for
teaching industrial or technical arts.



      TRAVEL TRAILER.A vehicle or other portable structure that is
designed to move on the highway and designed or used as a temporary dwelling.



      TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. An area of land on which two or more travel
trailers are regularly accommodated with or without charge, including any
building or structure, fixture or equipment that is used or intended to be
used in connection with providing that accommodation.



      USE.The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land
for a person's service, benefit or enjoyment.



         (a)   USE, NONCONFORMING. An existing use of land or
structure which fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this
chapter applicable to the district in which the use is located.



         (b)   USE, OPEN. The use of a lot without a building or
including a building incidental to the open use, the building having a ground
floor area equal to 5% or less of the area of the lot.



      VARIANCE.A modification of the specific requirements of this
chapter granted by the Board in accordance with the terms of this chapter for
the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances
applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and district.



      VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS. A triangular space at the street
corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision between
the heights of three and 12 feet above established grade, determined by a
diagonal line connecting two points measured 15 feet equidistant from the
street corner along each property line.



      YARD.A space on the same lot with a main building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



      YARD, FRONT.A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and
similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the
street right-of-way and the building line.



      YARD, REAR.A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the rear of the main building and the rear lot line unoccupied other
than by an accessory building which does not occupy more than 30% of the
required space, the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of such main building.



      YARD, SIDE.A yard between the main building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard or front lot line where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard is measured
horizontally, at 90 degrees with the side lot line, from the nearest part of
the main building.



   (C)   Wherever the word CITY appears in this chapter, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of New Albany, Indiana; the word COMMISSION
refers to the City Plan Commission; the word BOARD refers to the Board of
Zoning Appeals; the words JURISDICTIONAL AREA refer to the city; the word
DISTRICT refers to a section of the jurisdictional area for which uniform
regulations governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of use of
buildings and land, and open spaces about buildings, are herein established;
the words ZONE MAP refer to a map entitled "New Albany, Indiana Zone Map"
dated 1971, and any amendments thereto; the words MASTER PLAN refer to the
complete plan, or any of its parts, for the development of the jurisdictional
area, prepared by the Commission and adopted in accordance with Chapter 174,
Acts of 1947, General Assembly of Indiana, as amended, as is now or may
hereafter be in effect.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-78-706, passed 8-7-1978; Ord.
Z-82-953, passed 11-1-1982; Ord. G-89-154, passed 1-9-1989; Ord. Z-92-140,
passed 12-17-1992; Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996; Ord. Z-97-216, passed
11-20-1997; Ord. Z-00-42, passed 8-17-2000; Ord. Z-02-34, passed 9-5-2002;
Ord. Z-04-20, passed 5-5-2004; Ord. Z-04-32, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. Z-09-09,
passed 4-10- 2009; Ord. Z-12-14, passed 7-19-2012; Ord. Z-12-25, passed
10-22-2012; Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15- 2012; Ord. Z-17-02, passed 3-16-2017)



§ 156.006  ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE; OBJECTIVES OF
MAPS.



   (A)   "The New Albany, Indiana Zone Map" dated 1971, as prepared and
adopted by the New Albany City Plan Commission on June 22, 1971 and the
"Contiguous Unincorporated Fringe Area of the City of New Albany, Indiana,
Zone Map", dated 1972, as prepared and adopted by the New Albany City Plan
Commission on July 18, 1972, which are together known herein as the ZONE MAP,
are incorporated by reference into this chapter, and at least two copies of
the zone map are now on file in the office of the City Clerk and are there
available for public inspection.



   (B)   The OS (fp), open space (flood plain), district is bounded as
shown in all areas designated as “A” zones (Zone A, AE, AH and AO) on
maps entitled FIA Flood Insurance Rate Map, Index and Nos. 127, 128, 129,
131, 133, 136, 137, 138, 139, and 141, to be made effective by the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security on December 4, 2012, and adopted by the
Common Council of the city on November 15, 2012 which, with all explanatory
matter thereon, are made a part of this chapter by reference.



   (C)   The primary objective of the zoning maps is to delineate the
lands best suited for residential, commercial, industrial and other purposes,
the designations to be proposed in terms of:



      (1)   Physical characteristics;



      (2)   Availability of utility services;



      (3)   Relationship to existing development;



      (4)   Relationship to transportation routes and community
facilities;



      (5)   Relationship between types of use; and



      (6)   The provision of the best obtainable environmental
quality.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-72-485, passed 8-7-1972; Ord.
76-636, passed 12-6-1976; Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



LAND USE GOALS



§ 156.020  AGRICULTURAL GOALS.



   Although the county is urbanizing, agriculture plays an important role
in the county's economy and will continue to do so in the foreseeable future.
The Zoning Code must recognize the particular needs of agriculture and the
characteristics of agricultural land just as it recognizes urban forms of
land use. The following goals are set:



   (A)   Provide for the retention of prime agricultural lands that are
not essential to meet the needs of urban growth during the planning period;



   (B)   Protect those agricultural areas from the intrusion of small
lot residential development and from other nonfarm related uses and
activities; and



   (C)   Provide those community services needed by rural residents.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.021  RESIDENTIAL GOALS.



   Recognizing that residential development constitutes the largest single
use of improved land, special attention in planning must be accorded to the
quality of housing and residential areas. The following goals are established:



   (A)   The shaping of existing residential development into
functional neighborhood units;



   (B)   The encouragement of new and creative forms of housing and
neighborhood designs;



   (C)   The development of residential areas into functional units of
a size that will enhance their physical and social identity, and which may be
efficiently served by a full complement of services and facilities required
by the residents; and



   (D)   Adequate open space should be provided within and between
planned residential areas.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.022  COMMERCIAL GOALS.



   Commercial activities are important both for the services they provide
and their economic base in providing tax income and employment. The following
are fixed:



   (A)   Where possible, consolidate existing commercial areas into
more functional units;



   (B)   Allocate a sufficient amount of land, appropriately located to
provide for a variety of commercial developments and activities necessary to
serve and support the projected population;



   (C)   Strive for the elimination of inappropriate strip zoning,
which fosters conflict between street use and through traffic movement; and



   (D)   Where appropriate, apply the use of natural or human-made
barriers as buffers, or demarcation lines between commercial and residential
land use areas. Better still, initiate new techniques for blending these
seemingly incompatible uses.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.023  INDUSTRIAL GOALS.



   Industry has long supported a substantial part of this area's economy.
However, its characteristics and needs are changing and the Comprehensive
Plan's recommendations must accommodate these emerging needs if industrial
opportunities are to be maximized. The following goals have been determined:



   (A)   Meet the potential for desirable industrial development
through the provision of sufficient industrial land for a variety of
locations furnished with adequate services to accommodate a diversity of
industrial uses; and



   (B)   Identify areas for industrial development, which will permit
performance compatible with adjoining areas.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.024  ENVIRONMENTAL GOALS.



   The term ENVIRONMENT is all encompassing. Every aspect of the world in
which we live is included. Air, water, land, along with natural and
human-made features, are included. Nature's handiwork must be protected and
human developments must be controlled. It is imperative, therefore, that the
following goals be implemented:



   (A)   Design and locational factors shall be a major consideration
in the approval of both rural and urban developments and shall apply to both
public and private facilities involving changes in the lands or waters of the
county;



   (B)   Areas of natural scenic beauty shall be protected from the
intrusion of urban uses except when required in the public interest;



   (C)   Human's land developments shall be made to blend with the
landscape rather than being imposed upon it; and



   (D)   Individuals and organizations promoting soil conservation,
re-forestation, park development, reservation of open space and the
preservation and rehabilitation of historic structures and places shall be
encouraged.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



POLICIES



§ 156.035  GENERAL POLICIES CONCERNING LAND USES.



   (A)   The use of land to meet the needs of urban growth should be
confined to the areas delineated in the land use plan for those purposes,
assuming transportation and community facilities can be provided through the
planning period. New development should adjoin presently developed areas to
prevent the costly and undesirable consequences of scattered development.



   (B)   Lands to be developed for urban uses are dependent upon a
broad range of urban services and improvements (for example, streets,
utilities, schools, parks, health facilities, libraries, police and fire
protection) and satisfactory arrangements for the provision of these needed
facilities shall go hand in hand with plans for the development of new lands.



   (C)   Lands in natural drainage courses, flood plains, marshes and
steep hillsides unsuitable because of topographic or geologic characteristics
should remain undeveloped.



   (D)   Lands not well suited to development because of natural
characteristics should be permanently reserved as open space through action
by public agencies; ownership in fee; zoning; or by establishing scenic
easements or through land use regulation. In addition to retaining the lands
to satisfy natural functions, open space can serve as a determinant of urban
form; can be utilized for casual recreation and the study of nature, and can
make a valuable contribution to the quality of urban life.



   (E)   The intrusion of plat or sell-off development into the
agricultural areas of the county should be discouraged as being inefficient
in terms of supplying needed public services and improvements and as
interfering with the socio-economic structure of the agricultural community,
recognizing, however, a valid interest in country living, utilizing the
nonagricultural land in the rural area as may be appropriate on large parcels
of several acres or more.



   (F)   Strip development bordering existing roads, whether for
residential or commercial use, should be discouraged as it increases traffic
hazards; is costly in terms of providing community services and facilities
and frequently produces dead interior land areas.



   (G)   Planned unit developments, for specific uses or an appropriate
mix of uses should be encouraged as a means of achieving good quality
neighborhoods and creativity in urban design.



   (H)   And finally, the integrity of the land use plan, as a guide to
establishing the most fitting pattern of land use, must be maintained if the
basic goals of the comprehensive planning program are to be achieved.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.036  RESIDENTIAL LAND USE POLICIES.



   (A)   The city and the county have grown from the city out, with a
clustering of development at outlying centers. There are residential sections
throughout the city and county which vary in quality; some indicate an
instability that leads to eventual blight; some are well planned and stable;
and others are poorly planned and already showing characteristics of
instability. Subdivisions are found throughout the county; varying in size,
quality and relationship to adjacent developments.



   (B)   A primary purpose, therefore, in guiding land development is
the creation of stable residential areas which contain pleasant homes served
by a traffic circulation system, and which are properly related to commercial
areas, employment centers and open space. In developing an interrelated
system of land uses, residential areas are generally best formed in
elementary school neighborhood units; are bounded by prominent physical land
features; and major elements of the circulation system, or other more
intensive land uses. Within the residential neighborhood there should be
adequate provision for an elementary school, church sites, local shopping
facilities and recreation facilities for both children and adults.



   (C)   Residential areas should be encouraged to develop primarily in
the gently rolling areas rather than in the valley bottoms or on the very
level lands better suited for agricultural or industrial use.



   (D)   The development of a variety of housing types and locations
should be encouraged by fostering and retaining the natural variety inherent
in the landscape by reason of topographic variation, views and water area,
and by allowing for the use of housing types ranging from single-family homes
to multi-family apartments and providing for variations in the design of
these areas and their related facilities.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.037  RESIDENTIAL DENSITY.



   (A)   While residential density is merely a measure of number of
persons residing within a unit area of land, it has considerable impact on
surrounding land uses. Residential density affects the size and spacing of
arterial streets, schools and parks, commercial areas and influences the
location and size of utility installation.



   (B)   Residential areas should have varying densities dependent upon
the type of development, location and degree of improvements.



   (C)   A maximum density of one housing unit per two acres should be
employed in the rural areas.



   (D)   Single-family development in new residential areas should have
a maximum allowed density of four housing units per gross acre.



   (E)   Multiple-family residential areas should always be located
functionally convenient to regional or local arterial streets. Adequate
arterial and collector streets should exist prior to or be developed
concurrently with the development of multiple family uses.



   (F)   In order that a maximum number of persons may take advantage
of the amenities of view and permanent open space, multiple residential uses
may be located in or adjacent to the areas; provided, their development does
not destroy such amenities for adjoining, existing or potential residential
areas.



   (G)   The lower density residential uses should be located:



      (1)   Adjoining or convenient to regional or local arterial
streets;



      (2)   Adjoining the smaller business, cultural or commercial
centers (at community or neighborhood level); and



      (3)   As a transitional use between higher density multiples
and single-family residential densities.



   (H)   High density residential uses should be located:



      (1)   Adjoining or convenient to regional arterials with
preference given those routes which provide the most convenient and direct
access (in terms of travel time) to the major trade and employment centers of
the area; and



      (2)   Adjoining major shopping, cultural or civic centers (at
urban or multi-community level).



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.038  COMMERCIAL LAND USE POLICIES.



   (A)   Conveniently located commercial areas of sufficient size to
offer an adequate range of goods and services are as important to good
community development as schools, parks and utilities. The need for a full
range of business and commercial development is recognized and should include
neighborhood, community and central business centers. The total amount of
land allocated for all business and commercial uses should be scaled to
demonstrated demand and need. Because of the impact business has on adjoining
land uses, its scale and locations should be carefully coordinated with
adjoining uses.



   (B)   More specifically:



      (1)   Commercial areas should locate on properly sized traffic
distributors.



      (2)   To assure traffic safety, commercial areas should be
designed and located for convenient access; provide off street parking and
separate vehicular from pedestrian traffic.



      (3)   The indiscriminate stripping of commercial uses along
road frontage must not be allowed.



      (4)   Commercial uses should be permitted only after
sufficient rights-of-way, improvements and special control of access points
have been assured to accommodate the added traffic.



      (5)   To preclude congestion, access to commercial areas
should be removed from intersecting streets and highways.



      (6)   Commercial areas should be located centrally within a
trade area containing an adequate supporting population.



      (7)   Commercial areas should be at a location which is
conducive to convenient access by numerous shoppers. To be avoided are
intersections which have existing congestion problems, abrupt changes of
grade, intersections formed by acute angle streets, and other situations
where additional traffic would impair the safety of motorists and pedestrians.



      (8)   As retail and personal services are dependent in part on
the maximum movement of pedestrians, the location of nonshopping
establishments should be discouraged within the core.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.039  NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING AREAS.



   (A)   Neighborhood commercial areas should consist of neighborhood
shopping only. Intensive and heavier general commercial uses, large space
users and residential uses are not compatible within neighborhood shopping
areas.



   (B)   The size of a neighborhood shopping center or district should
be designed to serve the potential population within its trade area and range
in size up to a maximum of ten acres.



   (C)   Neighborhood shopping areas should be located from one to two
miles apart in order to encourage stable commercial areas.



   (D)   A neighborhood commercial area should locate at the junction
of two local arterials or a local and a regional arterial, which should be
central within its trade area.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.040  COMMUNITY SHOPPING AREA.



   (A)   A community shopping center or district should range in size
from ten to 40 acres.



   (B)   To encourage stable commercial areas, community centers should
be located from two to four miles apart; and, as community businesses also
serve the function of a neighborhood commercial area, a community center
should be located about one mile from neighborhood shopping centers.



   (C)   A community center should locate at the junction of a local
arterial and regional arterial or the intersection of two regional arterials.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.041  REGIONAL SHOPPING AREAS.



   (A)   The size of a regional center or district should range from 40
to 100 acres in size.



   (B)   A regional center should be designed to serve a potential
population of 50,000 to 150,000 persons.



   (C)   In order to encourage stable commercial areas, regional
centers should be located from four to eight miles apart.



   (D)   A regional center should locate at the intersection of two
regional arterials.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.042  INDUSTRIAL LAND USE POLICIES.



   (A)   Industrial activities involve the processing, handling and
manufacturing of products along with research and technological processes.
Heavier industries may include manufacturing, assembling, fabrication and
processing; bulk handling of products; and storage, warehousing and heavy
trucking. All should be considered in terms of intensity of use and should
operate to minimize external effects on traffic congestion, noise, glare, air
and water pollution, fire and safety hazards.



   (B)   Enough land, whether for individual establishments or for
planned industrial parks, should be provided with adequate space for future
expansion, off-street parking (for employees and visitors), loading and
docking facilities, storage, landscaping, utilities and other space
requirements. While most industries purchase or reserve areas larger than
necessary for immediate needs, space for industrial uses should be scaled to
the demonstrated demand and need. More specifically:



      (1)   The county needs industry for employment, for tax
revenues and as a customer for local business. But industry is more than
jobs, taxes and additional sales. The production activities of the community
form its personality, shape its landscape, ensure its future and manifest its
reason for being.



      (2)   Industry is a legitimate lands use possessing integrity
comparable to other classes of land use. An efficient and attractive location
with space to grow ensures continuing occupancy, jobs and tax revenues;
prevents deterioration of land use and property values; and maintains
balanced use of community facilities.



      (3)   Nature alone cannot create a good industrial site.
Advance planning for industry; the location of highways, an airport, water
and sewer trunklines can enhance or even create prime sites for industry.



      (4)   Industry has special land and location requirements that
cannot be met from land "left-over" after residential, commercial and public
uses have been designated. The county's land must be evaluated for locations
uniquely related to rail; to present and future freeways, airports and
waterfront location.



      (5)   Potential industrial sites should be kept intact for
industrial use. When large tracts are broken up by the intrusion of
residences or unrelated retail uses, the remaining sites are seldom usable
for industry.



      (6)   Because the supply of good industrial land is limited
and not easily renewable, good industrial sites should not be wasted. The
crowding of new industrial plants today on small inadequate sites will create
the slums of tomorrow.



      (7)   Land must be identified now as having potential use for
industry within the next two decades. The design of highways, utilities and
other public works near these future sites should proceed on the basis of
industrial use in the future.



      (8)   The location, capacity and timing of water, sanitary
sewer and drainage facilities should be guided by the industrial potential of
the land to be served.



      (9)   With few exceptions, industrial management today seeks
an attractive location for its new plant, laboratory or even warehouse. It
does not want slum houses, shoddy commercial uses or unkempt industries as
neighbors.



      (10)   A planned distribution of industrial sites throughout
the county along the radial and circumferential freeways can substantially
reduce the time required for the daily journey to work, thus extending the
hours spent with the family.



      (11)   The modern factory, warehouse or laboratory is a major
element of the daily environment of the metropolitan area. Properly and
prominently located, its architecture and landscaping can be an aesthetic
contribution to the physical design of the community.



      (12)   Industrial areas should be located where they can be
adequately served by major utility lines which include electric power
stations and transmission lines, trunk sewer lines and trunk gas lines.



      (13)   Whereas collector and local arterial streets serving
residential areas are designed primarily for passenger automobile service,
industries should be located with access provided only to expressway or major
truck routes so that traffic will not pass through residential areas.



      (14)   Certain industrial uses generate heavy traffic, noise,
smoke or other nuisances, and should be located where it is feasible to
provide an adequate transition, such as light industrial areas, commercial
areas or open space, to adjoining land use types.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-21-1971)



DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 156.055  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   The city is classified and divided into districts designated as follows:



 


District Designation

 

Primarily For






A

 
Agricultural



AR

 
Agricultural - residential



C3a

 
Neighborhood shopping center



R-1

 
Suburban residential



R-2

 
Urban residential



R-2/CM

 
Single-family/community medical



R-3

 
Multi-family (medium density)



R-4

 
Multi-family (high density)



R-5

 
Multi-family (high rise)




 



 


District Designation

 

Primarily For






RO

 
Multi-family (office)



RN-1

 
Neighborhood residential



RN-2

 
Neighborhood residential - 2



C-1a

 
Limited local business



C-1b

 
Local business



C-2

 
General business



C-3

 
Regional shopping center



HS

 
Highway service



I-1a

 
Light industrial



I-1b

 
Light industrial park



I-2

 
Heavy industrial



OS (fp and ss)

 
Open space (flood plain and steep slopes)



HD

 
Historic district




 



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-72-485, passed 8-7-1972; Ord.
Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. Z-04-32, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. Z-09-04,
passed 2-2-2009)



§ 156.056  DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICTS.



   The districts identified in § 156.055 are described as follows:



   (A)   Residential districts. Eight districts, R-1, R-2, RN-1, RN-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5 and RO, are established for residential use in conformity with
the types of neighborhoods which now exist and are likely to develop in the
areas so designated on the zone maps. The districts differ primarily with
respect to requirements of lot size, building floor area and the number of
families which may be housed in one building.



      (1)   R-1 - Suburban Residential. This district is designed
for the areas of outer urbanization where development will occur both on
group sanitary waste disposal systems and on septic tanks. The permitted use
is single-family residential. The minimum lot size and minimum frontage are
reduced when on an approved sanitary group disposal system or sewers.



      (2)   R-2 - Urban Residential. This district is designed for
areas where development will occur on group sanitary waste disposal systems
and sewers. The permitted use in this district is single-family residential.



      (3)   RN-1 - Neighborhood Residential. This district is
designated for higher density single-family development and two-family
dwellings where approved through conditional use. Development on septic tanks
is prohibited.



      (4)   RN-2 - Neighborhood Residential - 2.  This district is
designed for higher density single-family development and two-family
dwellings where approved through conditional use.  Development on septic
tanks is prohibited.



      (5)   R-3 - Multi-Family (Medium Density). This district is
designed for medium density multi-family and single-family use. Development
using septic tank fields in this district is prohibited.



      (6)   R-4 - Multi-Family (High Density). This district has
similar characteristics and permitted uses as R-3. It is designed for areas
of higher density development. Development on septic tank fields is
prohibited.



      (7)   R-5 - Multi-Family (High Rise). This district is
designed for high density multi-family developments.



      (8)   RO - Multi-Family-Office. This is an overlay district
applying to the R-3, R-4, and R-5 districts, or portions thereof, permitting
office type operations as well as residential uses.



   (B)   Commercial districts. Five districts, C-1a, C-1b, C-2, C-3 and
HS, are established to meet the specific requirements for the several classes
of business uses needed to give adequate service throughout the county as
related to present and future developments.



      (1)   C-1a - Limited Local Business. This district is designed
to accommodate neighborhood type shopping and service facilities offering
direct services to customers. This district is important to the economic
welfare of the community in placing convenience and impulse goods shops close
to the consumer. This is a highly restricted business center permitting a
limited group of uses. No signs may overhang the front lot line.



      (2)   C-1b - Local Business. This district has the same
characteristics and requirements as C-1a. The permitted uses are generally
the same, but this is a more general business center.



      (3)   C-2 - General Business. This district is designed for
the central business district and other areas of concentrated heavy
commercial activity including enclosed storage and some limited industrial
operations. Also residential use as found in R-5 Districts may be permitted.



      (4)   C-3 - Regional Shopping Center. This district is
established for planned business and service centers to serve regional
requirements in accordance with specified design standards; no residential
use is permitted. This regional commercial center has a minimum lot area of
20 acres.



      (5)   C-3a - Neighborhood Shopping Center. This zone is
established for planned business and service centers to serve neighborhood
requirements in accordance with specified design standards; no residential
use is permitted. This neighborhood convenience center has a minimum lot
requirement of three acres.



      (6)   HS - Highway Service. This zone is designed to provide
for traveler uses at or near major highway or freeway interchanges; no
residential use is permitted. Design standards will be similar to those for
the C-3 districts and has a minimum lot area of one acre.



   (C)   Industrial districts. Three districts, I-1a, I-1b and I-2, are
established to meet the present and future needs of the city for industrial
development.



      (1)   I-1a - Light Industrial. This zone permits light
industrial uses, some limited commercial uses, and residential uses as in
R-4. It is designed for existing light industrial areas and their proper
expansions. Light industrial performance standards must be met, including no
outside storage or operations other than loading operations.



      (2)   I-1b - Light Industrial Park. This zone has the same
characteristics as I-1a. The permitted uses remain the same except no
residential use is permitted in this district. The requirements within this
district are designed to promote an industrial parklike development.



      (3)   I-2 - Heavy Industrial. This zone permits light and
heavy industrial uses, and related business  and  transportation  uses; no
residential use is permitted. It is designed for areas  of  industrial
concentration related to major transportation facilities and suitable
topography. Heavy industrial performance standards must be met; outside
storage or operations are permitted if shielded by fencing or landscaping
from adjacent residential areas and main highways.



   (D)   Special districts.



      (1)   fp - Flood Plain. This includes all land subject to
periodic overflow or flooding from the Ohio River, major creeks and covers
ponding areas as well as all lands designated for drainageways.



         (a)   ss - Steep Slopes. This includes all major areas
of land that have slopes in excess of 18%.



         (b)   This open space zone permits agricultural,
forestry and recreational uses. Adjoining use districts may be extended into
this district when approved by the Plan Commission and Board of Appeals as a
special exception. The approval is contingent upon the correction of or
protection from flooding or slope hazards or destructive effects to the
property within the development or to the property in the vicinity.



      (2)   HD - Historic District.



         (a)   In recognition of the unique character of
buildings and structures of a historic nature or a distinctive architectural
style a historic zone is hereby established to encompass such areas. Land
classified in the historic zone shall also be classified in another basic
land use zone. All uses permitted in the basic land use zone shall be
permitted in the Historic District, and other uses may be permitted as
special exception in order to enhance the places and areas of historical
interest. The historic zone is a secondary classification intended to place
the owners of the aforementioned buildings and structures, and the city at
large, on notice with respect to the unusual quality and nature of the
affected areas. It is the intent of this section that the buildings,
structures and grounds within the historic areas be maintained in a manner
consistent with the historic character of the area. Any changes, alterations
or treatment of exterior surfaces should be accomplished to continue the
historic characteristics of the improvements which gave the area its
distinctive historic value.



         (b)   An application for an improvement location permit,
for any improvements in the historic zone, shall be subject to review by the
executive director of the Plan Commission in consultation with the applicant.



      (3)   PUDD - Planned Unit Development District. A specific
overlay zoning district duly approved in accordance with the section of this
Zoning Code entitled “Planned Unit Development District (PUDD)”.



   (E)   Agricultural districts. Two districts, A and AR, are
established for agricultural use:



      (1)   A - Agricultural District.



         (a)   In recognition of agriculture as a major land use
in the county, this district is established to include the areas of
substantial size where little or no urbanization has occurred or is likely to
occur in the near future.



         (b)   Permitted uses in this district include all forms
of agriculture and allied uses.



      (2)   AR - Agricultural-Residential District.



         (a)   This zone is designed for areas of future
development or in areas where development will primarily occur using septic
tank disposal systems.



         (b)   Permitted uses in this district are agriculture
and related uses as well as single-family residences.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-72-485, passed 8-7-1972; Ord.
Z-73-502, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. Z-76-636, passed 12-6-1976; Ord. Z-96-157,
passed 11-21-1996; Ord. Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. Z-04-32, passed
6-17-2004; Ord. Z-09-04, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 156.057  BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The boundaries of the districts established by § 156.055 are
shown on the zone map and other maps adopted for the purpose of district
identification by this chapter. Except as provided in this section, these
boundaries may be changed only by amending this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   The exact boundaries of a district shall be
determined by the measurements shown on the zone map and other maps adopted
as a part of this chapter.



      (2)   Where measurements are not shown, or where the
boundaries of a district are uncertain, the boundaries shall be determined by
use of the scales of the maps.



      (3)   In the case of further uncertainty, the boundaries of
any district shall be as determined by the Zoning Officer.



   (C)   Territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall
remain as zoned unless changed by amendment of this Zoning Code.



   (D)   When a right-of-way is vacated by proper authority, the
districts adjoining each side are respectively extended to the center of the
area so vacated.



   (E)   If the boundary line of a district divides a lot having
frontage on a street so that the front part of the lot lies in one district
and part of the lot lies in another, the restriction that applies to the
front part of the lot applies to the entire lot.



   (F)   If the boundary line of a district divides a lot in a manner
essentially perpendicular to a street, that restriction which applies to the
larger part of the lot applies to the entire lot.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-6-636, passed 12-76-1976)



§ 156.058  USE.



   No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected,
reconstructed or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and
specified in the district in which the building or land is located.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.059  HEIGHT.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed in height the limits established and specified for the use and the
district in which the building is located.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.060  YARD, LOT AREA AND SIZE OF BUILDING.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered in
any manner which will encroach upon, or reduce in any manner, the yards, lot
area per family, ground floor area of residential buildings or lot coverage
regulations established and specified for the use and the district in which
the building is located except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.061  LOTS.



   Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot which fronts
on a street or place.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.062  VEHICLE PARKING SPACE; LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.



   For every building hereafter erected, off-street parking space and
loading and unloading berths shall be provided as hereinafter specified for
the use to which the building is to be devoted.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 156.999



AUTHORIZED USES AND REQUIREMENTS



§ 156.075  PRIMARY PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   The primary uses permitted in the districts established by or
under § 156.055 are shown in Table I.



   (B)   Where the district column is marked with an "X" the use is
permitted.



   (C)   Where the district column is marked with an "S" the use may be
permitted only as a special exception under §§ 156.090 or 156.091.



   (D)   Where the district column is marked with "C" the use may be
permitted only as a conditional use under §§ 156.095 through 156.096.



   (E)   Any use permitted in the basic district shall also be
permitted in the RO and HD Overlay Districts.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-76-636, passed 12-6-1976; Ord.
Z-86-167, passed 10-6-1986; Ord. Z-94-190, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. Z-96-157,
passed 11-21-1996; Ord. Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. Z-04-32, passed
6-17-2004)  Penalty, see § 156.999



Click here to view Table I in a PDF document.



TABLE I: AUTHORIZED USES



X - Permitted Use



S - Special Exceptions



C - Conditional Use



 




 
R1
 
R2
 
R2/CM
 
R3
R4
R5
 
RN-1
 
RN-2
 
RO
 
C-1a
 
C1b
 
C2
 
C3
 
HS
 
I-1a
 
I-1b
 
I2
 
OS (fp) *
 
OS (ss)
 
HD
 
A
 
AR
 
C-3a




RESIDENTIAL USES


Complex, multi-family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Dwelling, single-family
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Dwelling, multi-family (including two-family and row houses)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Dwelling, two-family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Fraternity, sorority or student cooperative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Construction trailer or office (temporary)
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Class B manufactured homes (temporary)
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Manufactured home parks
 

See §§ 156.105 - 156.109 Planned Unit Development District



Nursing homes or homes for the elderly
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 


Orphanages, boys and girls homes
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Swimming pool, private, associated with a residential use
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X


COMMERCIAL USES


Apparel and accessory sales and service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Clothing, apparel and accessory sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Custom tailoring, dressmaking and associated accessory specialty sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Furriers and fur shops and storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Laundries and dry cleaning (limited capacity - 40 lbs. using non-flammable
fluid)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Launderette and cleaning service (coin- operated, individual or family sized
equipment)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Laundry, steam plants and dry cleaning plants and storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Shoe repair and hat cleaning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


AUTOMOTIVE DEALERS, SERVICES AND REPAIRS


Automobile sales and associated sales and services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Used auto sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Automobile accessory sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Automobile service stations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S


Automobile and motorcycle repair garages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Car washing stations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Self-service car wash
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Automobile body repair, painting and repainting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Automobile commercial parking enterprise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Automobile parking accessory to permitted uses
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Junk yards and auto wrecking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Tire recapping and retreading
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICES AND SERVICES


Ambulatory care facilities
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Community health service agencies
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Diagnostic, testing and imaging facilities
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Duplicating and blueprinting establishments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Health care offices and related services that do not involve patient visits
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Laboratories for industrial research and testing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 


Laboratories for medical and dental research and testing
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 


Office equipment and supplies, sales and service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Offices - professional, semi professional and business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X


Printing, publishing establishments (limited to five tradesmen)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Printing, publishing establishments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Professional medical offices (physicians and dentists)
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Sign painting - no outside storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Sign manufacturing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


BUILDING MATERIALS


Contractors’ plants or storage yards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Hardware, small appliances, electrical items and incidental repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Sawmill
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 


Lumber and other building materials and incidental millwork
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Plumbing and heating or electrical retail sales and service (enclosed storage)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Wallpaper, paint and glass stores
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


FARM EQUIPMENT


Farm machinery, sales, repair and storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Farm machinery assembly or production
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Fuel oil and bottled gas sales and storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Feed, fertilizers and seed retail sales in bulk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Garden supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Grain elevators and processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



 




 
R1
 
R2
 
R2/CM
 
R3
R4
R5
 
RN-1
 
RN-2
 
RO
 
C-1a
 
C1b
 
C2
 
C3
 
HS
 
I-1a
 
I-1b
 
I2
 
OS (fp) *
 
OS (ss)
 
HD
 
A
 
AR
 
C-3a




HOTELS AND OTHER LODGING


Boarding and rooming houses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Boarding house, exclusively for persons visiting patients that are admitted
and receiving medical services provided by the hospital or health care
facilities in the district
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Hotels, motels and inns
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Tourist homes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


MISCELLANEOUS SALES AND SERVICE


Antique and gift shops
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X


Apothecary shop as an accessory use within a medical building having no
advertising or outside entrance
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X


Art supplies retail sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bicycles sales and repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Billboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Book and stationery stores
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 


Commercial greenhouse - not exceeding 1,000 sq. ft. in area
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Commercial greenhouse - over 1,000 sq. ft
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Drug stores and pharmacies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Florist, flower shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 


Gift shop - as an accessory use to a permitted use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Jewelry and watch sales and repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Lock and gunsmiths
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Newsdealers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Opticians and optical supply sales
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Pawnshops or second-hand stores
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Pet shops, bird stores, taxidermists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Photographic studios and camera supply
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 


Photo pick-up station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Machine shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Sexually oriented business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Signs-when accessory to an established permitted use
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Sporting goods sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Sporting goods sales and rental accessory to a recreational use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Stand-alone drive-up vending machines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Studios and galleries (art, music, dancing, etc.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Tattoo parlors and/or body art studios
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Temporary sales (garage, yard, auctions, etc.)
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Trailer or mobile home sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
X
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


FOOD RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES


Bakeries and confectioneries (limited to 2,500 sq. ft. manufacturing)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Bakeries (over 2,500 sq. ft. manufacturing)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Catering establishments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Coffee house and tea rooms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X


Cold storage lockers - for individual use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Cold storage plants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Dairies and ice cream manufacturing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Drive-in eating establishments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Food stores, retail only (i.e., grocery, delicatessen)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Ice manufacturing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Meat and poultry processing and packing (wholesale excluding slaughtering)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Meat market (retail)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Restaurant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Restaurant, including pick-up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Taverns, bars, saloons
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND SERVICES


Banks, savings and loan association
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Brokers, holding and other investment companies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Credit agencies and loan companies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Insurance and real estate agencies
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


FURNITURE AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS


China, glassware and metalware “specialty shops”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 


Floor covering, drapery and upholstery stores
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Furniture, retail sales and associated storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Major household appliances, sales and service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Radio and television, sales and service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


GENERAL MERCHANDISE


Department store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Direct selling and mail order stores
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Limited price variety stores (i.e. $0.05 and $0.10)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Servicing vending machine operators
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PERSONAL SERVICES


Barber and beauty shops
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Funeral homes and undertakers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Health clubs (public) reducing salon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Massage parlor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*(2)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


RECREATION AND AMUSEMENT


Billiard and other indoor game rooms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bowling alley
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Carnivals, fairs, circuses, etc.
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S


Fishing lake or docks, commercial
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Night clubs, dance halls, etc.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Outdoor commercial enterprises including outdoor theaters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Roller and ice skating rink
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Swimming pools or commercial lake (public or private)
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
*(3)
 
 
 
*(3)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 


Theaters, indoor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


INDUSTRIAL USES


Heavy industrial uses (See Sec. 3.4k)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Industrial material storage (open)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Industrial uses in flood plain area *(4)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Light industrial uses  (See Sec. 3.4b)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil removal and storing area
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Petroleum tank farm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Slaughter house
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Truck freight terminal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Warehouse, storage, monument sales and storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES


Addiction treatment facility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*(10)S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Airport or landing field
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Cemetery or crematory
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Church or temple
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
S
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


College (private)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
S
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


College or university (public and parochial)
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Country club or golf course
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Fire station or police station
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Hospital
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S


Kindergarten or day nursery   
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S


Lodge or private club including fraternal organizations with no sleeping
quarters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 


Medical health center or clinic
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Governmental buildings for office or public use
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Governmental garages, repair or storage yards and warehouses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Correctional and rehabilitational school
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Opioid treatment facility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*(11)S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*(11)S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Pain management clinic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*(7)S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*(8)S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Public library and museum
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 


Public utilities - service or storage yards and warehouses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Public utilities - transmission lines and substations
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Public utilities - plants, underground lines, reservoirs, storage tanks, etc.
(i.e. water, gas, sewer, electric and the like)
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Parks, public
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Radio and television towers
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Railroad right-of-way and uses related thereto
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Refuse dump
 

Not Permitted in Any District



Landfill - all
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Sanitary landfill
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 


School, parochial or public
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 


Sewage plant
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Stadium
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Public or private camp
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


AGRICULTURAL USES


Farm, confinement feeding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 


Farm, general
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
*(5)S
 
S
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Plant nursery
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Notes to table:

*(1)   Permitted when associated with a permitted use.

*(2)   A massage parlor shall be located no closer than 500 feet to the
property of any church, temple or other house of worship, or school,
kindergarten, day-care center, nursing home or housing for the elderly.

*(3)   Permitted when associated with a hotel or motel.

*(4)   Industrial uses in an OS (fp) district shall be confined to the
specific area indicated as I-2, Heavy Industrial, on the “Zone Map,
1971”, and having property boundary line on the Ohio River. Concerning such
industrial uses in the OS (fp) districts, both in industrial regulations and
floodplain regulations found in this chapter shall apply.

*(5)   If construction or other structural improvements are included in a
proposal, “farm general” is permitted only by special exception; tilling
of the soil, grazing and the like are permitted by right without requirement
for special exception approval.

*(6)   This use is permitted only through conditional use approval in
accordance with §§ 156.095 and 156.096.

*(7)   This use is permitted only when the following are met:
   (a)   The use is at least 300 feet from a residentially-zoned
district; and
   (b)   The use is at least 1,000 feet from another pain management
clinic.

*(8)   This use is permitted only when the following are met:
   (a)   The use is at least 500 feet from a residentially-zoned
district; and
   (b)   The use is at least 1,000 feet from another pain management
clinic.

*(10)   This use is permitted only when the following are met:
   (a)   The use is at least 300 feet from a residentially-zoned
district; and
   (b)   The use is at least 300 feet from a dwelling.

*(11)   This use is permitted only when the following are met:
   (a)   The use is at least 500 feet from a residentially-zoned
district; and
   (b)   The use is at least 500 feet from a dwelling.




 



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-21-1971; Ord. Z-78-706, passed 8-7-1972; Ord.
Z-76-636, passed 12-6-1976; Ord. Z-82-953, passed 11-1-1982; Ord. A-86-167,
passed 10-6-1986;Ord. Z-92-134, passed 10-5-1992; Ord. Z-94-190, passed
4-21-1994; Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996; Ord. Z-97-216, passed
11-20-1997; Ord. Z-97-222, passed 12-1-1997; Ord. Z-01-06, passed 1-18-2001;
Ord. Z-04-20, passed 5-5-2004; Ord. Z-04-32, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. Z-09-04,
passed 2-2-2009; Ord. Z-12-14, passed 7-19-2012; Ord. Z-12- 25, passed
10-22-2012; Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. Z-17-02, passed 3-17-2017)



§ 156.076  RESIDENTIAL USES.



   The residential uses defined below are permitted in the districts
indicated in Table I under § 156.075 when complying with the requirements of
Tables IIa through IIc and the provisions and exceptions of § 156.079; or
when in an approved Planned Unit Development District under §§ 156.105
through 156.109.



   (A)   A single-family dwelling is a detached building designed for
or occupied by one family exclusively.



   (B)   A multi-family dwelling is a building designed for or occupied
by two or more families, exclusively for dwelling purposes.



   (C)   A multi-family complex is a lot or parcel to be developed for
use with two or more multi-family dwellings which is under one ownership.
Multi-family structures within a complex may front on a private interior
access road or court provided the complex meets the frontage requirements set
out in Table IIc.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996; Ord.
Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997)  Penalty, see § 156.999



TABLE IIa:  RESIDENTIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS - SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS



 


District in Which Use is Permitted

 

A

 

AR

 

R1

 

R2

 

R3

 

R4

 

R5

 

RO

 

RN-1

 

RN-2

 

C1a

 

C1b

 

C2

 

I1a

 

OS*(2)

 

HD





Minimum lot size in sq. ft. per dwelling unit
 
87,120 = (2 acres)
 
18,00 0
 
12,000 *(3)
 
7,200
 
6,000
 
6,000
 
5,000
 
*(1)
 
4,800
 
3,600
 
6,00 0
 
6,000
 
5,000
 
5,000
 
87,120
 
*(1)


Minimum lot width in feet
 
200
 
100
 
100 *(4)
 
60
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
*(1)
 
40' (by right) 30' *(6)
 
30' (by right)
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
200
 
*(1)


Maximum building height in feet
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
*(1)
 
35'
 
35'
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
25
 
*(1)


Minimum front yard in percent of average depth of lots in block- but not less
than 25
 
20%*
 
20%*
 
20%*
 
20%*
 
20%*
 
20%*
 
20%*
 
*(1)
 
10'
 
10'
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
*(1)


Minimum side yard in percentage of lot width but not less than 5 nor need be
greater than 25
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
*(1)
 
5'
 
5'
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
*(1)


Minimum rear yard in feet
 
30
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20'
 
20'
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)


Minimum distance between main and accessory buildings in feet  *(7)
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
*(2)
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
6'
 
*(2)


Vision clearance on corner lots
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
*(1)


Minimum ground floor building area in sq. ft.
 
750
 
750
 
1,200 *(5)
 
960 *(5)
 
750
 
740
 
740
 
*(1)
 
850
 
740
 
750
 
750
 
750
 
750
 
750
 
*(1)


Number of vehicle parking spaces to be provided on lot driveway may be
considered as parking area
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
*(1)


Maximum lot coverage in percent of lot
 
10%
 
35%
 
35%
 
35%
 
40%
 
50%
 
50%
 
*(1)
 
35%
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
50%
 
50%
 
10%
 
*(1)



The OS district designation includes both the flood plain and the steep
slopes parts of the OS, open space, district.



*   Where abutting an arterial street: 75


Where abutting a collector street: 60

Where abutting a residential street: 50

*(1)   Same requirements as basis land use district.

*(2)   Permitted when approved as a special exception.

*(3)   Where located on a sanitary sewer - 9,000 sq. ft.

*(4)   Where located on sanitary sewer - 80.

*(5)   Two-story and split level dwellings - 750 sq. ft.

*(6)   Lots narrower than 40' are subject to conditional use approval in
accordance with §§ 156.095 and 156.096.

*(7)   If less than 6', consider the accessory building as if attached to
the main building.




 



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-72-485, passed 8-7-1972; Ord.
Z-76-646, passed 12-6-1976; Ord. Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. Z-02-18,
passed 6-20-2002; Ord. Z-09-04, passed 2-2-2009)



Click here to view Table IIa in a PDF document.




TABLE IIb:  RESIDENTIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS - MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS




 




 
District in Which Use is Permitted



R3

 
R4
 
R5
 
RO
 
RN-1
 
RN-2
 
C2
 
I1a
 
HD
 
OS




Minimum lot size in square feet per dwelling unit
 
3,600
 
1,800
 
900
 
*(1)
 
3,000
 
2,400
 
1,800
 
3,600
 
*(1)
 
3,600


Minimum lot width in feet
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
*(1)
 
50'
 
40'
 
50
 
50
 
*(1)
 
50


Maximum building height in feet *(2)
 
35
 
60
 
120
 
*(1)
 
35'
 
35'
 
80
 
35
 
*(1)
 
35


Minimum front yard in percent of average depth of lots in block - but not
less than 25 *(2)
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
*(1)
 
10'
 
10'
 
20%
 
20%
 
*(1)
 
20%


Minimum side yard in percent of lot width - but not less than 5 *(2)
 
10%
 
10%
 
10%
 
*(1)
 
5'
 
5'
 
10%
 
10%
 
*(1)
 
10%


Minimum distance between main and accessory building in feet
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
7'
 
6'
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20


Minimum rear yard in feet *(2)
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20'
 
20'
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20


Vision clearance on corner lots (see definition)
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
*(1)
 
yes


Minimum floor area per dwelling unit in square feet exclusive of corridors,
furnace rooms, basements, etc.
 
500 + 150 per bedroom *(4)
 
450 + 150 per bedroom *(4)
 
400 + 150 per bedroom *(4)
 
*(1)
 
500+ 150 per bedroom *(4)
 
500+ 150 per bedroom *(4)
 
450 + 150 per bedroom *(4)
 
450 + 150 per bedroom *(4)
 
*(1)
 
500 + 150 per bedroom


Number of vehicle parking spaces to be provided on lot *(3)
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
*(1)
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
*(1)
 
2/DU


Maximum lot coverage in percent of lot
 
40%
 
50%
 
50%
 
*(1)
 
35%
 
35%
 
50%
 
50%
 
*(1)
 
40%



*(1)   Same requirements as basic land use district.



*(2)   All minimum yard requirements increased by 5 feet for each story
over three.



*(3)   Except for efficiency or no bedroom units - 2 spaces for each 3
units.



*(4)   Part of the 150 sq. ft. bedroom requirements may be used for living
space within the dwelling unit.





 



(Ord. Z-09-04, passed 2-2-2009)







Click here to view Table IIb in a PDF document.TABLE IIc:  RESIDENTIAL USES
AND REQUIREMENTS - MULTI-FAMILY COMPLEX



 




 
District in Which Use is Permitted



R3

 
R4
 
R5
 
RO
 
C2
 
I1a
 
HD
 
OS(fp)




Minimum lot size in square feet per dwelling unit
 
3,600
 
1,800
 
900
 
*(1)
 
1,800
 
3,600
 
*(1)
 
3,600


Minimum lot width in feet
 
75
 
75
 
75
 
*(1)
 
75
 
75
 
*(1)
 
75


Maximum building height in feet
 
35
 
60
 
120
 
*(1)
 
80
 
35
 
*(1)
 
35


Minimum front yard in percent of average depth of lots in block - but not
less than 25 *(4)
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
*(1)
 
20%
 
20%
 
*(1)
 
20%


Minimum side yard of complex in feet *(4)
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20


Minimum distance between main buildings in feet *(2)
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
*(1)
 
25
 
25
 
*(1)
 
25


Minimum distance between main and accessory buildings in feet
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20


Minimum rear yard of complex in feet *(4)
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20
 
20
 
*(1)
 
20


Vision clearance on corners lots (see definition)
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
*(1)
 
yes
 
yes
 
*(1)
 
yes


Minimum floor area per dwelling unit in square feet exclusive of corridors,
furnace rooms, basements and the like
 
500 + 150 per bedroom *(5)
 
450 + 150 per bedroom *(5)
 
400 + 150 per bedroom *(5)
 
*(1)
 
450 + 150 per bedroom *(5)
 
450 + 150 per bedroom *(5)
 
*(1)
 
500 + 150 per bedroom


Number of vehicle parking spaces to be provided on lot *(3)
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
*(1)
 
2/DU
 
2/DU
 
*(1)
 
2/DU


Maximum lot coverage in percent of lot
 
40%
 
50%
 
50%
 
*(1)
 
50%
 
50%
 
*(1)
 
40%



*(1)   Same requirements as basic land use district.




*(2)   Minimum distance between main buildings requirements increased by 5
feet for each story over three.




*(3)   Efficiency or no bedroom units - 2 spaces for each 3 units.




*(4)   Minimum yard requirements increased by 5 feet for each story over 3.




*(5)   A part of the 50 sq. ft. bedroom requirement may be used for living
spaces within the dwelling unit.





 



Click here to view Table IIc in a PDF document.



§ 156.077 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The commercial and industrial uses listed in Table I are permitted in
districts indicated in § 156.075 when complying with the requirements of
Tables IIIa and IIIb and the provisions and exceptions of § 156.079; or when
in an approved Planned Unit Development District under §§ 156.105 through
156.109.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996) 
Penalty, see § 156.999



TABLE IIIa:  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL REQUIREMENTS



 


Districts

 
R2/CM
 
C1a
 
C1b
 
C2
 
C3
 
C3a
 
HS * (3)
 
I-1a
 
I-1b
 
I-2
 
OS (fp) and OS (ss)


USES


Commercial
 
Industrial * (4)




Minimum front yard
 
16'
 
15
 
15
 
5
 
60
 
40
 
40
 
15
 
40*(1)
 
40
 
15
 
40


Minimum side yard where lot adjoins residential district
 
15'
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
45
 
30
 
20
 
5
 
60
 
30
 
25
 
30


Minimum side yard where lot does not adjoin residential district
 
5'
 
*(2)
 
*(2)
 
*(2)
 
15
 
15
 
20
 
*(2)
 
15
 
20
 
15
 
20


Minimum street side yard
 
5'
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
45
 
30
 
20
 
15
 
40*(1)
 
40
 
15
 
40


Minimum rear yard
 
20'
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
45
 
30
 
20
 
15
 
30*(1)
 
30
 
15
 
30


Maximum building height
 
35'
 
35
 
35
 
80
 
50
 
35
 
60
 
50
 
50
 
80
 
60
 
80


Maximum lot coverage in percent of lot
 
35%
 
50%
 
50%
 
90%
 
35%
 
35%
 
50%
 
75%
 
75%
 
75%
 
50%
 
75%


Vision clearance on corners lots (see definitions)
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes
 
yes



RO - Residential-Office districts have the same requirements as residential
uses under Tables IIa through IIc.




*(1)   When abutting an existing or proposed major street or a
residentially zoned district - 60’.




*(2)   May build on property line but side yard must be at least 5 if not
built on property line.




*(3)   The HS district also includes the following requirements:




   (a)   Gasoline pump islands and lighting standards may not be closer
than 20’ to a front property line.




   (b)   Minimum lot size:




      Area: 1 acre




      Width: 150’




      Depth: 125’




   (c)   There shall be a minimum distance of 15’ between a main
building and an accessory building.




*(4)   Any industrial yard located between a building (the building line)
and the Ohio River shall be minimally 50’, measured on a horizontal plane.





 



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-72-485, passed 8-7-1972; Ord.
Z-76-636, passed 12-6-1976; Ord. Z-04-32, passed 6-17-2004)



Click here to view Table IIIa in a PDF document.



TABLE IIIb:  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS



 

Type of Use
 
Minimum Spaces Required




Addiction treatment facility
 
1 per 200 square feet of G.F.A


Automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, boat or farm implement sales and
service and repair (outdoor)
 
1 per 1,000 square feet used for retailing or storage


Automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, boat or farm implement sales and
service and repair (indoor)
 
1 per 200 square feet of G.F.A.


Auto service station
 
2 per garage bay plus 1 per 2 gasoline pumps1,2


Gasoline service station
 
1 per 2 gasoline pumps


Gasoline service station and convenience store
 
1 per 2 gasoline pumps and 1 per 200 square feet of G.F.A.


Car washes:
 
 


Automatic (conveyor)
 
1 20' stacking space for every 20' of tunnel space


Self-service
 
2 20' stacking spaces per washing stall


Offices (business, financial, banking and professional)
 
1 per 200 square feet G.L.A.


Boarding houses, lodging houses, bed and breakfast motels, hotels and motels
 
1 per sleeping room


Fraternity, sorority or student cooperative houses
 
1 per 3 occupants


Bowling alley
 
3 per lane and 1 per 6 spectator seats


Church, temple, synagogue or other place for religious services, stadium,
coliseum or auditorium
 
1 per 4 seats in the main auditorium or 1 space per 50 square feet of the
largest place of assembly where removable seats are used


Hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes
 
1 per 4 beds plus 2 per 3 employees on the largest shift


Clinics, medical emergency centers, and out-patient facilities
 
1 per 150 square feet of G.F.A.


Funeral homes, mortuaries
 
1 per 250 square feet of G.F.A.


Industrial, wholesale, manufacturing, processing, warehousing and storage
 
1 per 2 employees for the combined employment of the two largest shifts


Truck freight terminal, distribution center
 
1 per 2 employees plus 4 for customers, of which at least one shall be
handicapped accessible


Outdoor commercial recreational uses
 
1 per 3 employees and 1 per 500 square feet of use area


Police station, fire station, rescue squad station
 
1 per 3 employees on the largest shift


Private club, lodge, fraternity or sorority
 
1 per 6 active members


Public library, museum, cultural center
 
1 per 300 square feet of G.F.A.


Sewage disposal plant
 
1 per employee on the largest shift


Broadcast tower, station
 
1 per employee on the largest shift


Telephone exchange, public utility substation
 
1 per employee on the largest shift


Retail sales and service establishments up to 50,000 square feet
 
1 per 200 square feet of G.L.A.


Retail sales and service establishments in excess of 50,000 square feet
 
1 per 225 square feet of G.L.A.


Educational:
 



   School, non-driving age students
 
1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 5 children


   School, driving age students, college, university, trade or business
school
 
1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 3 students3


Barber shop, beauty salon
 
3 per chair


Restaurant:
 



   Sit-down
 
14 per 1,000 square feet or 1 per 4 seats, whichever is greater


   Carry-out only
 
10 spaces


   Combination sit-down/carry-out
 
10 plus 14 per 1,000 square feet


Stand-alone drive-up vending machines
 
3 20' stacking spaces


Clinics, medical emergency centers, and out- patient facilities
 
1 per 150 square feet of G.F.A.


Opioid treatment facility
 
1 per 125 square feet of G.F.A


Mixed-use proposals
 
At least the sum of the spaces required for each


Any use not otherwise listed
 
At the direction of the Board of Zoning Appeals


1.   Parking spaces are those spaces separate from the gasoline pumps. The
pads used for filling the gasoline shall not be considered a parking space.


2.   A gasoline pump shall be defined as a device for delivering a refined
petroleum product through one individual nozzle.


3.   Parking demand shall be calculated using total student enrollment of
the school, not just driving age student enrollment.


4.   Parking in the R-2/CM district shall be located in the rear yard
only. Off-street parking shall be at 90 degrees to the alley on all lots less
than 60 feet in width. In lots of 60 feet or more in width, parking and
circulation surface areas cannot exceed 25% lot coverage.




 



Click here to view Table IIIb in a PDF document.



   (A)   A minimum of three parking spaces shall be provided for any
non-residential active use. For any combined use, the total requirements
equal the sum of the individual parking use requirements that occur
concurrently. If the uses are non-concurrent in nature, the larger of the
requirements shall be used.



   (B)   Each parking space required by this section shall be at least
ten feet wide and 20 feet long, exclusive of driving lanes, access lanes,
landscaping areas and walkways.



   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically indicated, all square footage
(square feet) measurements are for the gross floor area. Gross floor area,
(G.F.A.), is the total enclosed area within a building and includes upper
floors.



   (D)   For retail sales and service establishments with common areas,
the square footage (square feet) measurements are to be applied to the gross
leasable areas (G.L.A.). The G.L.A. is the total floor area designed for
tenant's occupancy and exclusive use and includes storage areas. The G.L.A.
includes upper floors, basements and mezzanines and excludes common areas
such as mall areas, stairways, public restrooms and elevators.



(Ord. Z-91-283, passed 7-18-1991; Ord. Z-04-32, passed 6-17-2004; Ord.
Z-12-14, passed 7-19-2012; Ord. Z-12-25, passed 10-22-2012; Ord. Z-17-02,
passed 3-16-2017)



§ 156.078  INDUSTRIAL USES.



   The industrial uses defined below, including accessory buildings and
uses, are permitted in the districts indicated in Table I when complying with
the requirements of Tables IIIa and IIIb, the provisions and exceptions of §
156.079, and the requirements of this section or when in an approved Planned
Unit Development District under §§ 156.105 through 156.109. The
restrictions of this section shall not apply to the activities of site
preparation or construction, the maintenance, repair, alteration,
modification or improvement of buildings, equipment or other improvements on
or within the lot line; the operation of motor vehicles or other facilities
for the transportation of personnel, materials or products; conditions beyond
the control of the user such as fire, explosion, accidents, failure or
breakdown of equipment or facilities or emergencies; safety or emergency
warning signals or alarms necessary for the protection of life, limb or
property. The performance standards applicable to the district in which an
operation or facility is located shall be used in determining the compliance
or noncompliance of the operation of facility with such standards.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity or loudness of
sound. Sound level meters are used to measure the intensities and are
calibrated in decibels.



      FLASH POINT. The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid
under prescribed conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will burn
momentarily using the closed cup method.



      FOOT CANDLE. A unit of illumination. It is equivalent to the
illumination at all points which are one foot distant from a uniform point
source of one candle-power.



      FREE BURNING. A rate of combustion described by a material which
burns actively and easily supports combustion.



      INTENSE BURNING. A rate of combustion described  by a material
that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.



      MODERATE BURNING. A rate of combustion described by a material
which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.



      OCTAVE BAND. A term denoting all of the frequencies from one
given frequency to a second. In sound octave bands, the second frequency is
usually twice the first one.



      OCTAVE BAND FILTER. An electrical device which separates the
sounds in each octave band and presents them to the sound level meter.



      PARTICULATE MATTER. Finely divided liquid or solid material which
is discharged and carried along in the air.



      RESIDENCE DISTRICT. A district designated primarily for
residential use in this chapter.



      RESULTANT DISPLACEMENT. The maximum amount of motion in any
direction and shall be determined by means of any three-component
(simultaneous) measuring system approved by the Commission.



      RINGELMANN NUMBER. The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart
that most nearly matches the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. The
Ringelmann chart is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information
Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in
estimating smoke density. Smoke below the density of Ringelmann No. 1 shall
be considered no smoke or Ringelmann No. 0.



      SLOW BURNING OR INCOMBUSTIBLE. Materials which do not in
themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material
which will not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for
five minutes to a temperature of 1,200°F.



      SMOKE. Small gas borne particles resulting from incomplete
combustion, consisting predominantly of carbon and other incombustible
material, excluding metallurgical fume and dust, and present in sufficient
quantity to be observable independently of the presence of other solids.



      SMOKE UNIT. The number obtained when the smoke density in
Ringelmann number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the
purpose of this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at
least once a minute during the period of observation; each reading is then
multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed. The various
products are then added together to give the total number of smoke units
observed during the entire observation period.



      THREE COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM. Instrumentation which can
measure earthborne vibrations in three directions, that is, vibration
occurring in a horizontal as well as a vertical plane.



      VIBRATION. Oscillatory motion transmitted through the ground.



   (B)   Light industry. A light industrial use is one which creates a
minimum amount of nuisance outside the plant; is conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings, does not use the open area around the buildings for
storage of raw materials or manufactured products or for any other industrial
purpose other than transporting goods between buildings; provides for
enclosed loading and unloading facilities; and the use conforms to the
following performance standards.



      (1)   Light industrial restrictions: Smoke. The emission of
more than ten smoke units per hour per stack and emissions in excess of
Ringelmann No. 2 are prohibited. However, once during any 24-hour period, for
soot blowing, process purging and fire cleaning, each stack shall be
permitted an additional ten smoke units, during which time smoke up to and
including Ringelmann No. 3 is permitted.



      (2)   Light industrial restrictions:  Particulate matter.



         (a)   No industrial operation or activity shall
discharge or cause to be discharged any contaminants unless in conformance
with the provisions of the Indiana Air Pollution Control Law (Chapter 171,
Acts of 1961, as amended) and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and any
applicable acts of the Federal Government.



         (b)   Specifically, those regulations which apply to
Floyd County and are currently in effect are APC Regulations 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7
and 11.



      (3)   Light industrial restrictions:  Odor. No activity or
operation shall permit odors to be released which shall be detectable at the
lot line.



      (4)   Light industrial restrictions:  Toxic and noxious
materials. The emission of toxic and noxious materials may not produce any
concentration at a residence or business district boundary line exceeding the
following percentage of the threshold limit values for toxic materials in
industry as set forth in Threshold Limit Values for the current year, as
adopted at the annual meeting of the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists: Light industrial use:  3%.



      (5)   Light industrial restrictions: Glare and heat. No
industrial operation, activity or structure shall cause intense heat in such
a manner as to be a public nuisance or hazard across lot lines. No industrial
operation, activity or structure shall cause illumination at or beyond any
residence district boundary in excess of 0.1 foot candle.



      (6)   Light industrial restrictions:  Vibration.



         (a)   Any industrial operation or activity which shall
cause at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line,
earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column I (below)
are prohibited. In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall
cause at any time and at any point along a residence district boundary line,
earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column II are
prohibited. Vibration shall be expressed as resultant displacement in inches.



 

Frequency (Cycles per Second)
 

I
Displacement (Inches)

 

II
Displacement (Inches)



Below 10
 

.0008

 

.0004



10 to 20
 

.0005

 

.0002



20 to 30
 

.0002

 

.0001



30 to 40
 

.0002

 

.0001



40 and over
 

.0001

 

.0001




 



         (b)   The above tabulation is for steady state
vibration; this is defined as continuous vibration in contrast to discrete
pulses. Impact vibration, that is, discrete pulses which do not exceed 100
pulses per minute, shall not produce in excess of twice (two times) the
displacement stipulated above.



      (7)   Light industrial restrictions: Noise.



         (a)   1.   At no point on the boundary of a residence
or business district shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant
(other than background noises produced by sources not under control of this
chapter, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation
facilities) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below.



 


Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second)

 

I
Maximum Permitted Sound Level Along Residence District Boundaries (In
Decibels)

 

II
Maximum Permitted Sound Level Along Business District Boundaries (In Decibels)





20 to 75
 

72

 

79



75 to 150
 

67

 

74



150 to 300
 

59

 

66



300 to 600
 

52

 

59



600 to 1,200
 

46

 

53



1,200 to 2,400
 

40

 

47



2,400 to 4,800
 

34

 

41



Above 4,800
 

32

 

39





 



            2.   The prescribed limits of column I are
applicable between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. At other times the
allowable levels shall be reduced by six decibels in every octave band.



         (b)   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level
meter and associated octave band filter, manufactured in compliance with
standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. When sounds are
of such short duration as not to be measured accurately with the sound-level
meter, the impact noise analyzer as manufactured under standards of the
American Standards Association shall be used to determine the peak value of
the impact. Impacts shall meet the noise performance standards.



      (8)   Light industrial restrictions:  Fire hazards.



         (a)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted
provided the following condition is met:



         (b)   The materials or products shall be stored,
utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having
incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire
extinguishing system.



         (c)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of
flammable liquids or gases* which produce flammable or explosive vapors,
shall be permitted in accordance with Table IV (exclusive of storage of
finished products in original sealed containers).



TABLE IV:  TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED, GALLONS*



 

Industries Engaged in Storage andDistribution of Such Materials
 
Above Ground
 
Under Ground




Materials having a flash point above 190°F
 
Prohibited
 
100,000


From and including 105°F to and including 190-3/4°F
 
Prohibited
 
40,000


Materials having a flash point below 105°F
 
Prohibited
 
20,000


Industries Engaged In Utilization and Manufacture of Such Materials


Materials having a flash point above 190°F
 
10,000
 
50,000


From and including 105°F to and including 190°F
 
1,000
 
20,000


Materials having a flash point below 105°F
 
500
 
10,000


*When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed
300 times the quantities listed above.




 



   (C)   Heavy industry. A heavy industrial use is one which requires
both buildings and open area for manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of equipment,
raw materials, manufacture products or wastes and land and/or buildings in
this district shall be used so as to comply to the following performance
standards.



      (1)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Smoke. The emission of
more than 30 smoke units per hour per stack and emissions in excess of
Ringelmann No. 2 are prohibited. However, once during any six-hour period,
for soot blowing, process purging and fire cleaning, each stack shall be
permitted an additional ten smoke units, during which time smoke up to and
including Ringelmann No. 3 is permitted.



      (2)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Particulate matter.



         (a)   No industrial operation or activity shall
discharge or cause to be discharged, any contaminants unless in conformance
with the provisions of the Indiana Air Pollution Control Law (Chapter 171,
Acts of 1961, as amended), being I.C. 13-17-3, and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and any applicable acts of the federal government.



         (b)   Specifically those regulations which apply to the
county and are currently in effect are APC regulations 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and
11.



      (3)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Odor. No activity or
operation shall permit odors to be released which shall be detectable at any
residence district boundary line. In addition, the odor, when measured at the
lot line, shall be rendered undetectable by mixing one volume of the odorous
air with four volumes of clean air.



      (4)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Toxic materials. For a
heavy industrial use, the emission of toxic and noxious materials may not
produce any concentration at a residence or business district boundary line
exceeding the following percentage of the threshold limit values for toxic
materials in industry as set forth in "Threshold Limit Values" for the
current year, as adopted at the annual meeting of the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists: Heavy Industrial Use: 30%.



      (5)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Glare and heat. The
standards regulating glare and heat for a light industrial use shall apply to
a heavy industrial use.



      (6)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Vibration.



         (a)   1.   Any industrial operation or activity which
shall cause at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line,
earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in column I (below)
is prohibited. In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall
cause at any time and at any point along a residence district boundary line,
earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in column II is
prohibited.



            2.   Vibration shall be expressed as resultant
displacement in inches.



 

Frequency (Cycles per Second)
 

I
Displacement (Inches)

 

II
Displacement (Inches)



Below 10
 

.0020

 

.0004



10 to 20
 

.0010

 

.0002



20 to 30
 

.0006

 

.0001



30 to 40
 

.0004

 

.0001



40 to 50
 

.0003

 

.0001



50 and over
 

.0002

 

.0001




 



      (b)   The above tabulation is for steady state vibration; this
is defined as continuous vibration in contrast to discrete pulses. Impact
vibration, that is, discrete pulses which do not exceed 100 impulses per
minute, shall not produce in excess of twice (two times) the displacement
stipulated above.



      (7)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Noise.



         (a)   At no point on the boundary of a residence or
business district shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant
(other than background noises produced by sources not under control of this
chapter) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below:



 

Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second)
 

I
Maximum Permitted Sound Level Along Residence District Boundaries (In
Decibels)

 

II
Maximum Permitted Sound Level Along Business District Boundaries (in Decibels)





20 to 75
 

74

 

81



75 to 150
 

69

 

76



150 to 300
 

65

 

72



300 to 600
 

60

 

67



600 to 1200
 

56

 

63



1200 to 2400
 

50

 

57



2400 to 4800
 

44

 

51



Above 4800
 

42

 

49





 



         (b)   The prescribed limits of column I are applicable
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. At other times the allowable
levels shall be reduced by six decibels in every octave band.



         (c)   Sound levels shall be measured in the manner
prescribed for this standard for a light industrial use.



      (8)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Fire hazards.



         (a)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials ranging
from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided the
materials shall be stored, utilized or manufactured in a manner approved by
the state's Fire Marshal and the state's Administrative Building Council.



         (b)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of
flammable liquids or gases, which produce flammable or explosive vapors shall
be permitted in accordance with Table V (exclusive of storage of finished
products in original sealed containers).



TABLE V:  TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED, GALLONS*



 

Industries Engaged in Storage andDistribution of Such Materials
 
Above Ground
 
Under Ground




Materials having a flash point above 190°F
 
100,000
 
400,000


From and including 105°F to and including 190°F
 
50,000
 
200,000


Materials having a flash point below 105°F
 
20,000
 
100,000


Industries Engaged in Utilization and Manufacture of Such Materials


Materials having a flash point above 190°F
 
50,000
 
400,000


From and including 105°F to and including 190°F
 
10,000
 
200,000


Materials having a flash point below 105°F
 
5,000
 
100,000


*When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed
300 times the quantities listed above.




 



      (9)   Heavy industrial restrictions:  Water pollution. No
industrial operation or activity shall discharge, or cause to be discharged,
liquid or solid wastes into public waters unless in conformance with the
provisions of the Stream Pollution Control Law of the State of Indiana
(Chapter 214, Acts of 1943 as amended), being I.C. 13-18-3, and the
regulations promulgated thereunder. Plans and specifications for proposed
sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal facilities shall be
submitted to and approval obtained from the Stream Pollution Control Board of
the state.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996) 
Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.079  ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Accessory buildings.



      (1)   Accessory buildings are permitted in all districts, but
not prior to the erection of the principal building.



      (2)   No accessory building to a residential use shall be
located closer to a side lot line than three feet nor exceed 18 feet in
height and, if detached from the principal building shall be set back at
least 15 feet from the principal building.



      (3)   An accessory building located on the rear lot line of a
corner lot shall set back from the side street as far as the dwelling on the
reversed interior lot.



      (4)   No more than one accessory building, including a
detached private garage, shall be permitted on any single-family dwelling
lot. The ground floor area of such an accessory building shall not exceed the
lesser of the ground floor area of the principal structure or 1,000 square
feet.



   (B)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses such as walks, driveways,
curbs, retaining walls, mail boxes, name plates (not exceeding 12 inches by
12 inches), lamp posts, bird baths and structures of a like nature are
permitted in any required front, side or rear yard. Fences, lattice-work,
screens, hedges or walls not more than seven feet in height may be located in
the required side or rear yard. Only fences of not more than four feet in
height may be located in any required front yard. However, no fence shall be
erected or altered on a corner or other lot in such a manner that obstructs
or in any way hinders the vision of a vehicle driver. Hedges, maintained not
to exceed three feet in height may be located in any required front yard.
However, no hedge shall be planted or maintained on a corner or other lot in
such a manner that obstructs or in any way hinders the vision of a vehicle
driver. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the
construction or maintenance of a fence of any height in connection with an
agricultural use. Trees, shrubs, flowers or plants, except as otherwise
herein regulated, shall be permitted in any required front, side or rear
yard. Any constructed or otherwise erected accessory use shall be of
substantial materials and shall be maintained in a state of good repair.



   (C)   Area and width. A single-family dwelling may be located on any
lot in any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted if the lot
was in single ownership or included in a subdivision which was of record in
the office of the county recorder prior to August 25, 1958, even though the
lot does not have the minimum lot width or the maximum lot area specified for
the district.



   (D)   Rear yard. One half of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may
be included in the rear yard, but such alley space shall not be included for
loading or unloading berths.



   (E)   Front yard.



      (1)   Where 25% or more of the lots in the block face are
occupied by principal buildings, the average setback of the buildings,
including porches, determines the dimension of the front yard.



      (2)   Front yard or setback lines established in a recorded
subdivision shall establish the dimension of front yard in such subdivisions,
except when the setback lines are less restrictive than the requirements in
§§ 156.076 and 156.077, Tables IIa through IIc and IIIa and IIIb.



      (3)   On through lots the front yard is established by the
existing principal buildings in the block.



   (F)   Height.



      (1)   In the districts limiting height to 25 feet, a
single-family dwelling may be increased in height not to exceed 35 feet;
provided, the required side yards are increased an additional foot for each
two feet the structure exceeds 25 feet in height.



      (2)   The maximum height requirement in commercial and
industrial districts may be increased if the minimum yard requirements are
increased one foot for each two feet of additional height above the maximum
height requirement.



      (3)   Chimneys, cooling towers, spires, church steeples,
elevator bulkheads, fire towers, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers,
transmission towers or essential mechanical appurtenances may exceed the
height requirement of the district by 30%.



   (G)   Parking.



      (1)   Vehicle parking requirements may be waived by the Board
where 50% or more of the area in a block was occupied by business or
industrial structures which do not provide on-site parking, at the time of
passage of this chapter.



      (2)   Groups of users requiring parking spaces may join in
establishing group parking. Capacity for the group parking shall aggregate
that required for each participating use. Acceptable evidence of such an
agreement shall be submitted in writing.



      (3)   All parking areas, circulation areas, loading and
unloading berths shall be paved with a hard, dustproof surface.



      (4)   Every car, truck, tractor, trailer or other vehicle used
in the conduct of a business and stored at the business site shall be
provided an off-street storage space which does not conflict with the
off-street parking demand for that use. The space shall not be counted
towards meeting the off-street parking requirements set forth in Table IIIb.



      (5)   Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and
two-family dwellings, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so
designed and be of the size that no vehicle is required to back into a public
street, excluding alleys to gain egress.



      (6)   (a)   Every commercial and industrial use shall
provide disabled-accessible parking according to the following schedule:



 

Total Number of Parking Spaces in Facility
 
Minimum Number of Reserved Spaces




30 to 75
 
1


76 to 100
 
2


101 to 150
 
3


151 to 200
 
4


201 to 300
 
5


301 to 400
 
6


401 to 500
 
7


501 to 1,000
 
8


1,000 or more
 
10




 



         (b)   The spaces shall be of at least the minimum
dimensions as follows: 13 feet wide by 18 feet deep. The width dimension
shall be constructed as a minimum of 8 feet stall width and 5 feet access
aisle width. The spaces shall be located along the shortest, most direct
route to an accessible entrance into the facility. Such spaces shall be
clearly marked with the international symbol of accessibility.



   (H)   Buffering and landscaping.



      (1)   Any part of a lot not used for buildings, off-street
parking, loading and maneuvering areas, drives and pedestrian walks or
agricultural purposes shall be landscaped with a lawn or other planted ground
cover which may include trees and shrubs.



      (2)   Where a commercial or industrial use or off-street
parking area abuts a residential district it shall be screened in such a
manner as to prevent any adverse effects to the residential property caused
by light, glare, noise and the like arising from the commercial or industrial
use.



   (I)   Single-family dwellings.



      (1)   All single-family dwellings shall exceed 23 feet in
width for at least 32 feet of their length.



      (2)   All single-family dwellings shall be connected to
utilities in accordance with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code, and local
regulations and requirements.



      (3)   All single-family dwellings shall be placed on a
permanent foundation in accordance with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code.



      (4)   If a single-family dwelling is not designed to be
installed on a permanent perimeter foundation, a permanent perimeter
enclosure-retaining wall shall be installed in addition to the permanent
foundation. This permanent perimeter enclosure-retaining wall shall be
constructed in a manner and with materials customarily used for permanent
perimeter foundations of site-built homes built in accordance with the One
and Two Family Dwelling Code.



   (J)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   Class A. A manufactured home shall be considered a Class
A manufactured home and equivalent to a single-family dwelling when it
complies with the following minimum requirements:



         (a)   The home is located either in a subdivision
granted final plat approval on or after July 1, 1982; or on a lot approved by
the Board of Zoning Appeals through special exception as set forth in §
156.090 of this chapter. The Board may not grant approval unless it
determines that the roofing and siding materials of the home to be placed on
the lot will be in aesthetic character with other homes within its immediate
vicinity;



         (b)   The home was manufactured on or after January 1,
1981;



         (c)   The home has met all requirements of this chapter
for single-family dwellings;



         (d)   The home is anchored to the ground in accordance
with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code and in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications;



         (e)   The home has had any wheels, axles and hitch
mechanisms removed;



         (f)   The home is sided in a manner and with a material
which is customarily used in the construction of new, site-built,
single-family dwellings within the jurisdiction of this chapter. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall maintain a listing of acceptable siding materials;



         (g)   The home is roofed in a manner and with a roofing
material which is customarily used in the construction of new, site-built,
single-family dwellings within the jurisdiction of this chapter. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall maintain a listing of acceptable roofing materials;
and



         (h)   The home exceeds 950 square feet of ground floor
area.



      (2)   Class B. All other manufactured homes shall meet the
following minimum requirements:



         (a)   The home shall be located either in a Planned Unit
Development District in accordance with §§ 156.105 through 156.109; or on a
lot approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals for temporary use of the home in
accordance with § 156.142 of this chapter;



         (b)   The home shall be connected to utilities in
accordance with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code;



         (c)   The home shall be placed on a permanent foundation
in accordance with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code or on a temporary
system in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer;



         (d)   The home shall be anchored to the ground in
accordance with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code, and in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications; and



         (e)   The space between the floor joists and ground
shall be completely enclosed with siding or skirting in a manner and of a
durable nature subject to approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



      (3)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes are not permitted
in the Historic District (HD) overlay zone.



   (K)   Billboards. All billboards erected shall comply with the
agreement between the state and the U.S. Secretary of Commerce as per I.C.
8-23-20-1 and all acts or agreements amendatory thereto except where this
code poses a greater restriction.



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   No billboard shall be located beyond 300 feet of
the right-of-way of an interstate highway.



         (b)   No billboard shall be located within 100 feet of a
residential zoning district.



         (c)   No billboard shall be located within the
interstate scenic corridor, the corridor lying within 300 feet of the
right-of-way of any interstate highway, excluding therefrom any area so zoned
as to authorize a billboard as a permitted use.



         (d)   No billboard shall be located within 500 feet of
an interchange, the 500 feet to be measured along the interstate from the
beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the
main traveled way.



         (e)   A billboard shall be located a minimum of 15 feet
from the right-of-way of any city street, state highway or interstate highway.



         (f)   No billboard shall be located on a state or
national designated scenic route or byway, including the Ohio River Scenic
Byway and any other scenic routes and byways which may be designated in the
future.



      (2)   Spacing. No billboard shall be erected within 1,500 feet
of another billboard on the same side of an interstate highway, the 1,500
feet to be measured along the interstate between points essentially
perpendicular to the center of the billboard facings.



      (3)   Size.



         (a)   A billboard facing may contain up to 672 square
feet with a maximum height of 14 feet and maximum length of 48 feet. In
addition, embellishments are permitted not to exceed 80 square feet per
facing.



         (b)   A billboard may contain up to two facings;
provided that, the rears of the two facings are so positioned that they do
not create an acute angle greater than 30 degrees.



         (c)   A billboard shall contain no more than one
advertisement per facing.



         (d)   A billboard facing shall be elevated at least ten
feet above the ground.



      (4)   Lighting.



         (a)   Billboards which contain, include or are
illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights are
prohibited, except those giving public service information such as time,
date, temperature, weather or similar information.



         (b)   Billboards which are not effectively shielded to
prevent beams or rays of light from being directed to any portion of the
traveled ways of any city street, state highway or interstate highway and
which are of an intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with
any driver's operation of a motor vehicle, are prohibited.



      (5)   Construction.



         (a)   Any billboard erected shall be of a monopole
design and of structural metal construction.



         (b)   Exclusive of its facings, any billboard erected
shall be of a dark, earth-tone or neutral color.



         (c)   Any billboard erected shall possess security
devices to reasonably deter access by children and other unauthorized
individuals.



      (6)   Landscaping. The site of any freestanding billboard or
billboard located within the front yard or street side yard of a commercial
development shall be landscaped with evergreen bushes, shrubs or trees within
ten feet of the billboard standard.



      (7)   Electronic billboards.



         (a)   Duration. The full billboard image or any portion
thereof must have a minimum duration of six seconds and must be a static
display. No portion of the image may flash, scroll, twirl, change color, in
any manner imitate movement, or meet the characteristics of a flashing sign;



         (b)   Transition. Where the full billboard image or any
portion thereof changes, the change sequence must be accomplished by means of
instantaneous re-pixalization;



         (c)   Brightness. The sign must not exceed a maximum
illumination of 460 foot-candles during daylight hours and a maximum
illumination of 46 foot-candles for the time period between one half-hour
before sunset and one half-hour after sunrise as measured at grade within ten
feet of the sign's face at maximum brightness;



         (d)   Dimmer control. Electronic graphic display signs
must have an automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination
change from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period
between one half-hour before sunset and one half-hour after sunrise;



         (e)   Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers or any form
of pyrotechnics are prohibited in association with a billboard;



         (f)   Fluctuating or flashing illumination. No portion
of any billboard may fluctuate in light intensity or use intermittent, strobe
or moving light or light that changes in intensity in sudden transitory
bursts, streams, zooms, twinkles, sparkles or in any manner that creates the
illusion of movement;



         (g)   Video display. No portion of any billboard may
change its message or background in a manner or by a method of display
characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, or depicts action or a special
effect to imitate movement, or the presentation of pictorials or graphics
displayed in a progression of frames that give the illusion of motion or the
illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light or expanding or
contracting shapes;



         (h)   Location. Electronic billboards are subject to the
same zoning restrictions as other billboards. Additionally, electronic
billboards may not be located within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning
district;



         (i)   All nonconforming billboards shall be kept in good
repair, safe, neat, clean and attractive condition. In the event signs are
not kept in said condition or are demolished by any force whatsoever to the
extent of 50% of their use, said signs shall then conform to this chapter;



         (j)   Nonconforming billboards which are structurally
altered, relocated or replaced shall comply immediately with all provisions
of this code.



   (L)   Signs.



      (1)   Locational prohibitions.



         (a)   No sign shall be erected or maintained in any form
or at any location where it may obstruct or in any way interfere with the
view of traffic or in any way interfere with the view of or be confused with
any authorized traffic-control device.



         (b)   No sign shall be located in any public
right-of-way; except that a sign may be located in a public right-of-way if
approved by the appropriate governing body.



         (c)   No sign shall project into any public
right-of-way; except that an on-premises wall sign may be permitted to
project into the right-of-way from the face of a building if approved by the
appropriate governing body.



      (2)   Performance and structural prohibitions.



         (a)   Signs which direct attention through the use of
flashing lights or strobe light effects are prohibited.



         (b)   The source of light of any illuminated sign shall
not be directed into any residential district or toward traffic in a public
way.



         (c)   Signs advertising activities which are illegal
under federal, state or city laws or regulations are prohibited.



         (d)   Signs which are deteriorated, leaning or derelict
or structurally or mechanically unsafe by reason of inadequate maintenance,
age, abandonment or breach of applicable state or local codes are prohibited.



         (e)   All temporary business signs, excepting those as
herein permitted, are prohibited.



         (f)   Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers or any form
of pyrotechnics are prohibited in association with a sign.



         (g)   Fluctuating or flashing illumination. No portion
of any sign may fluctuate in light intensity or use intermittent, strobe or
moving light or light that changes in intensity in sudden transitory bursts,
streams, zooms, twinkles, sparkles or in any manner that creates the illusion
of movement.



         (h)   Video display. No portion of any sign may change
its message or background in a manner or by a method of display characterized
by motion or pictorial imagery, or depicts action or a special effect to
imitate movement, or the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in
a progression of frames that give the illusion of motion or the illusion of
moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light or expanding or contracting
shapes.



         (i)   All nonconforming signs shall be kept in good
repair, safe, neat, clean and attractive condition. In the event signs are
not kept in said condition or are demolished by any force whatsoever to the
extent of 50% of their use, said signs shall then conform to this chapter.



         (j)   Nonconforming signs which are structurally
altered, relocated or replaced shall comply immediately with all provisions
of this Code.



      (3)   Declaration of public nuisance and hazard and removal of
prohibited signs. Any sign which violates any of the above locational,
performance and structural prohibitions may be declared a public nuisance and
hazard by the Zoning Officer and, if so declared, shall be removed at the
expense of the owner.



      (4)   Signs permitted in all districts.



         (a)   Multi-family dwelling, subdivision or mobile home
signs. Signs located at the drive or entrance to a multi-family dwelling
complex, subdivision or mobile home development identifying the name or
address of the development and containing no other information.



         (b)   Construction signs. Any signs announcing the names
of architects, engineers, contractors, or other individuals or firms involved
with the construction, alteration or repair of a building or announcing the
character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is
intended.



         (c)   Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a
nation, state, municipality or organization.



         (d)   Garage, yard or other temporary sales signs.
Rummage sale or other temporary sale signs clearly incidental to the primary
use of the premises.



         (e)   Holiday signs. Signs or displays which contain or
depict a message pertaining to a national or state holiday and no other
information.



         (f)   Real estate signs. Any signs announcing the name
of the owner, manager, realtor or other person directly involved in the sale
or rental of the property or announcing the purpose or conditions for which
it is being offered.



         (g)   Institutional signs. Any sign or bulletin board
setting forth or denoting the name of or simple announcement for any
charitable organization.



         (h)   Integral signs. Names of buildings, dates of
construction, commemorative tablets, and  similar signs, when carved into
stone, concrete or similar material or when made of bronze, aluminum or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the building or
structure.



         (i)   Nameplates and address signs. Signs which identify
the owner, resident, manager, business home occupation, or address of the
premises where the sign is located and contain no other information.



         (j)   Political campaign signs. Temporary signs
announcing candidates seeking public political office and other data
pertinent thereto.



         (k)   Public event signs. Temporary signs announcing any
public, charitable, educational or religious event or function as permitted
in accordance with division (L)(6) of this section.



         (l)   Public information signs. Signs including safety
signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, entrance and exit signs, signs
indicating scenic or historical points of interest, memorial plaques, and all
signs erected by or on order of a public officer in the performance of a
public duty.



      (5)   Business signs provisions.



         (a)   Any business located in the RO, C-1a, C-1b, C-2,
HS, I-1a, I-1b or I-2 Districts may erect or maintain one wall sign and one
ground or pole sign; except that, in the case of a business located on a
corner lot, two wall signs and two ground or pole signs shall be permitted,
one for each street frontage.



         (b)   A ground sign may not be located closer than
one-half the minimum front yard requirement of the zoning district in which
the business is located, but not less than five feet.



         (c)   A pole sign may be located in any required front
yard, except that no portion of the sign may extend above a public
right-of-way and the location of the sign shall meet the definition of vision
clearance on corner lots.



         (d)   A ground or pole sign shall conform to the side
and rear yard requirements of the zoning district in which the business is
located, except that a pole sign may be located in the street side yard
provided that the location of the sign meets the definition of vision
clearance on corner of lots.



         (e)   Businesses located within the C-3 and C-3a
Districts or within a shopping center approved in a Planned Unit Development
District may erect and maintain one wall sign per business. In addition, a
shopping center may erect one pole or ground sign for the common use of the
shopping center businesses. An additional pole or ground sign for common use
is permitted for every 150 feet of road frontage over 150 feet.



         (f)   No illuminated business sign shall be located
closer than 50 feet to any residential district.



         (g)   No business sign shall exceed the minimum building
height requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.



      (6)   Temporary sign provisions.



         (a)   One temporary sign for a business or public event
may be located for a period of not  more than 30 days, three times annually,
with a minimum of 60 days between periods; provided, the issuance of a
temporary sign permit by the Zoning Officer. In the case of a grand opening
for a new business, the initial period may be for up to 90 days.



         (b)   Any temporary sign permitted shall be located,
installed and maintained in accordance with all other provisions of this
section and other applicable state and local codes.



         (c)   Any temporary sign maintained in excess of the
time limit of the permit or otherwise in conflict with any provisions of this
section may be declared a nuisance and hazard and is subject to removal by
the Zoning Officer, at the expense of the owner.



         (d)   All temporary signs not meeting the requirements
of this section are hereby declared a public nuisance and hazard and shall be
removed within 180 days of the passage of this chapter, unless a temporary
sign permit is secured in accordance with § 156.144.



   (M)   Sexually oriented businesses.



      (1)   Purpose and findings.



         (a)   Purpose.



            1.   The purpose of this division is to regulate
sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult
uses within the city.



            2.   The provisions of this division have neither
the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of, or reasonable access to, any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials.



            3.   Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the
effect of this division to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution or Article I, § 9, of the Indiana Constitution, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market.



            4.   Neither is it the intent or the effect of
this division to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.



         (b)   Findings.



            1.   This division is based on the city's general
police power, as well as on the evidence of the adverse secondary effects of
sexually oriented enterprises, which is within the common knowledge of
municipalities and is widely reported in judicial opinions, media reports,
land use studies and crime impact reports made available to the Common
Council, several of which are set forth within Ord. Z-04-20.



            2.   Additionally, the Common Council relies upon
repeated judicial findings of municipalities' reasonable reliance on this
body of secondary effects evidence to support time, place and manner
regulations of sexually oriented businesses.



            3.   The Common Council relies upon and
incorporates the findings of secondary effects discussed in the following
non-exhaustive list of cases:  City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc.,
535 U.S. 425 (2004); Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini
Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Sewell v.
Georgia, 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial
federal question; 435 U.S. 982 (1978); Schultz v. City of Cumberland, 26
F.Supp.2d 1128 (W.D. Wisc. 1998), aff'd in part, rev'd in part, 228 F.3d 831
(7th Cir. 2000); Blue Canary Corp. v. City of Milwaukee, 270 F.3d 1156 (7th
Cir. 2001); Matney v. County of Kenosha, 86 F.3d 692 (7th Cir. 1996); Berg v.
Health & Hospital Corp., 865 F.2d 797 (1989); DiMa Corp. v. Town of Hallie,
185 F.3d 823 (1999); Entertainment Concepts v. Maciejewski, 631 F.2d 497
(1980); Genusa v. City of Peoria, 619 F.2d 1203 (1980); Graff v. City of
Chicago, 9 F.3d 1309 (1993); North Avenue Novelties, Inc. v. City of Chicago,
88 F.3d 441 (1996); Chulchian v. City of Indianapolis, 633 F.2d 27 (7th Cir.
1980); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 227 F.Supp.2d
1143 (E.D. Wash. 2004) (including exhibits cited therein); Bigg Wolf Discount
Video v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); County of Cook
v. Renaissance Arcade and Bookstore, 122 III. 2d 123 (1988) (including cases
cited therein); and other cases; and on reports regarding secondary effects
from the following jurisdictions, including but not limited to:  Garden
Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier,
California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-1998;
Minneapolis, Minnesota -1980; Houston, Texas - 1997; Indianapolis, Indiana -
1984; Centralia, Washington - 2003; Amarillo, Texas; Seattle, Washington -
1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; and Dallas, Texas - 1997; Alliance,
Ohio - 2002; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Greensboro, North Carolina -
2003; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York
Times Square study - 1994; and also on findings from the Report of the
Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Adult Uses (June 6,
1989, State of Minnesota);



            4.   The Council finds:



               a.   Sexually oriented businesses should be
segregated from one another by a minimum distance, and are further
inappropriate for locations in close proximity to houses of worship, schools,
day-care centers and residential neighborhoods because sexually oriented
businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide
variety of adverse secondary effects, including but not limited to, personal
and property crimes, illicit and unsanitary sexual activity, illicit drug
use, decreased desirability of and negative impacts on the use of surrounding
properties, urban blight, litter and sexual assault and exploitation.



               b.   The city has a substantial government
interest both in regulating the proper location of sexual enterprises and in
preventing each of the aforementioned adverse effects.



      (2)   Locational standards.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate or
cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, except in the
following zoning districts:  C-2, General Business; C-3, Regional Shopping
Center; I-1a, Light Industrial; I-1b, Light Industrial Park; and I-2, Heavy
Industrial.



         (b)   It shall further be unlawful to establish, operate
or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless the
business shall be at least:



            1.   One thousand feet from any other sexually
oriented business; and



            2.   One thousand feet from any house of worship,
day-care center, public or private elementary or secondary schools; and



            3.   One thousand feet from any residential
district and 500 feet from any dwelling.



         (c)   For the purpose of this division, measurements
shall be made in a straight line in all directions, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of a residential
district line or structure to the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where an adult business is to be established.



         (d)   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the
contrary, the sexually oriented businesses regulated herein shall be
considered permitted uses in the zoning districts where they are allowed to
locate under the Zoning Code, and shall not be subject to the standards
applied to special or conditional uses.



      (3)   Nonconforming use(s).



         (a)   Two-year period for continued operation.



            1.   A nonconforming sexually oriented business,
lawfully existing in all respects prior to the effective date of this
division, may continue to operate for two years following that date in order
to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location.



            2.   At the conclusion of the two-year period, the
use will no longer be recognized as a legal nonconforming use.



         (b)   Six-month hardship extension.



            1.   A legal nonconforming sexually oriented
business may apply for a variance to permit one or more six-month
extension(s) of the original two-year period, upon a showing of financial
hardship.



            2.   An application for an initial extension based
upon financial hardship shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion
of the aforementioned two-year period.



            3.   If a hardship extension is granted,
subsequent variance applications for hardship extensions shall be made at
least 60 days before the conclusion of the current extension period.



         (c)   Procedure for seeking hardship extension.



            1.   An application for a variance for a hardship
extension shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Officer, in accordance
with § 156.140(D), and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement
costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, costs of relocation and evidence
of compliance with the Code of New Albany.



            2.   The Zoning Officer shall process the
application in accordance with § 156.145 (Board of Zoning Appeals).



            3.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue a
written decision within ten days after the public hearing on the application
for a hardship extension.



            4.   The hardship extension shall be considered in
terms of I.C. 36-7-4-918.5.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976; Ord.
Z-82-953 passed 1-1-1982; Ord. Z-85-63, passed 5-6-1985; Ord. G-89-154,
passed 1-9-1989; Ord. Z-91-283, passed 7-18-1991; Ord. Z-91-309, passed
12-19-1991; Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996; Ord. Z-04-20, passed 5-5-2004;
Res. R-17-09, passed 7-20-2017)  Penalty, see § 156.999



SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES



§ 156.090  CERTAIN SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES PERMITTED.



   Certain land uses, construction and operations are specified as special
exceptions in § 156.075 due to their extent, the nature of the operation,
limited application, relationship to natural resources, relationship and
effect on neighboring property, and relationship and regulation by both
zoning and nonzoning elements and objectives of the Master Plan. The special
exception uses listed in §§ 156.075 through 156.079, and their accessory
buildings and uses, may be permitted by the Board in the districts indicated
in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



§ 156.091  PROCEDURE FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   (A)   On receipt of an application for a special exception by the
property owner, the Building Commissioner shall refer the application to the
Secretary of the Plan Commission for investigation as to the manner in which
the proposed location and character of the special exception use will affect
the Master Plan. The Commission shall report its findings on the proposal to
the Board of Zoning Appeals and, if the report is favorable to the proposal,
the Board may, after public notice and hearing according to the law, grant
the permit, including the imposition of conditions, restrictions and
requirements on the use which the Board deem essential to ensure that the
special exception is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of this
chapter, will not substantially and permanently injure the appropriate use of
neighboring property, and will not adversely affect the public health,
safety, morals and welfare.



   (B)   In considering the proposal for a special exception and
imposing conditions, restrictions and requirements, the Board shall consider,
in addition to any other pertinent factors:



      (1)   The avoidance of congestion and provision for traffic
and other transportation;



      (2)   The insurance from and provision for safety from any
hazards associated with the proposal; and



      (3)   The avoidance of adverse effects to neighboring property.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 36-7-4-918.2



CONDITIONAL USES



§ 156.095  CERTAIN CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.



   Certain land uses, construction and operations are specified as
conditional uses in § 156.075 instead of being permitted by right, although
they may have beneficial effects and serve important public interests. They
are subject to the conditional use regulations because they may, but do not
necessarily, have adverse effects on the environment, overburden public
services, change the character of an area or create major nuisances. A review
of these uses is necessary due to the potential individual or cumulative
impacts they may have on the surrounding area or neighborhood. The
conditional use review provides an opportunity to allow the use when there
are minimal or favorable impacts, to allow the use but impose measures to
mitigate potentially adverse effects, or to deny the use if the adverse
effects cannot be mitigated or resolved. The conditional uses lists in §§
156.075 through 156.079, and their accessory buildings and uses, may be
permitted by the Board in the districts indicated in accordance with the
procedure set forth in § 156.096.



(Ord. Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 156.096  PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL USE.



   (A)   On receipt of an application for a conditional use by the
property owner, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the
Secretary of the Board for public notice and public hearing by the Board.
After public notice and hearing according to law, the Board may grant the
permit including the imposition of conditions, restrictions and requirements
on the use which the Board deem essential to ensure that the conditional use
is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the chapter, will not
substantially and permanently injure the appropriate use of neighboring
property, and will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals and
welfare. The applicant bears the burden of proof in meeting the criteria for
the granting of a conditional use.



   (B)   In considering the proposal for a conditional use and imposing
conditions, restrictions and requirements, the Board shall consider, in
addition to any other pertinent factors.



      (1)   For a two-family dwelling or for a single-family lot
narrower than 40 feet in width in an RN-1 district, or for any lot in the
RN-2 district, the following:



         (a)   The extent to which the exterior appearance of the
dwelling and site is consistent with the exterior appearance and architecture
of adjoining and nearby residences and buildings and/or whether a local
Historic Preservation Commission has endorsed the exterior appearance of the
dwelling. The burden of proving consistency of the exterior appearance shall
be on the applicant.



         (b)   The provision for outdoor space including lawn,
garden, patio and/or balcony space and provision for adequate and functional
off-street parking.



      (2)   For uses permitted by conditional use in the R-2/CM
district, the Board shall consider the following:



         (a)   The extent  to which the proposal preserves and
adapts the existing structure to its proposed use; the amount and character
of any expansion or enlargement of the existing structure; and the extent the
proposal retains the principal residential character of the dwelling and its
immediate environs, including the preservation of significant landscape
features.



         (b)   The extent of traffic generated by the conditional
use of the site by employees/staff; customers; and delivery or other
service-related vehicles.



         (c)   The extent that new construction permitted by the
conditional use conforms to the existing physical development of the
vicinity, with regard to building setbacks, as well as the characteristics of
the existing built environment in terms of scale, massing, openings (windows
and doors), materials, heights and roof forms, as well as any other factors
the Board of Zoning Appeals deems important to the compatibility of the
structure to its environs.



         (d)   The extent to which the proposal provides
substantial buffering between parking and circulation areas and adjoining
residential land uses, by use of either physical separation, an attractive
fence, a landscape buffer or all three of these forms of buffering.



         (e)   In addition to the foregoing, the Board shall
consider any other pertinent factors in its decision to grant a conditional
use approval.



(Ord. Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. Z-04-32, passed 6-17-2004; Ord.
Z-09-04, passed 2-2-2009)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT



§ 156.105  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of the PUDD are to:



   (A)   Encourage flexibility in the development/redevelopment of land
in order to promote appropriate use, character and design;



   (B)   Facilitate the adequate and economic provision of
infrastructure and city services;



   (C)   Encourage redevelopment of older areas with appropriate
in-fill development;



   (D)   Provide a mechanism for arranging improvements on sites so as
to preserve desirable natural, human-made, environmental and scenic features;
and



   (E)   Permit special consideration of property with unique features
such as historical significance, unusual topography, scenic beauty, landscape
amenities and size and shape.



(Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996)



§ 156.106  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The area designated in the PUDD shall be a tract of land under
single ownership or control. Single control of property in multiple ownership
may be accomplished through the use of enforceable covenants or commitments
that run to the benefit of the Plan Commission or other appropriate public
entity.



   (B)   The PUDD ordinance shall indicate the land use(s), development
standards and other applicable specifications of the City of New Albany that
shall govern the PUDD. If the PUDD ordinance is silent on a particular land
use, development standard or other specification, the land use or development
standard applicable to the underlying district or the applicable regulation
shall apply.



   (C)   Uses permitted in a PUDD may include any of the following:



      (1)   Residential uses, including Class B manufactured home
parks;



      (2)   Commercial uses;



      (3)   Industrial uses;



      (4)   Institutional uses; and



      (5)   Public facilities.



   (D)   A PUDD may overlay any base zoning district in any area of the
planning jurisdiction.



   (E)   The PUDD map shall show the location of all improvements. The
location of the Planned Unit Development Districts adopted pursuant to this
section shall be designated on the official Zone Map.



   (F)   Common open space and improvements for common use shall either
be conveyed to:



      (1)   The appropriate municipal or public entity;



      (2)   A not-for-profit corporation or entity established for
the purpose of benefitting the owners and tenants of the PUDD, or where
appropriate and where approved by the Plan Commission and Common Council,
adjoining or nearby property owners or tenants or both. All conveyances
hereunder shall be structured to insure that the grantee has the obligation
and right to maintain and improve the common space; and that the duty of
maintenance and improvement is enforced by the owners and tenants of the PUDD
and where applicable, by adjoining owners; or



      (3)   Owners other than those specified in divisions (F)(1)
and (2), above, and subject to restrictive covenants describing and
guaranteeing the common space/improvement and its maintenance and
improvement, running with the land for the benefit of the PUDD or adjoining
property owners or both.



   (G)   When adopting, commending for adoption or amending a Planned
Unit Development District, the Common Council and/or the Plan Commission may
do the following:



      (1)   Impose reasonable conditions;



      (2)   Condition issuance of an improvement location permit on
the furnishing of a bond or a satisfactorily written assurance guaranteeing
the timely completion of a proposed public improvement within a PUDD or
serving a PUDD. The bond or satisfactorily written assurance shall:



         (a)   Run to the Plan Commission;



         (b)   Be an amount determined by the Plan Commission to
be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance
with the approved PUDD; and



         (c)   Provide surety satisfaction to the Plan Commission.



      (3)   Allow or require an owner of real property to make a
written commitment in the manner authorized under I.C. 36-7-4-614 or I.C.
36-7-4-615.



   (H)   Any existing planned unit development (PUD) approved prior to
January 1,1997, through the Special Exception process or other prior process
shall be subject to amendment through this section.



(Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996)



§ 156.107  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT APPROVAL PROCESS.



   PUDD applications shall be considered as an amendment to the zone map
in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-1505 and I.C. 36-7-4-602(c)(1)(B). PUDD
applications shall be accompanied by all plans and documents required by §
156.108. A three-step process shall be used including: (1) sketch plan
conference, (2) Planned Unit Development District Ordinance, and (3)
secondary review.



   (A)   Sketch plan conference.



      (1)   Prior to filing an application for approval of a PUDD,
the applicant shall attend a pre-application meeting with the Plan Commission
Director or his or her designee. This conference shall be held to allow the
applicant to discuss characteristics of the development in relation to
adopted city policies and to allow the Director or his or her designee to
review PUDD procedures, development standards and policies with the applicant.



      (2)   The sketch plan conference is intended only for the
above purposes; neither the applicant nor the jurisdiction is bound by any
decision made during the conference.



   (B)   Planned Unit Development District Ordinance.



      (1)   Upon receiving an application for a PUDD in accordance
with § 156.140(F), the Director or his or her designee shall initiate a
review by the planning staff and/or other appropriate department(s).



      (2)   The application and the results of the review shall then
be forwarded to the Plan Commission for its consideration, public hearing and
recommendations together with the planning department's report and such other
information as may be pertinent to the PUDD.



      (3)   The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with § 156.147 and in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-604.



      (4)   Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall
certify the proposed PUDD to the Common Council in accordance with I.C.
36-7-4-605. Upon completion of its review, including public hearing, the Plan
Commission shall certify the application to the Common Council with a
favorable recommendation, an unfavorable recommendation, or no recommendation.



      (5)   The Council shall adopt or reject the proposed PUDD in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-608.



      (6)   Any amendment to a PUDD Ordinance shall be subject to
the procedure for approval of a new PUDD, and no amendment shall be approved
unless the application and review encompass the entire PUDD.



      (7)   Upon approval of a PUDD Ordinance by the Common Council,
the Ordinance shall become effective and its location shall be shown on the
Zone Map.



      (8)   Upon such amendment of the Zone Map, the use and
development of the site shall be governed by the PUDD Ordinance, subject to
secondary review.



      (9)   No permit of any kind shall be issued until secondary
review approval is issued by the Plan Commission.



   (C)   Secondary Review. Upon adoption of the PUDD Ordinance by the
Common Council, the PUDD shall be returned to the Plan Commission for
secondary review. The purpose of the secondary review is to finalize
development details of the PUDD, through the review of a detailed development
site plan, PUDD Ordinance text and accompanying documents and materials:



      (1)   The applicant shall file an application for secondary
review with the Zoning Officer in accordance with § 156.140(F).



      (2)   The application shall be filed together with:



         (a)   A detailed site development plan as outlined in
§§ 156.141 and 156.108(C);



         (b)   PUDD Ordinance text, including a statement of
proposed exceptions to the requirements of the underlying district;



         (c)   Covenants or written commitments as required by §
156.108(F) or § 156.108(G);



         (d)   Performance/maintenance guarantees as required by
§ 156.108(G); and



         (e)   Other supporting data and materials as may be
required by the Plan Commission or Common Council.



      (3)   The application and supporting materials shall be
submitted for review at least 15 days prior to the regular Plan Commission
meeting at which the secondary review is to be considered.



      (4)   The Plan Commission shall conduct the secondary review
at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a duly called special meeting, open to
the public. Notice for the meeting and secondary review shall be in
accordance with I.C. 5-14-1.5-5 (the Indiana Open Door law). No public
hearing is required. The Plan Commission may establish rules governing the
nature of secondary review proceedings.



      (5)   The detailed site development plan, PUDD Ordinance text
and all supporting documents and materials shall conform to the PUDD
Ordinance as approved by the Common Council.



      (6)   Upon determination that the secondary plan is consistent
with the approved PUDD Ordinance, and all supporting materials and
documentation are determined to be acceptable, the Plan Commission shall
confer secondary review approval.



      (7)   One copy of the approved secondary PUDD shall be
retained permanently in the offices of the Plan Commission.



      (8)   Unless otherwise specified in the PUDD Ordinance, the
secondary review shall be submitted to the Plan Commission not more than 18
months following Common Council approval of the PUDD Ordinance. The secondary
review may be submitted and approved in phases if such is approved in the
PUDD Ordinance.



      (9)   Secondary review approval shall expire 18 months after
approval, unless improvement location permits have been obtained and are
still current and valid on that date. This rule shall also apply to each
phase of a PUDD duly approved in phases.



      (10)   No permit of any kind shall be issued for any purpose
within a PUDD except in accordance with the secondary review approval.



(Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996)



§ 156.108  CONTENT OF PLANS.



   PUDD plans and supporting data shall include all documentation listed
in this section.



   (A)   Sketch plan. A scaled drawing of the site, in simple sketch
form, showing the proposed location and extent of the land uses, major
streets and the approximate location of any existing easements, natural
features and topographic or geologic constraints.



   (B)   Planned Unit Development District Plan.



      (1)   Location map.



      (2)   District Plan. A drawing of the PUDD shall be prepared
at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet (1" = 100'), or as considered
appropriate by the Director or his or her designee, and shall show in concept
major circulation, generalized location and dimensions of buildings,
structures and parking areas, open space areas, recreation facilities and
other details to indicate the character of the proposed development. The
submission shall include:



         (a)   Boundary lines and acreage of each land use
component;



         (b)   Existing easements, including location, width and
purpose;



         (c)   Existing land use and ownership of abutting
properties;



         (d)   Other conditions on adjoining land: topography
including any embankments or retaining walls; use and location of buildings,
railroads, power lines, towers and other influences; name of any adjoining
subdivision plat;



         (e)   Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract,
including street name, right-of-way width, walks, curbs, gutters and
culverts. Proposed public improvements; streets and other major improvements
planned by the public for future construction on or adjacent to the tract;



         (g)   Existing utilities on the tract;



         (h)   Any land on the tract within the 100-year flood
plain;



         (i)   Other conditions on the tract, including water
courses, wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas, isolated trees six inches or
more in diameter, existing structures and other significant features;



         (j)   Map data, name of development, north point, scale
and date of preparation; and



         (k)   Development phases, if multiple phases are
proposed.



      (3)   Other. The Director or his or her designee shall inform
the applicant of any additional documents or data requirements.



      (4)   A statement of present and proposed ownership of all
land within the project including the beneficial owners of a land trust.



      (5)   Development schedule indicating:



         (a)   Phases in which the PUDD will be built, including
the area, density, use, public facilities, open space to be developed with
each phase; and



         (b)   Dates for beginning and completion of each phase.



      (6)   Proposed uses:



         (a)   Residential uses: Gross area, architectural
concepts (narrative, sketch, or representative photo), number of units,
bedroom breakdown; and



         (b)   Non-residential uses: Specific nonresidential
uses, including gross area, architectural concepts (narrative, sketch,
representative photo) and building heights.



      (7)   Facilities plan. Preliminary plans for:



         (a)   Roads;



         (b)   Sidewalks;



         (c)   Sanitary sewers;



         (d)   Stormwater management;



         (e)   Water supply system;



         (f)   Street lighting; and



         (g)   Public utilities.



      (9)   Landscape plan. A conceptual landscape plan showing
existing vegetation; vegetation to be preserved and the locations, nature and
purpose of proposed landscaping.



   (C)   Secondary review.



      (1)   A detailed site development plan as outlined in §
156.141(N) of the entire phase for which secondary review approval is being
requested, plus the following:



         (a)   Location of all utility lines and easements;



         (b)   A detailed landscape plan, including size and
species, installation specifications, identification of vegetation to be
preserved and the site measures to accomplish preservation, and conservation
easements where required;



         (c)   Tabulation on each separate use area, including
land area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units per acre, type of
unit, bedroom breakdown;



         (d)   An erosion control plan;



         (e)   Any land within the 100-year flood plain; and



         (f)   Digitized map update(s) of the city's digitized
mapping that reflects the approved PUDD, as applicable.



      (2)   Such additional information as may have been required by
the PUDD Ordinance approval.



(Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996)



§ 156.109  REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS.



   In their consideration of a PUDD Ordinance, the Director or his or her
designee in his or her report to the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission, in
its recommendation, and the Common Council, in its decision, shall consider
as many of the following as may be relevant to the specific proposal:



   (A)   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements,
standards and stated purpose of the PUDD regulations;



   (B)   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, the density, dimension, bulk, use, required
improvements and construction and design standards and the reasons why such
departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest;



   (C)   The extent to which the PUDD meets the purposes of this zoning
chapter, the Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted planning or development
policies and objectives of the city;



   (D)   The design of the PUDD and the extent to which it makes
adequate provision of public services, provides adequate control over
vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated common open space and
furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment;



   (E)   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the
adjacent properties and neighborhood, and whether the proposed plan would
substantially interfere with the use or diminish the value of adjacent
properties and neighborhoods;



   (F)   The desirability of the proposed plan to the physical
development, tax base and economic well-being of the planning jurisdiction;



   (G)   The proposal will not cause undue traffic congestion in excess
of that anticipated in the existing base zoning and can be adequately served
by existing or planned public facilities and services;



   (H)   The proposal preserves ecological, natural, historical,
architectural and human-made resources to the extent possible;



   (I)   The proposal will not be injurious to the public health,
safety and general welfare; and



   (J)   The proposed development is an effective and unified treatment
of the development possibilities on the PUDD site.



(Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996)



NONCONFORMING USES



§ 156.128  NONCONFORMING USES; SPECIFICATIONS.



   The lawful use of a building or premises, existing at the time of
passage of this chapter, may be continued  although the use does not conform
to all the provisions of this chapter, except as hereinafter provided.



   (A)   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout a building
provided no structural alterations are made therein, except those required by
law.



   (B)   A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or greater restrictions; provided, no structural changes are
made in the building. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a
conforming use or to a use permitted in a district of greater restrictions,
it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a less
restricted one.



   (C)   No building shall be erected upon any premises devoted to a
nonconforming use, except in conformance with regulations of this chapter.



   (D)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize, by written permit,
in a residentially-zoned district for a period of not more than one year from
the date of the permit, a temporary building for commercial or industrial use
incidental to the residential construction and development of the district.



   (E)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of a building for which an improvement
location permit has been heretofore issued, and the construction of which has
been diligently prosecuted within 90 days of the date of the permit, and
which entire building shall be completed according to the plans filed within
three years from the date of passage of this chapter.



   (F)   In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or
premises is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the same shall
thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is
located.



   (G)   Any nonconforming open use of land shall be discontinued
within five years from the date of original adoption of this chapter.



   (H)   These provisions apply in the same manner to a use which may
become a nonconforming use due to a later amendment to this chapter.



   (I)   No nonconforming use rights are heretofore conferred upon any
temporary sign not meeting the requirements of §§ 156.079 and 156.144.



(Ord. Z-71-449, passed 7-12-1971; Ord. G-89-154, passed 1-9-1989)  Penalty,
see § 156.999



ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT



§ 156.140  ZONING OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Except where herein otherwise specified, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer who shall be
designated by the Plan Commission. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer
and he or she shall have the power to do the following acts:



   (A)   Receive and examine all applications for improvement location
permits and to refer applications to persons or bodies as specified by this
chapter or to make any other referrals as deemed advisable by the Zoning
Officer;



   (B)   Issue improvement location permits after approval and
certificates of occupancy only when there is compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and with other city ordinances. However, the issuance of an
improvement location permit shall not be deemed a waiver of the requirements
of any other city ordinance;



   (C)   Receive applications for special exceptions and refer these
applications to the secretary of the Plan Commission and Board of Zoning
Appeals who shall investigate the applications and forward them to the Plan
Commission and Board in accordance with §§ 156.090 and 156.091;



   (D)   Receive applications for variances and conditional uses and
refer these applications to the Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals who
shall investigate the applications and forward them to the Board for action
thereon;



   (E)   Receive applications for appeals from alleged error of the
Zoning Officer and refer these applications to the secretary of the Board of
Zoning Appeals who shall investigate the applications and forward them to the
Board for action thereon;



   (F)   Receive applications for zoning amendments and changes in
zoning districts in accordance with § 156.147 and refer these applications
to the Secretary of the Plan Commission who shall investigate the
applications and forward them to the Plan Commission and the Common Council,
as applicable, for their action thereon;



   (G)   Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter;



   (H)   Issue stop, cease and desist orders and order, in writing,
correction of all conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter. The written orders shall be served personally or by certified
mail upon persons, firms or corporations deemed by the Zoning Officer to be
violating the terms of the chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any such order lawfully issued by the Zoning Officer and any person
violating any such order shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter;



   (I)   With approval of the Plan Commission or the Board, or when
directed by one or both of them, institute in the name of the Plan Commission
or Board any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance
or use and to restrain, correct or abate the violation, so as to prevent the
occupancy or use of any building, structure or land, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises;



   (J)   Revoke by order, an improvement location permit issued under a
mistake of fact or contrary to the law or the provisions of the chapter;



   (K)   Upon request of the Plan Commission or Board, present to the
bodies facts, records or reports which they may request to assist them in
making decisions; and



   (L)   Maintain a map showing the current zoning district
classifications of all land in the city.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976; Ord. Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 156.141  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
extended, structurally altered or moved, and no land, building or structure
changed in use, until an improvement location permit has been secured from
the Zoning Officer. Upon completion of changes in use the construction,
reconstruction, extension, alteration or moving of structures, the applicant
shall notify the Zoning Officer of the completion.



   (B)   No improvement location permit shall be considered as complete
or as permanently effective until the Zoning Officer has noted on the permit
that the work or occupancy and use has been inspected and approved as being
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and a certificate of
occupancy has been issued.



   (C)   Improvement location permits shall be issued with a 24-month
life. However, if work is not commenced within three months after the
issuance of the improvement location permit and delivery of construction
materials to the site, the permit shall automatically expire and a new permit
shall be required before the work or change in use commences. Work not
completed within two years from the date of the issuance of the improvement
location permit shall require a new permit for construction.



   (D)   The Zoning Officer shall issue an improvement location permit
for a multiple-family complex, commercial complex or industrial complex only
after the site development plan for the complex has been referred to and
approved by the Plan Commission. For the purposes of this chapter, a COMPLEX
shall be defined as a development consisting of two or more buildings or
located upon a parcel of land containing five or more acres.



   (E)   The Zoning Officer shall issue an improvement location permit
for a special exception use, a conditional use or a use which requires the
approval of a variance only following receipt of notice from the Board of
Zoning Appeals that the application therefor has been approved by the Board.



   (F)   The Zoning Officer may require any changes or alterations on
the plot plan or detailed site development plan before issuing an improvement
location permit, when the action is deemed necessary to carry out the purpose
and intent of this chapter.



   (G)   If an application for an improvement location permit relates
to an industrial use, it shall be accompanied by a certificate of compliance
subscribed by a registered professional engineer of the state, stating that
the use will meet the performance standards, as set forth in § 156.078 of
the district concerned. After a ten-day period has elapsed during which the
Zoning Officer has not required additional data or information or objected to
the certificate of compliance in writing to the applicant, he or she shall
issue the permit.



   (H)   Applications shall be made for an improvement location permit
in accordance with division (N) of this section.



   (I)   No improvement location permit shall be issued for the
excavation for, or the erection, reconstruction or structural alteration of,
any building or structure before application has been made for a certificate
of occupancy.



   (J)   Improvement location permits, except when in conjunction with
a variance, special exception or Planned Unit Development District, shall be
granted or refused by the Zoning Officer within 15 days after written
application has been filed with the Zoning Officer, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter.



   (K)   A record of improvement location permits shall be kept on file
by the Zoning Officer and shall become public record.



   (L)   (1)   All applications for improvement location permits
shall be made in writing by the owner, tenant, vendee under contract of sale
or authorized agent, on a form supplied by the Zoning Officer, and shall be
filed with the Zoning Officer. Upon making application for the permit, the
applicant shall furnish the Zoning Officer with the following:  A plot plan
(in the case of single-family, two-family or agricultural building or use),
or a detailed site development plan (for all other uses), of the real estate
upon which the application for an improvement location permit is made. The
application shall be made at least 15 days  prior to the issuance of the 
improvement location permit, which 15-day period may be waived by the Zoning
Officer, if he or she deems such feasible. The plot plan or detailed site
development plan shall be drawn to scale, shall include all standard markings
and symbols, and shall show the following items:



         (a)   Plot plan (two copies):



            1.   Legal or site description of the real estate
involved;



            2.   Location and size of all buildings and
structures;



            3.   Width and length of all entrances and exits
to and from this real estate;



            4.   All adjacent and adjoining streets, roads or
highways; and



            5.   Any additional plans, items of plans, data
and/or information deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer for ascertaining
whether the proposed use, erection, construction, reconstruction, extension,
addition, structural alteration or use complies with the provisions of this
chapter.



         (b)   Detailed site development plan (five copies):



            1.   Lot dimensions;



            2.   All buildings and structures-location
elevations, size, height and proposed uses;



            3.   Yards and distance between buildings;



            4.   Walls, fences and landscaping-location,
height, size and material;



            5.   Off-street parking-location, height, size of
spaces, dimensions of parking area and internal circulation pattern;



            6.   Access and circulation (pedestrian,
vehicular, service), points of ingress and egress, sidewalks and paths,
on-site roads and on-site circulation of vehicles;



            7.   Signs-location, size, height, type of
illumination and glare deflectors;



            8.   Loading and unloading-location, dimensions,
number of spaces and internal circulation;



            9.   Lighting-location and general nature, hooding
devices and glare deflectors;



            10.   Common facilities and open space-location,
dimensions and uses;



            11.   Public and private roads-location,
dimensions and circulation patterns;



            12.   Sewage and drainage-evidence of a
satisfactory means of sewage disposal and surface drainage, including
existing and proposed elevations of the site, and location and size of
existing and proposed culverts, tiles and catch basins;



            13.   Fire hydrants, location; and



            14.   Any additional plans, items of plans, data
and/or information deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer for ascertaining
whether the proposed use, erection, construction, reconstruction, extension,
addition, structural alteration or use complies with the provisions of this
chapter.



      (2)   Except when variances, special exception and/or Planned
Unit Development Districts are involved, the Zoning Officer may waive certain
items or portions of items required for the detailed site development plan in
division (N) of this section.



      (3)   Any plan furnished to the Zoning Officer in accordance
with division (N) of this section shall be kept on file by the Zoning Officer
and shall become a permanent public record.



   (M)   The plot plan or detailed site development plan shall be
placed or based upon an accurate land survey of the lot or parcel to be
developed. The land survey shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in
the State of Indiana.



   (N)   Prior to the construction of any principal structures,
addition thereto or permanent accessory structures, the applicant of the
improvement location permit shall cause to be field staked the specific
location of the structures and improvements.



   (O)   The applicant of the improvement location permit shall
disclose by whom and by what means the field staking shall be accomplished.
Field staking shall be accomplished by a land surveyor registered in the
State of Indiana or other qualified person acceptable to the Zoning Officer.
Any field staking errors which create a subsequent conflict with the
development standards of the Zoning Code shall be the sole responsibility of
the applicant of the improvement location permit.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976; Ord. Z-96-157, passed 11-21-1996; Ord.
Z-96-216, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. Z-99-311, passed 4-15-1999)  Penalty, see
§ 156.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 36-7-4-800et seq.



§ 156.142  TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS.



   Temporary improvement location permits shall be permitted only for the
following uses and in accordance with the following procedures.



   (A)   A temporary improvement location permit shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer, in accordance with Table I of § 156.075 and other applicable
provisions of this chapter, for a temporary construction trailer or office
structure on any site in any permitted district only when used in conjunction
with ongoing construction work taking place on the site. The trailer or
structure shall be used only for such purpose and no other, and shall be
removed within one month following the completion of construction work or the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the construction work, whichever
is earlier.



   (B)   A temporary improvement location permit may be issued by the
Zoning Officer, in accordance with Table I of § 156.075 and other applicable
provisions of this chapter, for a temporary Class B manufactured home only
after special exception approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
temporary Class B manufactured home may be permitted only after the applicant
demonstrates considerable practical difficulty or hardship  to the Board 
in proving the need for the temporary Class B manufactured home; the
applicant shall also meet any other requirements for a special exception as
provided by this chapter. The temporary improvement location permit shall be
issued for a specified time period only, not to exceed six months, and may be
renewed by the Board not more than three times for an aggregate period of
time not exceeding 24 months. In special cases of demonstrated extreme
hardship the Board may waive the required time limits; provided that, the
required time period shall be replaced by another time period specified by
the Board. Upon expiration of the improvement location permit, the Class B
manufactured home shall be removed.



   (C)   Regarding divisions (A) and (B), all use and dimensional
requirements for the district in which the use or structure is located shall
apply.



   (D)   Regarding division (B), the Board may impose whatever
additional provisions or conditions it deems necessary to ensure that the use
or structure will be in harmony with the character of the development in the
neighborhood where it will be located and to ensure the temporary use or
structure is in conformance with the purpose and intent of this chapter.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976; Ord. Z-82-953, passed 11-1-1982)



§ 156.143  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used and no building or structure
hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, extended or structurally
altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose
whatsoever, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Zoning Officer stating that the building or structure and use comply with all
the provisions of this chapter applicable to the building, structure or use
or premises in the district in which it is to be located.



   (B)   No change in use shall be made in any building, structure or
parts thereof, now or hereafter, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
extended or structurally altered without a certificate of occupancy having
been issued by the Zoning Officer, and no such permit shall be issued to make
such change unless it is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally
with the application for an improvement location permit and shall be issued
within ten days after the lawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
extension or structural alteration of the building or structure shall have
been completed. However, the work shall be done in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   A record of certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file by
the Zoning Officer and become public record.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.144  TEMPORARY SIGN PERMITS.



   (A)   A temporary sign permit may be issued by the Zoning Officer
provided it is demonstrated, through an application filed with the Zoning
Officer, that the sign is to be located, installed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of § 156.079.



   (B)   In addition to the fee prescribed in § 156.148, the Zoning
Officer shall require a deposit of $50 for the issuance of a temporary
business sign permit. The deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon the
expiration of the permit and the timely removal of the temporary business
sign by the applicant.



   (C)   The Zoning Officer may utilize all or any portion of a
temporary business sign deposit to implement the removal of any temporary
business sign declared a public nuisance or hazard. In the event of the
removal of a temporary business sign by the Zoning Officer, no portion of
said deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.



(Ord. G-89-154, passed 1-9-1989)



§ 156.145  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Establishment. In order that the objectives of this chapter
may be more fully and equitably achieved and a means for further competent
interpretation of this chapter be provided, the Board of Zoning Appeals is
established with membership and appointments provided in accordance with I.C.
36-7-4-900 et seq. and all acts now and hereafter amendatory thereto.



   (B)   Officers and employees. At the first meeting of each year, the
Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among its members.
It may appoint and fix the compensation of a Secretary and such employees as
are deemed necessary for the discharge of duties, all in conformity to and in
compliance with the salaries and compensation theretofore fixed by the
legislative authority.



   (C)   Procedures and rules. The Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary to effectuate its responsibilities under
the provisions of this chapter and to effectively conduct its affairs.



   (D)   Conduct of business. All official decisions of the Board shall
be made in accordance with state statutes and in a public hearing. Procedural
and administrative matters may, at the discretion of the Chairperson, be
decided outside of a public hearing.



   (E)   Records and decisions. The Board shall keep minutes of its
public hearings, keep records of its examinations and other official
decisions, record the vote of each member voting upon each question or case,
and keep a record of the final disposition of each case. All minutes and
records shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall be public records.



   (F)   Public hearings and notice. Upon filing with the Board of
Zoning Appeals an application for a variance, special exception or appeal
from alleged error of the Zoning Officer, the Board shall fix a reasonable
time and place for a public hearing thereon, and, in accordance with I.C.
36-7-4-920, publish public notice and provide due notice to interested
parties at least ten days before the date set for the hearing.



   (G)   Powers and duties; appeal from alleged error of Zoning
Officer. To hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision, determination or interpretation made by the
Zoning Officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter.



   (H)   Powers and duties; variances.



      (1)   To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases the
variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to public
interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done.



      (2)   The applicant shall have the burden of proof in
establishing the right to a variance.



      (3)   In reaching its decision on a variance application, the
Board shall follow the provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-918.4 and 36-7-4-918.5, as
applicable.



      (4)   The Board may prescribe any safeguard that it deems to
be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the regulations and
provisions to which the variance applies.



   (I)   Powers and duties; special exceptions.



      (1)   To hear and decide upon applications for special
exceptions for any of the uses for which this chapter requires the obtaining
of special exception approval from the Board, in accordance with §§ 156.090
and 156.091.



      (2)   The applicant shall have the burden of proof in
establishing the right to a special exception.



      (3)   In granting approval of a special exception, the Board
may impose whatever conditions regarding layout, circulation, and performance
it deems necessary to ensure that any proposed development will secure
substantially the objectives of this chapter.



   (J)   Powers and duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have any
other powers and duties as stipulated for it under this chapter and the state
statutes.



   (K)   Powers and duties; conditional uses.



      (1)   To hear and decide upon applications for conditional
uses for any of the uses for which this chapter requires the obtaining of
conditional use approval from the Board, in accordance with §§ 156.095
through 156.096.



      (2)   The applicant shall have the burden of proof in
establishing the right to a conditional use.



      (3)   In granting approval of a conditional use, the Board may
impose whatever conditions regarding layout, circulation and performance it
deems necessary to ensure that any proposed development will secure
substantially the objectives of this chapter.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976; Ord. Z-93-170, passed 10-21-1993; Ord.
Z-97-216, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 156.146  APPLICATION FOR APPEAL.



   (A)   An application for an appeal from alleged error of the Zoning
Officer shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the Zoning Officer,
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, shall set forth and refer to the
specific provisions of this chapter involved, and shall specify the alleged
error and the interpretation claimed by the applicant.



   (B)   An application for a variance shall be made in writing on a
form supplied by the Zoning Officer, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer,
shall set forth and refer to the specific provisions of this chapter
involved, and shall address the points listed in § 156.145(H)(3).



   (C)   An application for a special exception shall be made in
writing on a form supplied by the Zoning Officer, shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer, and shall clearly address all aspects of the proposed use, in
accordance with § 156.091 and other applicable sections of this chapter.



   (D)   Application for an appeal from alleged error of the Zoning
Officer, a variance or a special exception shall be accompanied by either a
plot plan or a detailed site development plan as described in § 156.141(N)
and for the respective uses as therein specified.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976)



§ 156.147  AMENDMENTS; CHANGES IN ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   All amendments to this chapter and changes in this chapter or
zone map shall be handled as amendments in conformance with I.C. 36-7-4-602.



   (B)   Except for the Common Council and the Plan Commission, all
persons desiring amendments to this chapter or changes in this chapter or
zone map shall make application on a form supplied by the Zoning Officer,
shall file the application with the Zoning Officer, and shall thoroughly
describe the reasons for the request on the application form.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976)



§ 156.148  FILING FEES.



   (A)   Applications and petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be accompanied by the current filing fees specified in §
158.01, Building Permits, and § 158.02, Planning and Zoning Permits; which
shall be paid to and collected by the Zoning Officer.



   (B)   No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this section shall
be returned to the applicant or petitioner.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976; Ord. G-89-154, passed 1-9-1989)



§ 156.149  REMEDIES.



   (A)   The Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, the Zoning
Officer or any designated enforcement official, or any person or persons,
firm or corporation jointly or severally aggrieved, may institute a suit for
injunction in the county's Circuit Court to restrain an individual or a
governmental unit from violating the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Plan Commission, or the Board of Zoning Appeals, may also
institute a suit for an injunction directing any individual, a corporation or
a governmental unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976)



§ 156.150  REVIEW BY CERTIORARI.



   Every decision of the Plan Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall be subject to review by certiorari.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976)



§ 156.999  PENALTY.



   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, or who shall build, reconstruct or structurally alter any building
in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted or approved
thereunder shall, for each and every violation or noncompliance, be guilty of
a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $10 and not
more than $300. Each day that a violation or non-compliance shall be
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. G-76-613, passed 6-11-1976; Ord. Z-02-34, passed 9-5-2002)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 157:  FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



Section




General Provisions




   157.001   Statutory authorization



   157.002   Findings of fact



   157.003   Statement of purpose



   157.004   Objectives



   157.005   Definitions



   157.006   Lands to which this chapter applies



   157.007   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data



   157.008   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   157.009   Compliance



   157.010   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   157.011   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations



   157.012   Interpretation



   157.013   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   157.014   Increased cost of compliance (ICC)




Administration




   157.025   Designation of Administrator



   157.026   Permit procedures



   157.027   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   157.035   General standards



   157.036   Specific standards



   157.037   Standards for subdivision proposals



   157.038   Critical facility



   157.039   Standards for identified floodways



   157.040   Standards for identified fringe



   157.041   Standards for special flood hazard areas without
established base flood elevation and/or floodways/fringes



   157.042   Standards for flood prone areas




Special Exception Procedures




   157.050   Designation of special exception



   157.051   Duties of Board of Zoning Appeals



   157.052   Special exception procedures



   157.053   Conditions for special exceptions



   157.054   Special exception notification



   157.055   Historic structure



   157.056   Special conditions



 



   157.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 157.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 and I.C. 14-28-4 granted the
power to local government units to control land use within their
jurisdictions.  Therefore, the Common Council does hereby adopt the
following floodplain management regulations.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.002  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.003  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve these uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters.



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage.



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
structures and their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.004  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life and health.



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects.



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions.



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in floodplains.



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
flood blight areas.



   (G)   To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property
is in a flood area.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.005  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE.  Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of
flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both.  In A
Zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings.  These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone
AE, Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. 
The definitions are presented below:



      (1)   ZONE A.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event.  Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.  Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (2)   ZONE AE and A1-A30.  Areas subject to inundation by the
1% annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods.  Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones.  Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.  (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones
A1-A30.)



      (3)   ZONE AO.  Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual
chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.  Average flood depths derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.  Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (4)   ZONE AH.  Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual
chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet.  Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydrauhc analyses are shown within this zone.  Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.



      (5)   ZONE AR.  Areas that result from the decertification of
a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in
the process of being restored to provide base flood protection.  Mandatory
flood insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (6)   ZONE A99.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of
an under-construction federal flood protection system.  These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes.  Zone A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion.  No base flood elevations or depths are shown.  Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure that is located on the same parcel
of property as the principal structure and the use of which is subordinate to
the use of the principal structure.  Accessory structures should constitute
a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential.  Examples of accessory
structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay
sheds.



   ADDITION (to an existing structure).  Any walled and roofed expansion
to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a
common load-bearing wall other than a firewall.  Any walled and roofed
addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may
be evident.  This flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation of the 1% annual chance
flood.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY.  A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS).  A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY.  A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great.  Critical facilities include, but are not
limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency
response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous
materials or hazardous waste.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of roads, or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, ruling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials; or



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   Does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing, resurfacing
roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE.  A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls),
pilings, or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM.  The first phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP.  It is intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the community's first
floodplain ordinance.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD.  The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any year.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been identified as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA.  The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOOD PRONE AREA.  Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source.  See FLOOD.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG).  The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA.  See FREEBOARD.



   FLOODPLAIN.  The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood.  The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas.  This term describes federal,
state, or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.  Floodplain
management regulations are also referred to as floodplain regulations,
floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain
management requirements.



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING).  A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water.  All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG.  This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FRINGE.  Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the
BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management.  It is used
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood
processing facilities.  The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   HARDSHIP.  As related to special exceptions of this chapter, means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
special exception.  The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the special
exception is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. 
Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. 
Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal
preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a
rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.  All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a special exception, even if
the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites
and Structures.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).  The cost to repair a
substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that
is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with
the local flood damage prevention ordinance.  Acceptable mitigation measures
are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof.  All
renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or
after June 1,1997, will include IGC coverage.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  An amendment to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a
SFHA.  A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map.  It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F).  An official revision
by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls having a total net
area of one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area.  The
bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the
exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher; and



         (b)   The enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A dwelling unit, designed and built in a factory,
which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the
federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law of 1974
(42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.).  The term manufactured home does not include
a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MAP AMENDMENT.  A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no
alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER.  The four-digit number followed by a letter suffix
assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map
panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has
been revised. (The letter A is not used by FEMA, the letter B is the first
revision.)



   MARKET VALUE.  The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear.  Market value can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION.  Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects.  The purpose of
mitigation is two fold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).  The federal program that
makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating
communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal
government and the private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929.  As corrected in
1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain
ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88).  As adopted in 1993,
is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD.  The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood.  See REGULATORY FLOOD.



   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.  The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  Any flood zone that begins
with the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood.  See REGULATORY
FLOOD.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY.  Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR).  An official republication of a
community's FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features.  These changes typically occur as a result of
structural works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood
hazard areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION.  Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31,1974, whichever is later.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION.  Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   PROBATION.  A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is (i) built on a single
chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM.  The phase of the community's participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in § 157.007 of this chapter.  The regulatory
flood is also known by the term base flood, 1% annual chance flood, and
100-year flood.



   REPETITIVE LOSS.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the
event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the
flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of
the structure at the time of each flood event.



   SECTION 1316.  That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SPECIAL EXCEPTION.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).   Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the City of New Albany subject to inundation by the
regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the City of New Albany and the Unincorporated
Two Mile Fringe Area are generally identified as such on the Floyd County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated December 4,
2012 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas
are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1 - A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms,
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof.  The term includes a gas or liquid storage
tank, a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building.  The term also
includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180
days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement.  This term includes structures that have
incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage  regardless of the actual
repair work performed.  The term does not include improvements of structures
to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code requirements or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a
historic structure.



   SUSPENSION.  The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter.  A structure or other development without
the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required
in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until the time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. 
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 (NGVD) (other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.



   X ZONE.  The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the
SFHA.  Shaded X Zones shown on recent FIRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of
being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood).  Unshaded X Zones (C Zones
on older FIRMs) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of
flooding is less than 0.2%.



   ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A.  See definition for A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C, and X.  Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. 
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems.  Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones.  (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B
and C.)



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. Z-14-07, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 157.006  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas
within the jurisdiction of the City of New Albany and the Unincorporated Two
Mile Fringe Area.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.007  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FOOD DATA.



   This chapter's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.



   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the City of New Albany and
the Unincorporated Two Mile Fringe Area shall be as delineated on the 1%
annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Floyd County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map
dated December 4, 2012 as well as any future updates, amendments, or
revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most
recent date.



   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the City of New Albany and
the Unincorporated Two Mile Fringe Area, delineated as an "A Zone" on the
Floyd County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated
December 4, 2012 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent
date, shall be according to the best date available as provided by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area
from the subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to replace existing
date with better data that meets current engineering standards. To be
considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources for review, subsequently approved.



   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known flood prone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile.



   (D)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD), any
more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be
utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing
all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. Z-14-07, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 157.008  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.009  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations.  No land or stream within
the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.010  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.011  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND
ELEVATIONS.



   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the
SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.  The property owner
should be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.012  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements.



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.013  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.  Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions.  Therefore, this chapter does not create
any liability on the part of the city, the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, or the state, for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.014  INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).



   In order for buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC
coverage as a repetitive loss structure, the National Reform Act of 1994
requires that the building be covered by a contract for flood insurance and
incur flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period ending
on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the
cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25%
of the market value of the building at the time of each flood event.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 157.025  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Common Council hereby appoints the Director of the City Plan
Commission to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is
herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.026  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the
following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage
facilities, and the location of the foregoing.  Specifically the following
information is required:



   (A)   Application stage.



      (1)   A description of the proposed development.



      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams.



      (3)   A legal description of the property site.



      (4)    A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades.



      (5)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD.



      (6)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be floodproofed.



      (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



   (B)   Construction stage.  Upon placement of the lowest floor; or
floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of
the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built.  The certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.  When
floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
architect and certified by same.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of
the certification shall be at the permit holders’ risk.  (The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation
survey data submitted.)  The permit holder shall correct deficiencies
detected by the review before any further work is allowed to proceed. 
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required
hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.027  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter.  The
administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations.



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to §§ 157.010 and 157.012 of this chapter, and maintain a record of
authorization (either copy of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment).



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. 
Copies of the permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit.



      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of the notifications to FEMA.



      (6)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps.  Letters of map amendment
(LOMA), letters of map revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and as-built elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.



      (7)   Utilize and enforce all letters of map revision (LOMR)
or physical map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective
SFHA maps of the community.



      (8)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.



      (9)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 157.026.



      (10)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance
with § 157.026.



      (11)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance.



      (12)   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.



         (b)   The notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      (13)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval, issued under the provisions of the chapter, in cases where there
has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or
replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation
of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



      (14)   Inspect sites for compliance.  For all new and/or
substantially improved buildings constructed in the SFHA, inspect before,
during and after construction.  Authorized city officials shall have the
right to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 157.035  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the following provisions are
required:



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse of lateral movement of the structure.



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces.



   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG.



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located
at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below the FPG.  Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service faculties may be located below the FPG.



   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.



   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not further extended, or
replaced.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.036  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:



   (A)   In addition to the requirements of § 157.035, all structures
to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the
FPG.  This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



      (1)    Construction or placement of any new structure having a
floor area greater than 400 square feet;



      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure:



         (a)   Where the cost of the addition or improvement
equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the existing structure (excluding the
value of the land).



         (b)   With a previous addition or improvement
constructed since the community's first floodplain ordinance.



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure
where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the
value of the land) before damage occurred.



      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days.



      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site.  This chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.



      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss
structure.



   (B)   Residential construction.  New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation).  Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of § 157.036(D).



   (C)   Non-residential construction.  New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential
structure (or manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base
flood elevation) or be floodproofed to or above the FPG.  Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be
provided in accordance with the standards of § 157.036(D). Structures
located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done
in accordance with the following:



      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood.  The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice.  The certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 157.027(B)(10).



      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



   (D)   Elevated structures.



      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated
structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.



      (2)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.  Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a
minimum of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area).



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than
one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath
each opening, whichever is higher.



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions.



         (d)   Openings are to be not less than three inches in
any direction in the plane of the wall.  This requirement applies to the
hole in the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical
foundation air vent device.



         (e)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



         (f)   The interior portion of the enclosed area shall
not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



         (g)   The interior grade of the enclosed area shall be
at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.



         (h)   Where elevation requirements exceed six feet above
the highest adjacent grade, a copy of the legally recorded deed restriction
prohibiting the conversion of the area below the lowest floor to a use or
dimension contrary to the structure's originally approved design, shall be
presented as a condition of issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.



   (E)   Structures constructed on fill.  A residential or
nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
either the standard or modified proctor test method.



      (2)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the FPG.



      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading.  If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.



      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be
at or above the FPG.



   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:



      (1)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



         (a)   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or



         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a
result of a flood.



      (2)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.  This
requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.



      (3)   Manufactured homes with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in § 157.036(D).



      (4)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the
frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.



      (5)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days; and



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes as
stated earlier in this section.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.037  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the
SFHA and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.



   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into and
out of SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.038  CRITICAL FACILITY.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available.  Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. 
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.  Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.039  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 157.003(B), are areas
designated as floodways.  The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and
has erosion potential.  If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway.  Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit
for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for
any excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the
floodway.  This includes land preparation activities such as filling,
grading, clearing and paving, and the like undertaken before the actual start
of construction of the structure.  However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway.  (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial
additions/improvements to residences in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval (construction in
a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.)



   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the floodway.  Once
a permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
§§ 157.035 through 157.042 of this chapter have been met.  The floodplain
development permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit for
construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.  However, a community's more restrictive regulations (if any)
shall take precedence.



   (C)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination, with existing or future development, will increase the
regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot.



   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.040  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.



   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§ 157.035 through 157.042 of this chapter have
been met.  The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new
or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.041  STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.



   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square
mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in a floodway or a floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1% annual chance flood elevation
and the recommended flood protection grade has been received from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in §§ 157.035 through 157.042  of this chapter have been met.



   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square
mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and 1% annual
chance flood elevation for the site.



      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
§§ 157.035 through 157.042 of this chapter have been met.



   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.042  STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.



   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps,
or where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards
as required per §§ 157.035 through 157.042.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURES



§ 157.050  DESIGNATION OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The City Plan Commission shall review all requests for special
exceptions in accordance with the zoning ordinance and, if favorably
reviewed, shall forward the request to the Board of Zoning Appeals, which
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for special exceptions from
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.051  DUTIES OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.  Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal the decision to the
Floyd County Circuit Court.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.052  SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURES.



   In authorizing the applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter; and



   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.



   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner.



   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.



   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.



   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.



   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.



   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.



   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.



   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site.



   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.053  CONDITIONS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Special exceptions shall only be authorized when there is:



      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the special
exception would result in exceptional hardship.



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a special exception
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   No special exception for a residential use within a floodway
subject to §§ 157.039 or 157.041(A) of this chapter may be granted.



   (C)   Any special exception granted in a floodway subject to §§
157.039 or 157.041(A) of this chapter will require a permit from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



   (D)   Special exceptions to the provisions for flood hazard
reduction of § 157.036, may be granted only when a new structure is to be
located on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood
protection grade.



   (E)   Special exceptions shall only be issued upon a determination
that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



   (F)   Special exceptions may be granted for the reconstruction or
restoration of any structure individually listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.



   (G)   Any applicant to whom a special exception is authorized shall
be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and
stating that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (see §
157.054).



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of
appeal actions and report any special exceptions to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request
(see § 157.054).



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.054  SPECIAL EXCEPTION NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any applicant to whom a special exception is authorized shall
be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The authorization of a special exception to construct a
structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



      (2)   The construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.  A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the office of the Floyd County Recorder and shall
be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all
special exception actions, including justification for their issuance and
report such variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.055  HISTORIC STRUCTURE.



   Special exceptions may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.056  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§ 157.050 through
157.056, and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach conditions to the authorization of special exceptions as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



§ 157.999  PENALTY.



   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such
in accordance with the provisions of the zoning code for the city.



   (A)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   (B)   The City Plan Commission shall inform the owner that any
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations.  All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. Z-12-20, passed 11-15-2012)



CHAPTER 158:  PERMIT FEES AND COSTS FOR BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section



   158.01   Building permits



   158.02   Planning and zoning permits



   158.03   Ambulance fees



   158.04   Redevelopment permits and fees



   158.05   Sewer permits, fees and inspections



   158.06   Vendor and taxi fees and permits



§ 158.01  BUILDINGS PERMITS.



   (A)   Permits: single-family dwellings.



      (1)   New construction: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (2)   Additions: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (3)   Remodeling: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (4)   Accessory structures: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (5)   Relocation: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (6)   Demolition: $100 flat fee.



   (B)   Permits: apartments.



      (1)   New construction: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (2)   Additions: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (3)   Remodeling: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (4)   Accessory structures: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (5)   Relocation: $0.15/square foot or $125 minimum.



      (6)   Demolition: $100 flat fee.



   (C)   Permits: commercial and industrial.



      (1)   New construction: $0.15/square foot or $300 minimum.



      (2)   Additions: $0.15/square foot or $300 minimum.



      (3)   Remodeling and repairs: $0.15/square foot or $300
minimum.



      (4)   Accessory structures: $0.15/square foot or $300 minimum.



      (5)   Relocation: $0.15/square foot or $300 minimum.



      (6)   Demolition: $100 flat fee.



   (D)   Permits: electrical.



      (1)   Residential: $0.50 per amp plus $25 service charge.



      (2)   Commercial: $0.50 per amp plus $25 service charge.



      (3)   Industrial: $0.50 plus $25 service charge.



      (4)   Temporary pole - residential: $25 service charge.



      (5)   Temporary pole - commercial: $50 service charge.



      (6)   Service and repair work: $50 service charge.



      (7)   Re-connect (residential and commercial): $50 service
charge.



   (E)   Permits: heating, cooling and ventilation.



      (1)   New unit: $40.



      (2)   Replacement unit: $40.



      (3)   Water heater: $35.



   (F)   Permits: plumbing.



      (1)   First fixture: $35.



      (2)   Each additional fixture: $4.



   (G)   Permits: swimming pools.



      (1)   Single-family in-ground: $75.



      (2)   Single-family above-ground: $35.



      (3)   Multi-family: $200.



   (H)   Licenses.



      (1)   Residential general contractor (new): $50/year.



      (2)   Residential general contractor (renewal): $50/year.



      (3)   Commercial general contractor (new): $100/year.



      (4)   Commercial general contractor (renewal): $100/year.



      (5)   Electrical contractor (new): $100/year.



      (6)   Electrical contractor (renewal): $100/year.



      (7)   Electrical supervisor (new): $50/year.



      (8)   Electrical supervisor (renewal): $50/year.



      (9)   HVAC contractor (new): $100/year.



      (10)   HVAC contractor (renewal): $100/year.



      (11)   Plumbing contractor (new): $50/year.



      (12)   Plumbing contractor (renewal): $50/year.



      (13)   Plumbing journeyman (new): $25/year.



      (14)   Plumbing journeyman (renewal): $25/year.



      (15)   Plumbing helper (new): $5/year.



      (16)   Plumbing helper (renewal): $5/year.



   (I)   Other fees.



      (1)   Permit renewal: $25.



      (2)   Re-inspection: $25.



      (3)   Certificate of occupancy: $25.



      (4)   Utility building and sheds: $35.



      (5)   Fence: $35.



      (6)   Foundation-only permit: $50.



(Ord. G-08-31, passed 8-21-2008)



§ 158.02  PLANNING AND ZONING PERMITS.



   (A)   Permanent sign permit: $50.



   (B)   Temporary sign permit: $100.



   (C)   Variances: $150 plus $10 sign fee.



   (D)   Special exceptions: $150 plus $10 sign fee.



   (E)   Special exception and variance combined: $300 plus $10 sign
fee.



   (F)   PUDD Rezoning: $250 plus $10 sign fee.



   (G)   Zoning change: $250 plus $10 sign fee.



   (H)   Site plan review: $100 plus $10 sign fee.



   (I)   Subdivisions: $750 plus $10 per lot and $10 sign fee.



   (J)   Appeals: $100.



(Ord. G-08-31, passed 8-21-2008)



§ 158.03  AMBULANCE FEES.



   (A)   Basic Life Support - resident: $400 plus $9/mile.



   (B)   Basic Life Support - non-resident: $480 plus $9/mile.



   (C)   Advanced Life Support Level I - resident: $500 plus $9/mile.



   (D)   Advanced Life Support Level I - non-resident: $600 plus
$9/mile.



   (E)   Advanced Life Support Level II - resident: $600 plus $9/mile.



   (F)   Advanced Life Support Level II - non-resident: $720 plus
$9/mile.



(Ord. G-08-31, passed 8-21-2008)



§ 158.04  REDEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   CF-1 Form: $150/year.



   (B)   Economic revitalization area (prior August 1,2003): $100/year.



   (C)   Economic revitalization area (after August 1,2003): $300/year.



   (D)   Economic revitalization area (establish new): $600/year.



   (E)   Copying of documents: $0.10/page.



(Ord. G-08-31, passed 8-21-2008)



§ 158.05  SEWER PERMITS, FEES AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Taps.



      (1)   Residential tap (within city limits): $1,650.



      (2)   Residential tap (city fringe): $3,000.



      (3)   Commercial tap: based on impervious drainage areas.



   (B)   Residential and commercial inspection fee: $50.



   (C)   Industrial inspection fee: $100.



   (D)   Capacity study: $3,000.



   (E)   Drainage study: $600.



(Ord. G-08-31, passed 8-21-2008)



§ 158.06  VENDOR AND TAXI FEES AND PERMITS.



   (A)   Vendor’s permit: $10.



   (B)   Solicitations: $50/solicitor.



   (C)   Vacation of right-of-way: $200.



   (D)   Taxi license plate: $60.



   (E)   Taxi permits: $15/driver.



(Ord. G-08-31, passed 8-21-2008)



CHAPTER 159:  RENTAL HOUSING



Section




Registration and Inspection Program




   159.01   Purpose



   159.02   Definitions



   159.03   Compliance required; application of chapter



   159.04   Registration of rental units required



   159.05   Annual registration fees



   159.06   Registration rental permits



   159.07   Rental Housing Fund established



 



   159.99   Penalty



REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION PROGRAM



§ 159.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the registration and
inspection of rental residential property, and to facilitate the prevention
and correction of violations of laws and ordinances pertaining to rental
residential property, so as to protect property values, the public health,
safety and welfare of the people of the city, including but not limited to,
the following:



   (A)   To protect the public health and safety by insuring rental
units comply with the city’s building codes, property maintenance codes and
all other applicable regulations adopted by the State of Indiana or other
governmental agency.



   (B)   To protect the character and stability of residential
neighborhoods.



   (C)   To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely
affect or are likely to adversely affect the safety, general welfare and
health of the persons occupying dwellings.



   (D)   To prevent the overcrowding of rental units.



   (E)   To facilitate the enforcement of minimum standards for
maintenance of existing residential buildings and, thus, to prevent slums and
blight.



   (F)   To preserve the value of property, land, and buildings
throughout the city.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)



§ 159.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates



or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT. Every person at least 18 years of age, or younger if emancipated.



   DWELLING UNIT. The abode of a family; a single unit providing complete,
independent facilities for the exclusive use of the household, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   FAMILY. Includes all of the following:



      (1)   An individual;



      (2)   Two or more individuals related by genetics, marriage,
legal adoption, foster care or guardianship, or other comparable relationship
established by law; or



      (3)   Five or fewer individuals who constitute a relatively
permanent functioning group living as a single housekeeping unit.



   HABITABLE ROOM. Any room meeting the requirements of this chapter for
sleeping, living, or dining purposes, excluding such enclosed places as
closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage places,
utility rooms and similar spaces.



   HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION. An individual’s principal place of residence
that: the individual owns; the individual is buying under a contract,
recorded in the County Recorder’s office; provides that the individual is
to pay the property taxes on the residence; the individual is entitled to
occupy as a tenant-stockholder (as defined in 26 U.S.C. 216, as may be
amended) of a cooperative housing corporation; or is a residence described in
I.C. 6-1.1-12-17.9 (as may be amended) that is owned by a trust if the
individual is an individual described in I.C. 6-1.1-12-17.9 (as may be
amended).



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential building designed for, or modified
to accommodate, more than one independent rental unit.



   OCCUPANCY PERMIT. A permit allowing an owner to lease, rent, or
otherwise use premises by tenants.



   OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable title in a rental
building or premises.



   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
any group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. References in the
masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter; those in the present
tense include the future, and those in the singular include the plural.



   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land containing a rental building or
rental unit.



   REGISTRATION PERMIT. The permit issued by the city upon registration of
each rental unit.



   RENTAL BUILDING. A building containing one or more rental units.



   RENTAL HOUSING CODE. Sections 159.30 through 159.47 of this chapter.



   RENTAL HOUSING OFFICER. That municipal officer charged with the primary
responsibility of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. As set out
in § 159.12 hereof, the City Building Commissioner shall serve as the Rental
Housing Officer.



   RENTAL PERMIT. The form issued by the city to an owner upon completing
the necessary documentation regarding a rental unit.



   RENTAL UNIT. Any rented dwelling unit or rooming unit that does not
have a homestead exemption on the property.



   RENTAL UNIT COMMUNITY. One or more parcels of contiguous real property
upon which are located one or more structures containing rental units, if:



      (1)   The combined total of all rental units in all of the
structures is five or more rental units; and



      (2)   The rental units are not occupied solely by the owner or
the owner’s family.



   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
three or more persons who are not related by blood or married.



   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   TENANCY AGREEMENT. Includes all agreements, written, oral or implied,
and valid rules and regulations embodying the terms and conditions concerning
the use and occupancy of a rental unit.



   TENANT. Any person entitled to occupy a rental unit under a tenancy
agreement to the exclusion of others.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)



§ 159.03  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   No person shall occupy or maintain a rental unit within the
city unless in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This chapter
applies to all rental units located within the city, but shall not apply to
the following:



      (1)   Occupancy in a single-family, owner-occupied dwelling
unit with a homestead exemption.



      (2)   Occupancy in a “group home” or “residential
institution” as those terms are defined by state statute.



      (3)   Occupancy in federally subsidized and owned housing
complexes which have multiple on-site units and which are owned and
maintained by the federal government or local housing authority, or scattered
site Section 8 housing units administered by a local housing authority.



      (4)   Occupancy by the purchaser of a dwelling unit under a
recorded contract of sale.



      (5)   Occupancy in a dormitory owned by Indiana University
Southeast or other institute of higher learning.



      (6)   Transient occupancy in a hotel, motel or other similar
lodging.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of each person owning or
operating a dwelling unit that the person claims is exempt from this chapter,
to produce such documentation or other information as may be requested by the
Rental Housing Officer, or his or her designee, so as to permit the Rental
Housing Officer or designee to determine whether the dwelling unit is exempt.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)



§ 159.04  REGISTRATION OF RENTAL UNITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No owner of real estate within the city shall use that real
estate for the purpose of erecting or maintaining a rental unit thereon after
January 31, 2017, without registering each rental unit with the city and
obtaining a rental permit. All existing rental units shall be registered and
obtain a rental permit with the city by January 31,2017. The registration
shall be effected by furnishing to the city a complete and accurate
application, upon forms prescribed by the city, setting forth the following
information:



      (1)   The name of the owner;



      (2)   The address of the owner;



      (3)   The street address of the rental unit;



      (4)   The number of rental units on the property;



      (5)   If the owner is not an individual, or a resident of
Floyd County, Indiana, or a county contiguous to Floyd County, the name,
address and telephone number of the owner’s agent authorized to receive
notification of complaints, damages, emergencies, substandard conditions or
other communications, including service of process. The address of any and
all agents shall be within Floyd County or a contiguous county. Any owner who
does not reside in Floyd County, Indiana, or a contiguous county shall be
required to designate an agent.



      (6)   A current email and telephone number of the owner and/or
agent.



   (B)   The registration application shall be signed by the owner.
Whenever ownership of a rental unit or group or complex of rental units
changes, the new owner shall have the responsibility to report the change in
ownership to the city. Upon completion of an initial registration of the
unit, a rental permit shall be issued for the rental unit, and shall remain
valid and not expire until a change of ownership. Previously issued rental
permits shall automatically expire 30 days following transfer of title to a
registered property.



   (C)   Notification to the owner or his or her agent at the address
shown on the registration application shall constitute sufficient notice
pursuant to any provision of this chapter. Registration of a rental unit
shall be evidenced by issuance of a rental permit.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.05  ANNUAL REGISTRATION FEES.



   There shall be a $5 annual registration fee assessed for each rental
unit, except as provided in I.C. 36-1-20-5 (as may be amended), located
within the city after the initial registration and obtaining of a rental
permit. The above-referenced registration fee shall be paid on or before
January 31 of each year after a rental permit has been obtained.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.06  REGISTRATION RENTAL PERMITS.



   All rental units in the city shall obtain and maintain a valid rental
permit, except for a rental unit community, which is required to obtain one
rental permit for the complex as per I.C. 36-1-20-3.5 (as may be amended).
For all registered rental units, the city shall issue a rental permit stating
the date of the unit’s registration. The owner of each rental unit shall be
responsible for continuously maintaining a copy of the certificate. Each
owner shall provide the Rental Housing Officer, or his or her designee, with
a copy of the rental permit upon request. A rental permit shall otherwise
remain in effect and not expire until suspended or revoked as set forth in
this chapter. The issuance of a rental permit is not evidence that a property
meets the requirements of this chapter or is otherwise fit for human
habitation.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.07  RENTAL HOUSING FUND ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Common Council hereby establishes a Rental Housing
Non-Reverting Fund as required by I.C. 36-1-20-3 (as may be amended).



   (B)   The Rental Housing Officer, and/or his or her designee(s),
shall have the authority for the collection, allocation and expenditure of
all costs associated with the administration of the rental housing program.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)



§ 159.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   For submitting any other false or materially incomplete
information on an application or any other information submitted under this
chapter, a fine of up to $1,000, unless the violator has been convicted of a
previous violation for submitting any other false or materially incomplete
information on an application or any other information submitted under this
chapter, in which case the fine may be up to $2,500.



   (B)   For failure to maintain a rental permit pursuant to § 159.06,
a fine of up to $500, unless the violator has been convicted of a previous
violation for failing to maintain a rental certificate, in which case the
fine shall be up to $1,000.



   (C)   For failure to timely sign or submit a complete registration
application, a fine of up to $100. Each day a violation of this provision
exists or continues to exist constitutes a separate and distinct violation of
this chapter, with maximum fine of $7,500.



   (D)   For rental of any dwelling unit without first obtaining or
continuing to have a valid registration permit, a fine of up to $100, unless
the violator has been convicted of previous violation involving renting
without a registration permit, in which case the fine shall be up to $500.
Each day a violation of this provision exists or continues to exist
constitutes a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.



   (E)   If fines are imposed by the Board of Public Works and Safety
or inspection fees are not paid, then the Enforcement Officer and/or the City
Attorney’s Office shall file liens upon the property for the outstanding
balances due. A person may appeal the determination of the Rental Housing
Officer to the Board of Public Works and Safety, with respect to any
determination as to registration and rental permit outlined in this chapter,
within ten business days from notice to the owner of the property, based upon
the information provided as part of the registration or by use of the address
used for tax purposes as maintained by the Floyd County Treasurer.



(Ord. G-16-02, passed 3-17-2016)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Indiana Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Cite
 
Code Section




1-1-8.1
 
11.10


4-1-6-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 36


4-1-6-8
 
36.02


4-21.5
 
151.15


4-21.5 et seq.
 
51.156


4-21.5-1 et seq.
 
33.075


4-21.5-3-1–4-21.5-3-37
 
116.35


4-21.5-3-7
 
150.020


5-3-1
 
90.25


5-4-1-5.1
 
33.118; 51.115


5-11-10-2
 
35.41


5-14-1.5
 
33.137; 33.148; 115.41; 151.02


5-14-1.5-5
 
156.107


5-14-1.5-6.1
 
33.148; 36.02


5-14-3
 
36.01


5-14-3-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 36; 36.03


5-14-3-3
 
36.06


5-14-3-4(a)
 
36.01


5-14-3-4(b)
 
33.147; 36.02


5-14-3-4(c)
 
36.07


5-14-3-5
 
36.02


5-14-3-8
 
36.04


5-14-3-9
 
36.05


5-15-5.1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 36


5-16-9-2
 
72.55


5-22-1
 
33.101


5-23
 
30.02


6-1.1-12.1-17(b)
 
35.53


6-1.1-12-17.9
 
159.02


6-1.1-41
 
33.189


8-10-5
 
33.175 , 33.181 , 33.191


8-10-5 et seq.
 
33.176


8-10-5-2
 
33.176


8-10-5-4
 
33.178


8-10-5-5.5
 
33.177


8-10-5-6.5
 
33.181


8-10-5-8.1
 
33.181


8-10-5-9
 
33.182


8-10-5-20
 
33.181


8-23-20-1
 
156.079


9-13-2-1
 
90.05; 150.101


9-17
 
90.26


9-18-12
 
90.05; 90.06


9-18.1-8
 
90.06


9-18.5-8
 
72.55


9-18.5-34
 
90.06


9-21-5
 
71.47


9-21-5 et seq.
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


9-22-1-1
 
90.06


9-22-1-1–9-22-1-32
 
90.01


9-22-1-3
 
90.06


9-22-1-11
 
90.14


9-22-1-12
 
90.15


9-22-1-13
 
90.16


9-22-1-14
 
90.17


9-22-1-15
 
90.18


9-22-1-16
 
90.19


9-22-1-17
 
90.20


9-22-1-18
 
90.18; 90.21


9-22-1-19(a)
 
90.22


9-22-1-19(b)
 
90.22


9-22-1-24
 
90.27


9-22-1-30
 
90.30


9-22-1-31
 
90.31


9-22-1-32
 
90.32


9-22-6
 
90.22


9-24-1 et seq.
 
119.27


10-14-4-1
 
92.01


12-13-5
 
115.35


12-15
 
115.35


12-23-1-6
 
156.005


12-23-1-8
 
156.005


13-17-3
 
156.078


13-18-3
 
156.078


14-21-1-19
 
151.01


14-22-11-1
 
91.00


14-28-1
 
157.039


14-28-1-26
 
157.039


14-28-4
 
157.001


15-5-12
 
91.26


15-5-17-1
 
91.27


16
 
115.23


16-20 et seq.
 
51.146; 115.21


16-20-1-10
 
115.41


16-20-1-1
 
51.157; 101.01; 115.25


16-20-1-26
 
115.38


16-20-1-27
 
115.37


16-20-1-25(c)
 
115.40


16-20-2-2
 
51.145; 115.20


16-20-2-6
 
51.145; 115.35


16-20-2-16
 
51.145; 115.20; 122.02


16-20-8-5
 
115.39


16-20-8-6
 
115.39


16-39
 
36.01


16-41-31 et seq.
 
115.21


16-41-31
 
115.35


16-42-5
 
115.35


16-42-5-4
 
115.22; 115.35; 115.37


16-42-5-25
 
115.23


22-9-1-2
 
33.072


22-9-1-4 et seq.
 
33.082


22-9-1-12.1
 
33.071


22-9.5-4-8
 
33.082


22-9.5-1 et seq.
 
33.082


22-9.5.5.1
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-2
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-3
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-4
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-5
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-8
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-9
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-11
 
33.082


22-9.5-2-13
 
33.082


22-9.5-3
 
33.082


22-9.5-6
 
33.082


22-11-14 et seq.
 
96.02


22-13-2-7
 
150.020


22-13-2-7(b)
 
150.020


22-15-4
 
150.002


23-2-4
 
115.35


25-27-1
 
116.02


25-37-1-11
 
117.35


31-28-5
 
115.25


36-1-6-2
 
150.101


34-13-3-4
 
31.17


34-28-5
 
37.02; 51.157; 115.25


35-42-2-1
 
98.02


35-42-2-3
 
98.02


35-45-1-3
 
98.02


35-45-3-2
 
50.04


35-47-2-3
 
35.22


36-1-3
 
35.25


36-1-5-4
 
31.04


36-1-6-2
 
150.101


36-1-7 et seq.
 
91.00; 91.42


36-1-8-3
 
35.25


36-1-8-5.1
 
35.26


36-1-8-11
 
35.06


36-1-12
 
33.187


36-1-20-3
 
152.07


36-1-20-3.5
 
152.06


36-1-20-5
 
152.05


36-1-20.2
 
31.04


36-1-21
 
31.04


36-2-14-10
 
36.01


36-4-6-3
 
30.65


36-4-6-7
 
30.15


36-4-6-9
 
30.18


36-4-6-10
 
30.23


36-4-6-11
 
31.04


36-4-6-18
 
51.118


36-4-6-21
 
51.118


36-4-7-10
 
35.01


36-4-8
 
35.03; 35.41


36-4-10
 
35.01


36-5-2-9.4
 
31.04


36-7-3-12
 
155.01


36-7-4
 
33.055; 157.001


36-7-4-509
 
150.115


36-7-4-602
 
156.147


36-7-4-602(c)(1)(B)
 
156.107


36-7-4-604
 
156.107


36-7-4-605
 
156.107


36-7-4-608
 
156.107


36-7-4-614
 
156.106


36-7-4-615
 
156.106


36-7-4-800 et seq.
 
156.141


36-7-4-900 et seq.
 
156.145


36-7-4-918.2
 
156.091


36-7-4-918.4
 
156.145


36-7-4-918.5
 
156.145


36-7-4-920
 
156.145


36-7-4-1505
 
156.107


36-7-9
 
150.120


36-7-9-1–36-7-9-28
 
150.121


36-7-9-2
 
150.126


36-7-9-4
 
150.125


36-7-9-14
 
150.128


36-7-9-14(c)(2)
 
150.122


36-7-9-28
 
150.999


36-7-10.1
 
97.22


36-7-10.1-4
 
150.101


36-7-12
 
33.030


36-7-12-5
 
33.031


36-7-12-15
 
33.032


36-7-12-18
 
33.033


36-7-12-18.5
 
33.033


36-7-14.5
 
33.015


36-8-2-6
 
33.085


36-8-3-2
 
32.015


36-8-3.5
 
32.036


36-8-4-2
 
32.038; 32.040


36-8-4-7
 
32.038


36-8-4-8
 
32.016


36-8-4-11
 
32.051


36-8-4.7
 
32.038


36-8-7 et seq.
 
32.002


36-8-7-12.1(b)2(A)
 
32.002


36-8-8-9
 
32.002


36-8-16
 
92.15


36-9-1-8
 
56.01


36-9-2 et seq.
 
51.007


36-9-2-16
 
Ch. 50, 51.007


36-9-2-17
 
Ch. 51, 51.007


36-9-2-18
 
51.007


36-9-6-19
 
Ch. 50


36-9-23
 
Ch. 51; 56.01


36-9-23-4
 
51.115; 33.110


36-9-23-29
 
51.102


36-9-23-30
 
51.029


36-9-23-34
 
51.102


36-9-25 et seq.
 
51.115


36-9-30
 
50.01


36-10-4
 
33.001


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




R-62-7
 
10-1-1962
 
11.01; 11.02


7-77-659
 
6-7-1977
 
154.07


R-84-10
 
4-2-1984
 
36.01–36.07


R-84-17
 
8-6-1984
 
30.18


R-88-32
 
10-20-1988
 
35.02


R-12-10
 
6-25-2012
 
31.04


R-16-09
 
7-22-2016
 
35.53


R-17-04
 
3-16-2017
 
51.101


R-17-09
 
7-20-2017
 
156.079


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




4360
 
- -
 
154.06


Z-58-41
 
- -
 
94.04; 94.05


4063
 
8-17-1936
 
130.01


4074
 
11-12-1936
 
70.02; 70.28; 72.02–72.07; 72.09; 72.10; Ch. 75, Sch. I, II, IV


4104
 
11-16-1937
 
34.02


4116
 
9-5-1938
 
32.002


4120
 
3-6-1939
 
73.04; 73.99


4139
 
11-27-1939
 
70.02; 70.03; 70.25; 70.26; 70.27; 70.40–70.46; 72.72


4188
 
7-18-1941
 
72.01; 72.08; 72.11–72.13; 72.16; 72.17; 72.70; 72.71; 72.74; 72.99


4229
 
12-5-1942
 
72.74


4486
 
8-3-1953
 
99.21; 99.70


4494-1
 
10-5-1953
 
99.55; 99.56


4514
 
6-7-1954
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


4515
 
6-7-1954
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I and II


4573
 
8-27-1956
 
72.15; 72.99


4585
 
12-3-1956
 
154.01–154.06; 154.08–154.10; 154.99


4600
 
3-4-1957
 
30.15–30.24; 30.35; 30.36; 30.50–30.54


G-47-6
 
6-3-1957
 
30.18


G-57-6
 
6-3-1957
 
30.21


G-58-26
 
2-3-1958
 
31.02


G-58-31
 
5-12-1958
 
53.01


G-58-34
 
6-18-1958
 
51.001–51.006; 51.021; 51.028; 51.030; 51.045–51.049;
51.051–51.075–51.081; 51.999


G-58-37
 
8-4-1958
 
31.03


A-58-42
 
10-6-1958
 
31.01


G-58-49
 
12-1-1958
 
97.02–97.08; 97.99


O-58-51
 
12-9-1958
 
35.02


G-59-64
 
7-8-1959
 
99.50–99.54


G-60-80
 
4-4-1960
 
33.001


G-60-84
 
5-2-1960
 
50.01–50.07; 50.99


G-61-107
 
4-4-1961
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


G-61-113
 
6-5-1961
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I, II, III, V, VI, VII


G-61-115
 
7-10-1961
 
33.015


G-61-117
 
7-10-1961
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I, II


G-61-120
 
10-2-1961
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


A-62-128
 
5-14-1962
 
35.01


O-63-139
 
2-18-1963
 
35.02


G-63-140
 
6-5-1963
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


G-64-161
 
6-1-1964
 
37.02


G-64-165
 
7-27-1964
 
32.016


G-64-180
 
11-9-1964
 
35.02; 73.01–73.03; 73.05; 73.06; 73.07; 73.50; 73.51; 73.99


G-65-193
 
2-1-1965
 
35.21


G-65-197
 
4-5-1965
 
115.01–115.04; 115.99


G-65-208
 
7-12-1965
 
33.030


G-65-214
 
8-2-1965
 
72.12–72.14; 72.99


G-64-226
 
10-4-1965
 
99.01; 99.99


G-65-232
 
11-1-1965
 
94.01–94.05; 94.99


G-66-242
 
2-2-1966
 
30.65


G-66-250
 
5-2-1966
 
33.055


A-66-264
 
9-12-1966
 
98.25; 98.27


G-67-293
 
6-5-1967
 
51.002; 51.020; 51.022–51.027; 51.029; 51.030; 51.031–51.034; 51.050;
51.999


G-68-317
 
2-5-1968
 
35.20


G-68-341
 
12-9-1968
 
130.20–130.24


G-69-351
 
- -1969
 
150.001–150.004; 150.020–150.024


G-69-352
 
3-7-1969
 
150.095–150.106; 150.999


G-69-360
 
5-5-1969
 
50.03


G-69-375
 
10-6-1969
 
92.99


G-70-426
 
12-7-1970
 
130.03


G-70-433
 
2-4-1971
 
50.03


Z-71-449
 
7-12-1971
 
156.001–156.006; 156.020–156.024; 156.035–156.042; 156.055–156.062;
156.075–156.079; 156.090; 156.091; 156.128


A-72-473
 
2-22-1972
 
32.065–32.075


Z-72-485
 
8-7-1972
 
156.001; 156.006; 156.055; 156.056; 156.076


Z-73-502
 
2-5-1973
 
156.056


G-74-524
 
1-7-1974
 
33.071–33.073; 33.075


G-74-561
 
10-7-1974
 
99.35–99.38


G-74-567
 
12-2-1974
 
94.20–94.24


G-74-19
 
12-16-1974
 
30.65


G-75-579
 
7-7-1975
 
32.065–32.069; 32.073; 32.074


G-75-581
 
7-7-1975
 
35.35


G-76-598
 
3-1-1976
 
51.058; 51.100; 51.101; 51.103


G-76-600
 
3-15-1976
 
33.015


G-76-613
 
6-11-1976
 
156.079; 156.140–156.143; 156.145–156.150; 156.999


G-76-614
 
6-11-1976
 
116.01; 116.02, 116.20–116.23; 116.35–116.40; 116.99


G-76-627
 
10-4-1976
 
51.103


G-76-635
 
12-6-1976
 
51.022; 51.023


Z-76-636
 
12-6-1976
 
156.006; 156.056; 156.057; 156.075; 156.076


Z-76-646
 
12-6-1976
 
156.076


G-77-639
 
1-3-1977
 
113.01–113.16


G-77-657
 
6-6-1977
 
98.01–98.11


Z-77-659
 
6-6-1977
 
154.02


G-77-679
 
11-7-1979
 
113.02


G-78-686
 
2-6-1978
 
117.01–117.05; 117.99


G-78-692
 
5-8-1978
 
Ch. 75, Sch. VIII


Z-78-706
 
8-7-1978
 
156.005; 156.075


G-78-705
 
8-14-1978
 
116.39


Z-79-734
 
2-5-1979
 
154.05


G-79-736
 
3-5-1979
 
35.02; 110.01–110.13


G-79-737
 
3-5-1979
 
112.01—112.05


G-79-747
 
6-4-1979
 
113.02


G-79-752
 
7-2-1979
 
117.15–117.21; 117.99


G-79-756
 
8-6-1979
 
Ch. 75, Sch. VIII


G-79-775
 
11-12-1979
 
35.02; 72.55–72.59; 72.99


G-80-787
 
3-3-1980
 
35.02; 72.56; 72.99


G-80-840
 
9-25-1980
 
51.103; 51.104


G-81-874
 
2-2-1981
 
Ch. 75, Sch. VIII


G-81-888
 
4-6-1981
 
94.40–94.45; 94.99


G-81-893
 
5-4-1981
 
118.01–118.05; 118.99


G-81-902
 
8-3-1981
 
117.35–117.43; 117.99


G-81-910
 
10-22-1981
 
50.08


G-82-925
 
1-4-1982
 
32.035–32.051


Z-82-945
 
8-2-1982
 
150.115; 150.116


Z-82-953
 
11-1-1982
 
156.005; 156.075; 156.079; 156.142


G-82-961
 
12-15-1982
 
30.65


A-83-967
 
5-2-1983
 
35.03


G-83-971
 
6-6-1983
 
98.02


G-83-1003
 
12-5-1983
 
98.04–98.11


G-83-1015
 
12-19-1983
 
50.08


G-84-1
 
1-9-1984
 
32.002


G-84-5
 
2-6-1984
 
50.08


G-84-8
 
4-2-1984
 
150.120–150.129; 150.999


G-84-17
 
6-4-1984
 
32.018–32.047


G-84-18
 
7-3-1984
 
72.55; 72.60; 72.99


G-84-26
 
8-6-1984
 
35.20


G-85-49
 
1-7-1985
 
70.47–70.49; 70.99


G-85-56
 
2-14-1985
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


Z-85-63
 
5-6-1985
 
156.079


G-85-67
 
6-3-1985
 
150.001–150.003; 150.020; 150.023; 150.024


G-85-75
 
7-22-1985
 
50.08


G-85-85
 
8-6-1985
 
90.02


G-85-103
 
10-7-1985
 
70.48; 70.49


G-85-104
 
10-7-1985
 
98.02; 98.04–98.11


G-85-108
 
11-4-1985
 
34.15—34.17


G-85-109
 
11-4-1985
 
34.01


G-85-116
 
12-2-1985
 
150.005; 150.025–150.031; 150.039; 150.041–150.044; 150.048;
150.060–150.066; 150.068–150.076; 150.084; 150.085; 150.086; 150.999


G-86-123
 
2-3-1986
 
34.17


G-86-124
 
2-4-1986
 
90.01; 90.02


G-86-125
 
3-3-1986
 
150.074


G-86-132
 
4-8-1986
 
34.17


G-86-136
 
5-5-1986
 
98.04–98.11


G-86-142
 
6-2-1986
 
31.15–31.17


G-86-145
 
7-7-1986
 
70.48; 70.49; 71.45


Z-86-167
 
10-6-1986
 
156.075


G-86-175
 
12-1-1986
 
34.17


G-87-179
 
2-2-1987
 
30.01


G-87-180
 
2-2-1987
 
35.23


G-87-181
 
3-2-1987
 
155.01


G-87-186
 
6-1-1987
 
32.001


G-87-193
 
7-6-1987
 
95.01–95.15; 95.99


G-87-194
 
8-3-1987
 
114.01–114.07


G-87-205
 
10-5-1987
 
72.60


G-88-103
 
2-1-1988
 
30.15


G-88-106
 
3-17-1988
 
33.015


G-88-110
 
3-17-1988
 
35.03


G-88-112
 
4-21-1988
 
150.002; 150.010; 150.020


G-88-114
 
5-2-1988
 
34.30–34.32


G-88-116
 
6-6-1988
 
37.02


G-88-117
 
6-6-1988
 
92.15–92.17


G-88-121
 
6-16-1988
 
70.15; 70.16


G-88-130
 
8-18-1988
 
111.01; 111.99


G-88-132
 
8-25-1988
 
37.01; 37.02


G-88-136
 
9-15-1988
 
37.01; 37.02


G-88-145
 
11-7-1988
 
32.018


G-89-154
 
1-9-1989
 
156.005; 156.079; 156.128; 156.144; 156.148


G-89-184
 
9-21-1989
 
35.04


G-89-185
 
9-21-1989
 
33.085—33.088


A-89-200
 
11-16-1989
 
35.22


G-89-204
 
11-16-1989
 
113.03; 113.12


G-90-208
 
2-5-1990
 
50.08


G-90-209
 
2-6-1990
 
51.101


G-90-210
 
2-15-1990
 
73.35; 73.36–73.39; 73.99


G-90-219
 
6-21-1990
 
34.01


G-90-239
 
10-18-1990
 
30.65


G-90-246
 
11-15-1990
 
35.20


G-91-259
 
11-19-1990
 
35.24


G-91-255
 
2-14-1991
 
51.101


G-91-260
 
4-1-1991
 
98.02; 98.05


Z-91-283
 
7-18-1991
 
156.077; 156.079


G-91-287
 
9-9-1991
 
35.20


G-91-299
 
10-17-1991
 
35.25


G-91-302
 
11-4-1991
 
70.99


Z-91-309
 
12-19-1991
 
156.079


G-92-106
 
3-2-1992
 
33.040–33.042


Z-92-134
 
10-5-1992
 
156.075


G-92-135
 
12-7-1992
 
30.15; 30.23; 30.36; 30.53


G-92-139
 
12-17-1992
 
30.65


Z-92-140
 
12-17-1992
 
156.005


G-93-141
 
1-21-1993
 
50.08


G-93-147
 
3-18-1993
 
51.101


G-93-156
 
8-19-1993
 
99.02


G-93-159
 
8-30-1993
 
150.005; 150.025


Z-93-170
 
10-21-1993
 
156.145


Z-93-171
 
10-21-1993
 
154.05


G-93-174
 
11-18-1993
 
70.99


G-94-185
 
2-17-1994
 
33.001


Z-94-190
 
4-21-1994
 
156.075


G-95-223
 
7-20-1995
 
51.100


G-95-228
 
8-17-1995
 
119.01–119.06; 119.08; 119.09; 119.11–119.13; 119.25–119.29; 119.99


G-96-105
 
3-13-1996
 
51.115


G-96-131
 
8-15-1996
 
51.125–51.132


G-96-132
 
8-15-1996
 
33.020


G-96-133
 
8-15-1996
 
119.04; 119.27


G-96-154
 
11-21-1996
 
32.002


G-96-155
 
11-21-1996
 
35.20


Z-96-157
 
11-21-1996
 
156.005; 156.056; 156.075–156.079; 156.105–156.109; 156.141


G-96-156
 
11-22-1996
 
35.19


G-97-174
 
3-20-1997
 
37.02; 72.99


G-97-173
 
3-21-1997
 
34.01


G-97-178
 
5-6-1997
 
113.02


G-97-179
 
5-16-1997
 
32.048


G-97-208
 
11-3-1997
 
51.145—51.158


G-97-209
 
11-3-1997
 
35.05


Z-97-216
 
11-20-1997
 
156.005; 156.055; 156.056; 156.075; 156.076; 156.095; 156.096; 156.140;
156.141; 156.145


G-97-213
 
11-21-1997
 
50.09; 50.99


G-97-215
 
11-21-1997
 
31.17


Z-97-222
 
12-1-1997
 
156.075


G-97-225
 
12-18-1997
 
72.99


G-98-240
 
4-16-1998
 
51.101


G-98-243
 
5-4-1998
 
50.08


G-98-257
 
8-20-1998
 
94.24


G-98-260
 
9-17-1998
 
33.102


G-98-261
 
9-17-1998
 
35.40


G-98-262
 
9-18-1998
 
51.127; 51.128–51.130


G-98-263
 
9-18-1998
 
90.05–90.32


G-98-271
 
9-28-1998
 
72.99


G-98-275
 
11-2-1998
 
130.30–130.32; 130.99


G-98-279
 
11-19-1998
 
51.003


G-98-280
 
11-19-1998
 
54.01–54.04


G-98-287
 
12-9-1998
 
51.101


G-98-290
 
12-17-1998
 
100.01–100.13; 100.99


G-99-306
 
3-2-1999
 
32.001


Z-99-311
 
4-15-1999
 
156.141


G-99-328
 
6-18-1999
 
94.24


G-99-330
 
6-17-1999
 
51.077; 51.999


G-99-331
 
6-17-1999
 
51.126


G-99-334
 
6-28-1999
 
151.01–151.15


G-99-345
 
8-4-1999
 
32.001


G-99-366
 
12-16-1999
 
51.115


G-00-22
 
5-18-2000
 
34.01


Z-00-42
 
8-17-2000
 
156.005


A-00-51
 
9-21-2000
 
35.20


A-00-64
 
12-4-2000
 
115.20–115.25


G-00-67
 
12-4-2000
 
51.077; 51.999


G-01-01
 
1-4-2001
 
37.02; 72.99


G-01-02
 
1-4-2001
 
90.02; 90.30


G-01-03
 
1-4-2001
 
99.01; 99.99


Z-01-06
 
1-18-2001
 
156.075


G-01-24
 
6-4-2001
 
72.18; 72.99


G-01-25
 
6-21-2001
 
97.01; 97.15–97.22; 97.99


G-01-26
 
8-6-2001
 
51.077; 51.999


G-01-37
 
10-18-2001
 
33.001


G-01-38
 
10-18-2001
 
90.02l; 90.30


A-01-47
 
12-20-2001
 
50.08


G-02-07
 
2-21-2002
 
35.20


G-02-11
 
4-17-2002
 
51.059


G-02-08
 
4-18-2002
 
150.068


G-02-13
 
5-6-2002
 
51.101


Z-02-18
 
6-20-2002
 
156.076


G-02-25
 
7-18-2002
 
72.18


Z-02-34
 
9-5-2002
 
156.005; 156.999


G-02-39
 
10-17-2002
 
150.010; 150.020; 150.025; 150.030; 150.031; 150.039–150.049; 150.060;
150.063; 150.066; 150.070; 150.072; 150.073; 150.074; 150.076; 150.084;
150.999


G-02-45
 
11-21-2002
 
51.029


G-03-08
 
3-3-2003
 
98.01–98.12; 98.99


G-03-17
 
4-7-2003
 
34.50–34.55


G-03-25
 
4-17-2003
 
51.029


A-03-33
 
5-15-2003
 
34.17


A-03-34
 
5-15-2003
 
32.001; 32.002; 34.16; 34.17


G-03-37
 
5-15-2003
 
51.101


A-03-40
 
6-19-2003
 
32.080–32.088


G-03-46
 
6-19-2003
 
33.031–33.034


A-03-53
 
8-21-2003
 
96.01; 96.02; 96.99; 117.40


G-03-59
 
9-18-2003
 
35.41; 35.52


A-03-65
 
12-1-2003
 
99.35


A-04-07
 
2-19-2004
 
51.115


G-04-10
 
3-18-2004
 
121.01–121.16; 121.99


G-04-21
 
5-5-2004
 
35.20


G-04-22
 
5-5-2004
 
37.02


Z-04-20
 
5-5-2004
 
156.005; 156.075; 156.079


G-04-23
 
5-20-2004
 
150.101


G-04-27
 
6-1-2004
 
34.01


Z-04-32
 
6-17-2004
 
156.005; 156.055; 156.056; 156.075; 156.077; 156.096


G-04-39
 
8-2-2004
 
90.05; 90.32


A-04-53
 
9-10-2004
 
72.31–72.35


G-04-72
 
12-6-2004
 
150.039


A-04-73
 
12-6-2004
 
55.01; 55.02


G-05-01
 
1-20-2005
 
150.140; 150.141–150.145; 150.999


G-05-10
 
3-8-2005
 
51.116


G-05-19
 
5-19-2005
 
35.26


G-05-25
 
6-6-2005
 
51.117


G-05-47
 
9-22-2005
 
50.01


G-05-50
 
10-3-2005
 
70.04


G-05-52
 
11-2-2005
 
56.01–56.11


G-05-55
 
11-17-2005
 
33.002


G-06-01
 
1-9-2006
 
51.102


Z-06-09
 
4-3-2006
 
56.20–56.33


G-06-10
 
4-3-2006
 
56.45–56.52


G-06-12
 
4-20-2006
 
56.60–56.72


G-06-13
 
5-1-2006
 
90.31


G-06-14
 
5-1-2006
 
35.41


G-06-17
 
5-18-2006
 
35.06


G-06-20
 
6-5-2006
 
33.110–33.120


G-06-21
 
6-5-2006
 
56.05


G-06-29
 
8-29-2006
 
51.101


G-06-39
 
9-21-2006
 
51.118


G-07-10
 
3-22-2007
 
56.34


G-07-11
 
3-22-2007
 
35.27


G-07-20
 
5-17-2007
 
35.29


G-07-36
 
8-6-2007
 
35.28


G-07-59
 
12-27-2007
 
30.65


G-08-03
 
1-23-2008
 
51.115


G-08-10
 
3-20-2008
 
35.07


G-08-11
 
4-4-2008
 
34.01


G-08-14
 
5-5-2008
 
115.35–115.44


G-08-15
 
5-15-2008
 
30.02


G-08-16
 
5-15-2008
 
35.51


G-08-20
 
6-2-2008
 
94.30


G-08-45
 
12-18-2008
 
35.30


G-09-01
 
1-5-2009
 
51.102


Z-09-04
 
2-2-2009
 
156.055; 156.056; 156.075; 156.076; 156.096


G-09-05
 
3-2-2009
 
120.01–120.18; 120.19


G-09-06
 
3-19-2009
 
33.165


Z-09-09
 
4-10-2009
 
156.005


G-09-14
 
5-4-2009
 
99.01; 99.99


G-09-15
 
5-4-2009
 
72.01–72.18, 72.34; 72.56– 72.58; 72.60; 72.71; 72.99


G-09-16
 
5-4-2009
 
37.02


G-09-17
 
5-4-2009
 
32.020


G-09-18
 
5-4-2009
 
90.02


G-09-20
 
5-21-2009
 
72.19


G-09-21
 
5-21-2009
 
101.01


G-09-24
 
6-1-2009
 
150.103


G-09-26
 
6-1-2009
 
150.101


G-09-32
 
8-20-2009
 
56.05


G-09-36
 
9-17-2009
 
50.08


G-09-46
 
12-7-2009
 
55.01; 55.02


G-10-04
 
2-1-2010
 
70.99


G-10-05
 
2-1-2010
 
71.21


G-10-10
 
5-5-2010
 
32.019


G-10-12
 
4-15-2010
 
30.22


G-10-13
 
4-15-2010
 
51.101


G-10-15
 
4-15-2010
 
122.01–122.30; 122.99


G-10-21
 
6-7-2010
 
115.38


G-10-26
 
9-2-2010
 
50.08


G-10-31
 
10-21-2010
 
72.20; 72.99


G-10-35
 
11-1-2010
 
123.01; 123.02; 123.99


G-10-38
 
12-8-2010
 
71.01–71.06; 71.20–71.30; 71.45–71.47


G-11-03
 
3-7-2011
 
151.10; 151.16; 151.17


G-11-07
 
4-4-2008
 
115.40


G-11-11
 
4-21-2011
 
99.15–99.20


G-11-26
 
8-18-2011
 
119.01–119.04; 119.13; 119.25; 119.26; 119.29; 119.99


G-11-30
 
10-3-2011
 
130.01


G-11-35
 
11-17-2011
 
97.19; 97.20; 97.99


G-11-36
 
11-17-2011
 
73.01–73.07; 73.50, 73.51; 73.99


G-11-41
 
12-15-2011
 
90.30


G-11-42
 
12-15-2011
 
96.01; 96.02; 96.99


G-12-01
 
2-6-2012
 
33.165


Z-12-14
 
7-19-2012
 
156.005; 156.075; 156.077


G-12-15
 
7-19-2012
 
33.070 - 33.077, 33.080,  33.081


G-12-17
 
8-16-2012
 
33.135–33.151


Z-12-20
 
11-15-2012
 
156.005; 156.006; 156.056; 156.075; 157.001–157.014; 157.025–157.027;
157.035–157.042; 157.050–157.056; 157.999


Z-12-25
 
10-22-2012
 
156.005; 156.075; 156.077


G-12-32
 
11-15-2012
 
33.001; 33.002


G-12-37
 
12-27-2012
 
30.65


G-13-01
 
1-7-2013
 
124.01–124.04; 124.99


G-13-03
 
2-21-2013
 
37.02; 97.09


G-13-04
 
2-21-2013
 
99.39; 99.99


G-13-05
 
3-4-2013
 
30.17; 30.36


G-13-07
 
4-1-2013
 
52.001–52.073 ; Ch. 52, Apps. A , B


G-13-11
 
5-16-2013
 
91.00–91.28; 91.35; 91.36; 91.38–91.47; 91.98; 91.99


G-13-12
 
5-16-2013
 
33.071; 33.074


G-14-01
 
1-6-2014
 
117.50


G-14-02
 
1-6-2014
 
33.175–33.191


G-14-06
 
4-7-2014
 
51.007


Z-14-07
 
4-7-2014
 
157.005, 157.007


G-14-12
 
7-7-2014
 
34.01


G-14-15
 
7-17-2014
 
33.082


G-14-16
 
8-12-2014
 
30.65


G-15-03
 
5-21-2015
 
30.01


G-15-04
 
6-1-2015
 
30.22


G-15-05
 
6-1-2015
 
30.15


G-08-31
 
8-21-2008
 
158.01–158.06


G-16-02
 
3-17-2015
 
159.01–159.07; 159.99


G-16-08
 
9-1-2016
 
96.01; 96.02; 96.99


G-16-10
 
10-3-2016
 
150.095–150.098; 150.103; 150.106; 150.999


Z-17-02
 
3-16-2017
 
156.005; 156.075; 156.077


G-17-03
 
4-3-2017
 
30.15


G-17-04
 
4-20-2017
 
30.15


G-17-10
 
8-7-2017
 
50.04


G-17-11
 
8-7-2017
 
37.02


G-17-16
 
11-6-2017
 
37.02; 72.01


 
 
 
 
 




 


