xv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I. ADMINISTRATION
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Governing Body
Article 3. Officers and Employees
Article 4. Personnel Policy and Employee Benefits
Article 5. Oaths and Bonds
Article 6. Open Records
Article 7. Investment of Public Funds
Article 8. Library Board
Article 9. Old City Records
Article 10. Administrative Departments
Article 11. Civil Defense
Article 12. Public Building Commission
CHAPTER II. ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Dogs and Cats
Article 3. Other Animals
CHAPTER III. BEVERAGES
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Cereal Malt Beverages
Article 3. Alcoholic Liquor
Article 4. Private Clubs
Article 5. Drinking Establishments
Article 6. Caterers
Article 7. Temporary Permits
CHAPTER IV. BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Article 1. Administrative Code
Article 2. Building Code
Building Standards
Dwelling Construction Under the
Building Code
Guidelines for Manufactured Housing
Installations
Article 3. Electrical Code
Article 4. Plumbing Code
Article 5. Mechanical Code
Article 6. Housing Code
Article 7. Landscaping and Urban Forestry Code
xvi
Article 8. Numbering Buildings
Article 9. Moving Buildings
Article 10. Dangerous and Unfit Structures
Article 11. International Private Disposal Code
Article 12. International Fuel Gas Code
Article 13. International Property Maintenance Code
CHAPTER V. BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Article 1. Solicitors, Canvassers, Peddlers
Article 2. Pawnbrokers and Precious Metal Dealers
Article 3. Adult Entertainment Establishments and
Hotels
Article 4. Escort Services
CHAPTER VI. ELECTIONS
Article 1. City Elections
Article 2. Wards
CHAPTER VII. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Article 1. Department of Public Safety
Article 2. Fire Prevention
Article 3. Fireworks
Article 4. Firemen's Relief Association
Article 5. Property in Safety Department Custody
Article 6. Department of Public Safety Fees
CHAPTER VIII. HEALTH AND WELFARE
Article 1. Junked Motor Vehicles on Private Property
Article 2. Weeds
Article 3. Fair Housing
Article 4. Insurance Proceeds Fund
Article 5. Release of Hazardous Materials
CHAPTER IX. MUNICIPAL COURT
Article 1. General Provisions
xvii
CHAPTER X. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Reserved
CHAPTER XI. PUBLIC OFFENSES
Article 1. Uniform Offense Code
Article 2. Local Regulations
Article 3. Mob Action
Article 4. Controlled Substances
CHAPTER XII. PUBLIC PROPERTY
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Santa Fe Lake and Park
Article 3. Lake Augusta-Gavin Park
Article 4. City Swimming Pool
Article 5. Elmwood Cemetery
CHAPTER XIII. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Article 1. Sidewalks
Article 2. Pavements, Curbs and Street Regulations
Article 3. Street Use Regulations
Article 4. Special Regulations, Certain Streets
Article 5. Snow and Ice
CHAPTER XIV. TRAFFIC
Article 1. Standard Traffic Ordinance
Article 2. Local Traffic Regulations
Article 3. Hazardous Materials
Article 4. Bicycles
Article 5. Emergency Snow Routes
Article 6. Emergency Access Routes
CHAPTER XV. UTILITIES
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Water
Article 3. Electricity
Article 4. Sewers
Article 5. Solid Waste
Article 6. Water Conservation
xviii
CHAPTER XVI. ZONING AND PLANNING
Article 1. City Planning Commission/
Board of Zoning Appeals
Article 2. Zoning Regulations
Article 3. Subdivision Regulations
Article 4. Flood Plain Management
APPENDIX A. CHARTER ORDINANCES
APPENDIX B. FRANCHISES
INDEX
1-1
CHAPTER I. ADMINISTRATION
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Governing Body
Article 3. Officers and Employees
Article 4. Personnel Policy and Employee Benefits
Article 5. Oaths and Bonds
Article 6. Open Records
Article 7. Investment of Public Funds
Article 8. Library Board
Article 9. Old City Records
Article 10. Administrative Departments
Article 11. Civil Defense
Article 12. Public Building Commission
____________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-101. CODE DESIGNATED. The chapters, articles and sections herein shall
constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Augusta, Kansas," and
may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Augusta City Code." (Code
1991; Code 2010)
1-102. DEFINITIONS. In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the
city, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body
or the context clearly requires otherwise:
(a) City - shall mean the City of Augusta, Kansas.
(b) Code - shall mean "The Code of the City of Augusta, Kansas."
(c) Computation of Time. - The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last
day be a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
(d) County - means the County of Butler in the State of Kansas.
(e) Delegation of Authority. - Whenever a provision appears requiring or
authorizing the head of a department or officer of the city to do some act or
perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or
perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise.
(f) Director of Public Safety - shall include the positions of chief of public
safety, fire chief and civil defense director.
(g) Gender - Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter.
(h) Governing Body - shall be construed to mean the mayor and city
council of the city, or those persons appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of
mayor or the city council as provided in this code.
1-2
(i) In the city - shall mean and include all territory over which the city now
has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its public safety
powers or other regulatory powers.
(j) Joint authority - All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such persons or officers.
(k) Month - shall mean a calendar month.
(l) Number - Words used in the singular include the plural and words
used in the plural include the singular.
(m) Oath - includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the word "swear" is
equivalent to the word "affirm."
(n) Officers, departments, etc. - Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers,
departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
(o) Owner - applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner
of the whole but any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of
the whole or a part of such building or land.
(p) Person - includes a firm, partnership, association of persons,
corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.
(q) Property - includes real, personal and mixed property.
(r) Real Property - includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all
rights thereto and interest therein, equitable as well as legal.
(s) Shall, may - "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
(t) Sidewalk - means any portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
(u) Signature, subscription - includes a mark when the person cannot
write, when his or her name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a
person who writes his or her own name as a witness.
(v) State - shall be construed to mean the State of Kansas.
(w) Street - means and includes public streets, avenues, boulevards,
highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and
all other public thoroughfares in the city.
(x) Tenant or occupant - applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, whether alone or with others.
(y) Tenses - Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
(z) Writing or written - may include printing, engraving, lithography and
any other mode of representing words and letters, except those cases where the
written signature or the mark of any person is required by law.
(aa) Year - means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
(Code 1991)
1-103. EXISTING ORDINANCES. The provisions appearing in this code, so far as
they are in substance the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the
1-3
effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not
as new enactments. (Code 1991)
1-104. EFFECT OF REPEAL. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive an
ordinance previously repealed, nor shall such repeal affect any right which has
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred or any proceeding commenced
under or by virtue of the ordinance repealed, except as shall be expressly stated
therein. (Code 1991)
1-105. CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS. The catchlines of the sections of this code
printed in capital letters are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents
of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor
as any part of any section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted.
(Code 1991)
1-106. PARENTHETICAL AND REFERENCE MATTER. The matter in parenthesis
at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the code.
Citations indicate only the source and the text may or may not be changed by this
code. This code is a new enactment under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3014 and
12-3015. Reference matter not in parenthesis is for information only and is not a
part of this code. (Code 1991)
1-107. AMENDMENTS; REPEAL. Any portion of this code may be amended by
specific reference to the section number as follows: "Section _____ of the code
of the City of Augusta is hereby amended to read as follows: (the new provisions
shall then be set out in full). . ." A new section not heretofore existing in the code
may be added as follows: "The code of the City of Augusta is hereby amended
by adding a section (or article or chapter) which reads as follows: . . .(the new
provisions shall be set out in full). . ." All sections, or articles, or chapters to be
repealed shall be repealed by specific reference as follows: "Section (or article or
chapter) __________ of the code of the City of Augusta is hereby repealed."
(Code 1991)
1-108. ORDINANCES. The governing body shall have the care, management and
control of the city and its finances, and shall pass all ordinances needed for the
welfare of the city. All ordinances shall be valid when a majority of all the
members-elect of the city council shall vote in favor. Where the number of
favorable votes is one less than required, the mayor shall have power to cast the
deciding vote in favor of the ordinance. (K.S.A. 12-3002; Code 1991)
1-109. SAME; SUBJECT AND TITLE; AMENDMENT. No ordinance shall contain
more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no section
or sections of an ordinance shall be amended unless the amending ordinance
contains the entire section or sections as amended and the section or sections
amended shall be repealed. (K.S.A. 12-3004; Code 1975, 1-121; Code 1991)
1-110. SAME; PUBLICATION. No ordinance, except those appropriating money,
shall be in force until published in the official city newspaper by the city clerk.
1-4
One publication of any such ordinance shall be sufficient unless additional
publications are required by statute or ordinance. The publisher of the newspaper
shall prefix such published ordinance by a line in brackets stating the month, day
and year of such publication. (K.S.A. 12-3007; Code 1991)
1-111. SAME; ORDINANCE BOOK. Following final passage and approval of each
ordinance, the city clerk shall enter the same in the ordinance book of the city as
provided by law. Each ordinance shall have appended thereto the manner in
which the ordinance was passed, the date of passage, the page of the journal
containing the record of the final vote on its passage, the name of the newspaper
in which published and the date of publication. (K.S.A. 12-3008; Code 1991)
1-112. RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS. Except where a state statute or city ordinance
specifically requires otherwise, all resolutions and motions shall be passed if
voted upon favorably by a majority of a quorum of the city council. (Code 1991)
1-113. CITY RECORDS. The city clerk or any other officer or employee having
custody of city records and documents shall maintain such records and
documents in accordance with K.S.A. 12-120 to 12-121 inclusive, which is
incorporated by reference herein as if set out in full. (K.S.A. 12-120:121; Code
1991)
1-114. ALTERING CODE. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to
insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Augusta to be
misrepresented thereby. This restriction shall not apply to amendments or
revisions of this code authorized by ordinance duly adopted by the governing
body. (Code 1991)
1-115. SCOPE OF APPLICATION. Any person convicted of doing any of the acts
or things prohibited, made unlawful, or the failing to do any of the things
commanded to be done, as specified and set forth in this code, shall be deemed
in violation of this code and punished in accordance with section 1-116. Each day
any violation of this code continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Code
1991)
1-116. GENERAL PENALTY. Whenever any offense is declared by any provision
of this code, absent a specific or unique punishment prescribed, the offender shall
be punished in accordance with this section.
(a) A fine of not more than $1,000; or,
(b) Imprisonment in jail for not more than 179 days; or,
(c) Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed (a) and (b) above.
(Code 1991)
1-117. SEVERABILITY. If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this code or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid or unenforceable, such
1-5
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Code
1991)
1-6
ARTICLE 2. GOVERNING BODY
1-201. GOVERNING BODY. The governing body shall consist of a mayor and eight
councilmembers to be elected as set out in Charter Ordinance No. 12. (Code
1975, 1-101; Code 1991; Code 2010)
1-202. POWERS AND DUTIES. The governing body shall have the power to enact,
ordain, alter, modify or repeal any and all regular ordinances and charter
ordinances not repugnant to the constitution or the laws of the State of Kansas,
and such as it shall deem expedient for the good government of the city, the
preservation of the peace and good order, the suppression of the vice and
immorality, the benefit of trade and commerce, and the health of the inhabitants
and such other ordinances, rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry
such power into effect, and the governing body shall be responsible for the city
manager's efficient administration of the city's business. The governing body shall
have such other powers and duties as may be now or hereafter conferred on
governing bodies by law. The governing body shall further have the power to
cause inquiry to be made at any time into the affairs and business of the city, but
no member of the governing body shall directly interfere with the conduct of any
department, except at the express direction of the governing body. (K.S.A. 12-
103; Code 1975, 1-106)
1-203. SAME; MEETINGS. (a) Regular meetings of the governing body shall be
held on the first and third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. In the event the
regular meeting day shall fall on any legal holiday or any day observed as a
holiday by the city offices, the governing body shall fix the succeeding day not
observed as a holiday as a meeting day.
(b) Special meetings may be called by the mayor or acting mayor, on the
written request of any three members of the city council, specifying the object and
purpose of such meeting, which request shall be read at a meeting and entered at
length on the journal.
(c) Regular or special meetings of the governing body may be adjourned
for the completion of its business at such subsequent time and place as the
governing body shall determine in its motion to adjourn.
(K.S.A. 14-111; Code 1975, 1-110,112:116; Ord. 1835, Sec. 1; Ord. 1991; Code
2010)
1-204. SAME; QUORUM. In all cases, it shall require a majority of the
councilmembers-elect to constitute a quorum to do business. (K.S.A. 14-111;
Code 1975, 1-110; Code 1991)
1-205. MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES. The mayor shall preside at all meetings
of the city council, and shall communicate to the city council such information and
recommend such measures as he or she may deem advisable. He or she shall
be the official head and chief executive officer of the city on all formal occasions
and the mayor shall have the power to remit fines and forfeitures and grant
reprieves and pardons for offenses arising under the ordinances of the city, by
and with the consent of the council, in the manner prescribed in K.S.A. 14-310.
The mayor shall have further power to appoint with the consent of the majority of
1-7
the councilmembers, all members to all city boards and commissions when the
terms of such members expire or the office becomes vacant unless a different
procedure for appointment is specified by ordinance or by the laws or constitution
of the State of Kansas. (K.S.A. 14-301:302, 14-305, 14-310; Code 1975, 1-107)
1-206. PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL. The city council shall elect one of its own
body as president of the council, at the first meeting after the election of the
council. The president of the council shall preside at all meetings of the council in
the absence of the mayor. In the absence of both the mayor and the president of
the council, the council shall elect one of its members as "acting president of the
council." The president and acting president, when occupying the place of mayor,
shall have the same privileges as other councilmembers but shall exercise no
veto. (K.S.A. Supp. 14-308; Code 1975, 1-108; Code 1991; Code 2010)
1-207. VACANCIES IN GOVERNING BODY; HOW FILLED. All vacancies
occurring in the office of city councilmembers for the city, whether such vacancies
occur by reason of the removal of a council member from his or her ward or by his
or her death, resignation, the failure of a council member to qualify for office, or
the disqualification of a council member for the holding of such office shall be
filled by an election held among the remaining members of the city council of said
city, and such election must be held at the next regular meeting of the governing
body of the city or at a special meeting called thereto for the purpose of filling
such vacancy or at an adjournment or continuance of such regular or special
meeting and any successor in office elected by the governing body to fill such
vacancy must be elected by a majority of the remaining councilmembers of the
city, and should the remaining councilmembers of the city fail to elect a successor
in office for the vacancy in office of council member after being polled three times
by the mayor, or in his absence, the president of the council of said city, then and
in the event, the mayor, or in his or her absence, the president of the council of
the city, shall appoint a qualified person from the ward in which said vacancy
exists to fill such unexpired term; and in the event any person so elected by the
remaining members of the council or appointed by the mayor or president of the
council in the manner aforesaid, should refuse, fail or neglect to qualify for such
office by taking or subscribing to his or her oath for a period of 30 days following
such election or appointment, as the case may be, then and in that event the
mayor of said city shall forthwith appoint another qualified person to fill such
vacancy. (C.O. No. 8, Sec. 5)
1-208. COMPENSATION. Members of the governing body shall receive as
compensation such amounts as may be fixed by ordinance. (Code 1991)
1-209. EXPENSES. Each member of the governing body shall receive for his or
her services and as reimbursement for his or her expenses, compensation as
follows:
(a) Mileage at the same rate as is established by law by the State of
Kansas for state employees for each mile traveled by the shortest route upon the
performance of duties assigned by the mayor, city council and/or city manager.
(b) Reimbursement for actual food and lodging expenses upon the
performance of duties assigned by the mayor, city council and/or city manager,
1-8
provided such expenses shall be documented by proper receipts and taxed
according to IRS regulations.
(Code 1991; Code 2010)
1-210. INCORPORATING CODE OF PROCEDURE FOR KANSAS CITIES. There
is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of establishing a code of
procedure for the conduct of city council meetings of the City of Augusta, Kansas,
that certain code known as the "Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities," current
edition, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas
Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas, save and except such articles, sections, parts or
portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed. No fewer than
three copies of said Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities shall be marked or
stamped "Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Augusta,
Kansas," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed
clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to which shall be
attached a copy of this section, and filed with the city clerk to be open to
inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (Code 2010)
1-211. SAME; AMENDMENTS. The “Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities” as
incorporated by reference in 1-210, shall have the following amendments: The
first sentence in Section 42 is hereby changed to read as follows: “For those
matters not covered by these rules, the procedure shall be as decided by Robert’s
Rules of Order.”
1-212. SAME; DELETIONS. Section 40 of the “Code of Procedure for Kansas
Cities” relating to confirmation of mayoral appointments to elected positions is
hereby declared to be and is omitted and deleted.
1-9
ARTICLE 3. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-301. CITY CLERK. The city clerk shall:
(a) Be custodian of all city records, books, files, papers, documents and
other personal effects belonging to the city and not properly pertaining to any
other office;
(b) Carry on all official correspondence of the city;
(c) Attend and keep a record of the proceedings of all regular and special
meetings of the governing body;
(d) Enter every appointment of office and the date thereof in the journal;
(e) Enter or place each ordinance of the city in the ordinance books after
its passage;
(f) Publish all ordinances, except those appropriating money, and such
resolutions, notices and proclamations as may be required by law or ordinance.
(Code 1975, 1-307:311; Code 1991)
1-302. SAME; FISCAL RECORDS. The city clerk shall:
(a) Prepare and keep suitable fiscal records according to generally
accepted accounting principles;
(b) Assist in preparing the annual budget;
(c) Audit all claims against the city for goods or services rendered for the
consideration of the governing body. His or her accounts shall properly show the
amounts paid from any fund of the city and the cash balance existing in each
fund;
(d) Keep an accurate account of all bonds issued by the city;
(e) Keep a record of all special assessments.
(Code 1975, 1-307:311; Code 1991)
1-303. SAME; SEAL; OATHS. The city clerk shall:
(a) Have custody of the corporate seal of the city and shall affix the same
to the official copy of all ordinances, contracts, and other documents required to
be authenticated;
(b) Have power to administer oaths for all purposes pertaining to the
business and affairs of the city;
(c) Keep suitable files of all such oaths required to be deposited in his or
her office.
(Code 1975, 1-307:311; Code 1991)
1-304. SAME; WITHHOLDING AGENTS. The city clerk is designated as the
withholding agent of the city for the purposes of the Federal Revenue (Income)
Act, and shall perform the duties required of withholding agents by said act or any
other act requiring withholding from the compensation of any city officer or
employee. The clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the
governing body or the Kansas statutes. (Code 1975, 1-307:311,313:324; Code
1991)
1-305. DEPUTY CITY CLERK. (a) The office of deputy city clerk is hereby
established. The city manager shall appoint the deputy city clerk.
1-10
(b) The deputy city clerk shall perform those duties assigned to that office
by the city clerk or city manager.
(c) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the position of city clerk the city is
without a person appointed, confirmed or qualified to hold that office, the deputy
city clerk shall become the acting city clerk and fulfill the duties of that office.
(Ord. 1285, Secs. 1:2; Code 1991; Code 2010)
1-306. CITY TREASURER. The city treasurer shall:
(a) Keep a full and accurate record of all money received and paid out in a
ledger book provided by the governing body;
(b) Publish a quarterly financial statement;
(c) Deposit all public moneys and sign all checks of the city;
(d) Pay out city funds only upon orders or warrants properly signed by the
city manager;
(e) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city manager or
the Kansas statutes.
(K.S.A. 10-803; K.S.A. 12-1608; Code 1975, 1-325:331; Code 1991)
1-307. CITY ATTORNEY; OFFICE; DUTIES. There is hereby established the office
of city attorney. The city attorney shall be appointed by the city manager. No
person shall be eligible for the office of city attorney who is not an attorney at law
admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of the State of Kansas. The city
attorney shall be charged with the general direction and supervision of the legal
affairs of the city. The city attorney shall:
(a) Attend meetings of the city governing body when so directed to attend
by the governing body;
(b) Advise the city governing body and all officers of the city upon such
legal questions affecting the city and its offices as may be submitted to him or her;
(c) When requested by the city governing body, give opinions in writing
upon any such questions;
(d) Draft such ordinances, contracts, leases, easements, conveyances and
other instruments in writing as may be submitted to him or her in the regular
transaction of affairs of the city;
(e) Approve all ordinances of the city as to form and legality;
(f) Attend planning commission and board of zoning appeals meetings
when so directed by the boards;
(g) Appear and prosecute all violations of city ordinances in municipal
court when his or her services shall be required;
(h) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing
body, the city manager and the Kansas statutes.
(Code 1991)
1-308. CITY ENGINEER. The city engineer shall be a licensed professional
engineer in the State of Kansas. He or she shall be responsible for duties
assigned by the city manager as from time to time are appropriate. (Code 1991)
1-309. CITY MANAGER. The administration of the city's business shall be in the
hands of a city manager. (K.S.A. 12-1024; Code 1975, 1-201)
1-11
1-310. APPOINTMENT; TERM; QUALIFICATION. Annually on the anniversary
date of the hiring of the city manager, the governing body shall review the
appointment of the city manager. He or she shall hold office at the pleasure of
the governing body. The governing body may, at its discretion, delay
appointment of the city manager until the third meeting of the governing body
following the anniversary date. The city manager in office shall continue in office
until his or her successor is appointed. Whenever a vacancy occurs by virtue of
dismissal, resignation, death or disqualification, the governing body shall
immediately appoint another city manager. The city manager shall be chosen
solely upon the basis of administrative ability and the choice shall not be limited
by any resident qualifications. (K.S.A. 12-1024, 12-1025; Code 1975, 1-202;
Code 1991)
1-311. SALARY; BOND. The city manager shall receive a salary to be fixed by the
governing body and shall give a bond for the faithful performance of his or her
duties in such amount as may be required by the city. (K.S.A. 12-1024, 12-1025;
Code 1975, 1-203)
1-312. DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER. The city manager shall appoint a municipal
judge, city treasurer and city attorney, as well as the heads of the various
departments of the city as hereafter designated. The city manager shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances and for the proper
discharge of the duties of the respective city administrative officers and
employees. He or she shall have the power to appoint and remove all
nonelective heads of departments, officers and employees of the city and will
undertake any other ministerial acts assigned to him or her by the governing
body. The city manager may perform the duties of the head of any city
department for which duties he or she is qualified, as deemed appropriate by the
current job description. He or she may designate one person to be the head of
one or more departments or offices of the city except where the duties of such
offices would be incompatible. He or she shall be responsible for discipline of all
appointive officers and may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or
the conduct or accounts of any officer or employee to be examined. He or she
shall prepare or cause the preparation of the annual budget to be submitted to the
governing body for its approval. He or she may make recommendation to the
governing body on all matters concerning the welfare of the city and shall have a
seat, but not a vote, in all public meetings of the governing body. (Code 1975, 1-
204; Code 2010)
1-313. COUNTERSIGN WARRANTS. The city manager shall countersign all
warrants or warrant checks issued by the city clerk. (Code 1975, 1-208)
1-314. PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS. The city manager is authorized and directed to
make arrangements for deductions from payroll for all or part of the cost of group
health, accident and/or life insurance plans and other deductions for community
or united funds. (Code 1975, 1-209; Code 1991)
1-12
ARTICLE 4. PERSONNEL POLICY AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
1-401 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS. There is hereby incorporated
by reference for the purpose of establishing employee personnel rules regulations
the document entitled “Uniform Personnel Rules and Regulations for the City of
Augusta.” No fewer than three copies of said document shall be marked or
stamped “Official Copy as adopted by the Code of the City of Augusta” and which
there shall be attached a copy of this section. Said official copies shall be filed
with the city clerk and shall be open to inspection and available to the public at all
reasonable hours. All departments of the city shall be supplied with copies of such
rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary. (Code 1991)
1-13
ARTICLE 5. OATHS AND BONDS
1-501. OATH; AFFIRMATION. All safety officers and governing body members of
the city, whether elected or appointed, either under the laws of the State of
Kansas or ordinances of the city, shall before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation as follows:
Oath: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Kansas
and faithfully discharge the duties of __________ (here enter name of office or
position). So help me God."
Affirmation: “I do solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm that I will
support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Kansas and
faithfully discharge the duties of ___________ (enter name of office or position).
This I do under the pains and penalties of perjury.
All other employees of the City must sign a written oath before entering upon
the duties of their position.
(K.S.A. 75-4308, 54-104, 54-106; Code 2010)
1-502. OATHS FILED. All safety officers and governing body members required to
take and subscribe or sign an oath or affirmation shall be supplied the forms for
the purpose at the expense of the city and upon taking and subscribing or signing
any such oath or affirmation, the same shall be filed with the city clerk. (Code
1975, 1-402; Code 1991; Code 2010)
1-503. BONDS REQUIRED. (a) Before taking office or assuming the duties of an
employee of the city, the officers and employees of the city hereinafter named
and any other officer or employee who has access to city funds or property of a
valuable nature shall furnish unto the city a bond conditioned upon the faithful
performance of all duties of this office or employment and such bonds shall be in
at least the following amounts for the following offices:
(1) City Manager, minimum - $15,000.
(2) City Clerk, minimum - $15,000.
(3) City Treasurer, minimum - $15,000.
(4) Municipal Judge, minimum - $2,000.
(5) Director of Public Safety, minimum - $2,000.
(6) Each Utility Collection Clerk - $5,000.
(7) Treasurer of Firemen's Relief Association - $25,000.
(8) Faithful performance of Duty for Governing Body, limit $15,000.
(b) The governing body may provide for the coverage by blanket bond of
such officers and employees and in such amounts as the governing body may, by
resolution, designate.
Provided, that such bonds shall be executed by responsible bonding
company authorized to do business in the State of Kansas, be payable to and for
the use and benefit for the city, in the minimum sum herein above specified or
such other amounts in excess thereof as the governing body from time to time
may determine by motion or resolution as necessary.
1-14
(Code 1975, 1-403; Code 1991)
1-504. SAME; PREMIUMS. All premiums on surety bonds shall be paid by the city.
(K.S.A. 78-111; Code 1991)
1-505. CONDITION OF BONDS. Each of the bonds required in section 1-503 of
this article shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of duty and all acts
required by the laws of Kansas and of the city, and for the application and
payment over to the proper persons of all moneys or property coming into the
hands of each such officer by virtue of his or her office. (Code 1975, 1-405; Code
1991)
1-506. APPROVAL OF BONDS. All bonds given to the city shall be approved as to
their form by the city attorney and as to surety and sufficiency by the governing
body, unless otherwise provided by the laws of the State of Kansas. (Code 1975,
1-404; Code 1991)
1-15
ARTICLE 6. OPEN RECORDS
1-601. POLICY. (a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that all public
records which are made, maintained or kept by or are in the possession of the
city, its officers and employees, shall be open for public inspection as provided
by, and subject to the restrictions imposed by, the Kansas Open Records Act.
(b) Any person, upon request, shall have access to such open public
records for the purpose of inspecting, abstracting or copying such records while
they are in the possession, custody and control of the appointed or designated
record custodian thereof, or his or her designated representative.
(Code 1991)
1-602. RECORD CUSTODIANS. (a) All city officers and employees appointed or
designated as record custodians under this article shall: protect public records
from damage and disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential
functions of the city; provide assistance and information upon request; insure
efficient and timely action and response to all applications for inspection of public
records; and shall carry out the procedures adopted by this city for inspecting and
copying open public records.
(b) The official custodian shall prominently display or distribute or
otherwise make available to the public a brochure in the form prescribed by the
Local Freedom of Information Officer that contains basic information about the
rights of a requester, the responsibilities of a public agency, and the procedures
for inspecting or obtaining a copy of public records under the Kansas Open
Records Act. The official custodian shall display or distribute or otherwise make
available to the public the brochure at one or more places in the administrative
offices of the city where it is available to members of the public who request
public information in person.
(Code 2010)
1-603. LOCAL FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICERS. The Local Freedom of
Information Officer shall:
(a) Prepare and provide educational materials and information concerning
the Kansas Open Records Act;
(b) be available to assist the city and members of the general public to
resolve disputes relating the Kansas Open Records Act;
(c) respond to inquiries relating to the Kansas Open Records Act;
(d) establish the requirements for the content, size, shape and other
physical characteristics of a brochure required to be displayed or distributed or
otherwise made available to the public under the Kansas Open Records Act. In
establishing such requirements for the content of the brochure, the Local
Freedom of Information Officer shall include plainly written basic information
about the rights of a requester, the responsibilities of the city, and the procedures
for inspecting and obtaining a copy of public records under the Act.
(Code 2010)
1-604. PUBLIC REQUEST FOR ACCESS. All city offices keeping and maintaining
open public records shall establish office hours during which any person may
make a request for access to an open public record. Such hours shall be no
1-16
fewer than the hours each business day the office is regularly open to the public.
For any city office not open Monday through Friday, hours shall be established by
the record custodian for each such day at which time any person may request
access to an open public record. (Code 1991, 1-603)
1-605. FACILITIES FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION. All city offices keeping and
maintaining open public records shall provide suitable facilities to be used by any
person desiring to inspect and/or copy an open public record. The office of the
city clerk, being the principal recordkeeper of the city, shall be used as the
principal office for providing access to and providing copies of open records to the
maximum extent practicable. Requesters of records shall be referred to the office
of the city clerk except when the requested records are not in that office and are
available in another city office. (Code 1991, 1-604)
1-606. PROCEDURES FOR INSPECTION. Any person requesting access to an
open public record for purposes of inspecting or copying such record, or obtaining
a copy thereof, shall abide by the procedures adopted by the governing body for
record inspection and copying, including those procedures established by record
custodians as authorized by the governing body. Such procedures shall be
posted in each city office keeping and maintaining open public records. (Code
1991, 1-605)
1-607. APPOINTMENT OF OFFICIAL CUSTODIANS. The following city officers
are hereby appointed as official custodians for purposes of the Kansas Open
Records Act and are hereby charged with responsibility for compliance with that
Act with respect to the hereinafter listed public records:
(a) City Clerk - All public records kept and maintained in the city clerk's
office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this section.
(b) City Treasurer - All public records not on file in the office of the city
clerk and kept and maintained in the city treasurer's office.
(c) Director of Public Safety- All public records not on file in the office of
the city clerk and kept and maintained in the city public safety department.
(d) City Attorney - All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk
and kept and maintained in the city attorney's office.
(e) Clerk of the Municipal Court - All public records not on file in the office
of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the municipal court.
(Code 2010)
1-608. APPOINTMENT OF LOCAL FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICER. The
City Clerk is hereby appointed as the local freedom of information officer and
charged with all of the duties as set forth in section 1-603. (Code 2010)
1-609. DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL RECORD CUSTODIANS. (a) Each of the
official custodians appointed in section 1-607 is hereby authorized to designate
any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record custodian. Such record
custodians shall have such duties and powers as are set out in the Kansas Open
Records Act.
1-17
(b) Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a
record custodian he or she shall notify the city clerk of such designation and the
city clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations.
(Code 1991, 1-607)
1-610. REQUESTS TO BE DIRECTED TO CUSTODIANS. All members of the
public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public record in accordance with the
provisions of the Kansas Open Records Act, shall address their requests to the
City Clerk who will forward the requests to the custodian charged with
responsibility for the maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or copied.
(Code 1991, 1-609; Code 2010)
1-611. FEE ADMINISTRATION. The city clerk is hereby authorized to provide the
clerk's office, and the office of each record custodian, with sufficient cash to
enable the making of change for record fee purposes. Each custodian shall
transmit all record fee moneys collected to the city treasurer not less than
monthly. Each custodian shall maintain duplicates of all records and copy
request forms, completed as to the amount of fee charged and collected, which
amounts shall be periodically audited by the clerk-finance officer and treasurer of
the city. (Code 1991, 1-610)
1-612. INSPECTION FEE. (a) Where a request has been made for inspection of
any open public record which is readily available to the record custodian, there
shall be no inspection fee charged to the requester.
(b) In all cases not covered by subsection (a) of this section, a record
inspection fee shall be charged.
(Code 1991, 1-611)
1-613. PREPAYMENT OF FEES. (a) A record custodian may demand prepayment
of the fees established by this article whenever he or she believes this to be in the
best interest of the city. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the
inspection and/or copying charges accrued in fulfilling the record request. Any
overage or underage in the prepayment shall be settled prior to inspection of the
requested record or delivery of the requested copies.
(b) Prepayment of inspection and/or copying fees shall be required
whenever, in the best estimate of the record custodian, such fees are estimated
to exceed $25.00.
(c) Where prepayment has been demanded by the record custodian, no
record shall be made available to the requester until such prepayment has been
made.
(Code 1991, 1-613)
1-614. PAYMENT. All fees charged under this article shall be paid to the custodian
of the records inspected and/or copied unless the requester has established an
account, for purposes of billing and payment, with the city. (Code 1991, 1-614)
1-18
ARTICLE 7. INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS
1-701. PURPOSE AND GOALS. It is the purpose of this statement to set forth the
public policies of the city relating to the investment of public moneys, and
establish procedural requirements as to investment management practice. The
objective of the investment policy and program of the city shall be as follows:
(a) The safeguarding of all public moneys shall be of the highest priority.
Public money shall not be invested or managed in any matter which would
jeopardize the safety of the principal.
(b) Consistent with the requirement of safety, the objective of the
investment program shall be to aggressively manage and invest all public moneys
to maximize net earnings, consistent with the public responsibility to secure
maximum, safe investment return possible from moneys assigned to its
stewardship, to relieve demands on the property tax and to otherwise reduce the
cost of public services.
(Code 1991)
1-702. ACTIVE FUNDS; DESIGNATION OF DEPOSITORIES; ELIGIBLE
DEPOSITORIES. (a) The governing body shall designate the banks, savings
and loan associations and savings banks which shall serve as depositories of its
funds. The clerk, treasurer or other city officer or employee having the custody of
city funds shall deposit such funds only at the designated banks, savings and loan
associations and savings banks. Only banks, savings and loan associations and
savings banks that have main or branch offices in Butler County shall be
designated as official depositories. No such bank, savings bank or savings and
loan association shall be designated as a depository until the city is assured that it
can obtain satisfactory security for its deposits.
(b) The clerk, treasurer or other city officer or employee depositing public
funds shall deposit all such public funds coming into such person's possession in
their name and official title as such officer. If the governing body fails to designate
an official depository or depositories, the officer thereof having custody of city
funds shall deposit such funds with one or more banks, savings and loan
associations or savings banks which have main or branch offices in Butler County
if satisfactory security can be obtained therefor and if not then elsewhere. In such
event, the officer or employee shall serve notice in writing on the governing body
showing the names and locations of such banks, savings and loan associations
and savings banks where such funds are deposited, and upon so doing the officer
or employee having custody of such funds shall not be liable for the loss of any
portion thereof except for official misconduct or for the misappropriation of such
funds by the officer or employee.
(c) If eligible banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks under
subsections (a) or (b) cannot or will not provide an acceptable bid, which shall
include services, for the depositing of public funds under this section, then banks,
savings and loan associations or savings banks which have main or branch
offices in any immediately adjoining county may receive deposits of the city’s
active funds, if such banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks have
been designated as official depositories under subsection (a) and the city can
obtain satisfactory security therefor.
(Code 2010)
1-19
1-703. DEFINITIONS. As used in this article the following words and phrases shall
mean:
(a) Bank - means any bank incorporated under the laws of the state of
Kansas or any other state, or organized under the laws of the United States and
which has a main or branch office in Kansas;
(b) Savings and loan association - means any savings and loan
association incorporated under the laws of the state of Kansas or any other state,
or organized under the laws of the United States and which has a main or branch
office in Kansas;
(c) Savings bank - means any savings bank organized under the laws of
the United States and which has a main or branch office in Kansas;
(d) Main office - means the place of business specified in the articles of
association, certificate of authority or similar document, where the business of the
institution is carried on and which is not a branch;
(e) Branch - means any office within this state, other than the main office,
that is approved as a branch by a federal or state supervisory agency, at which
deposits are received, checks paid or money lent. Branch does not include an
automated teller machine, remote service unit or similar device or a loan
production office;
(f) Investment rate - means a rate which is the equivalent yield for United
States government securities having a maturity date as published in the Wall
Street Journal, nearest the maturity date for equivalent maturities. The 0-90 day
rate shall be computed on the average effective federal funds rate as published
by the federal reserve system for the previous week.
(Code 2010)
1-704. INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS. Temporarily idle moneys of the city not
currently needed, may in accordance with the procedure hereinafter described be
invested:
(a) In temporary notes or no-fund warrants issued by the city;
(b) In time deposit, open accounts, certificates of deposit or time
certificates of deposit with maturities of not more than two years:
(1) In banks, savings and loan associations and savings banks,
which have main or branch offices located in the city; or
(2) If no main or branch office of a bank, savings and loan
association or savings bank is located in the city, then in banks, savings and
loan associations and savings banks, which have main or branch offices in
the county or counties in which all or part of the city is located;
(c) In repurchase agreements with:
(1) Banks, savings and loan associations and savings banks, which
have main or branch offices located in the city, for direct obligations of, or
obligations that are insured as to principal and interest by, the United States
government or any agency thereof; or
(2)(A) If no main or branch office of a bank, savings and loan
association or savings bank, is located in the city; or
(B) If no such bank, savings and loan association or savings bank
having a main or branch office located in the city is willing to enter into such
an agreement with the city at an interest rate equal to or greater than the
1-20
investment rate, as defined in subsection (g) of K.S.A. 12-1675a, and
amendments thereto, then such repurchase agreements may be entered
into with banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks which have
main or branch offices in the county or counties in which all or part of the city
is located; or
(3) If no bank, savings and loan association or savings bank,
having a main or branch office in such county or counties is willing to enter
into such an agreement with the city at an interest rate equal to or greater
than the investment rate, as defined in subsection (g) of K.S.A. 12-1675a,
and amendments thereto, then such repurchase agreements may be
entered into with banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks
located within the State of Kansas;
(d) In United States treasury bills or notes with maturities as the governing
body shall determine, but not exceeding two years. Such investment transactions
shall only be conducted with banks, savings and loan associations and savings
banks; the federal reserve bank of Kansas City, Missouri; or with primary
government securities dealers which report to the market report division of the
federal reserve bank of New York, or any broker-dealer engaged in the business
of selling government securities which is registered in compliance with the
requirements of section 15 or 15C of the securities exchange act of 1934 and
registered pursuant to K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 17-12a401, and amendments thereto;
(e) In the municipal investment pool fund established in K.S.A. 12-1677a,
and amendments thereto;
(f) In the investments authorized and in accordance with the conditions
prescribed in K.S.A. 12-1677b, and amendments thereto; or
(g) In multiple municipal client investment pools managed by the trust
departments of banks which have main or branch offices located in county or
counties where city is located or with trust companies incorporated under the laws
of this state which have contracted to provide trust services under the provisions
of K.S.A. 9-2107, and amendments thereto, with banks which have main or
branch offices located in the county or counties in which in which the City of
Augusta is located. Public moneys invested under this paragraph shall be
secured in the same manner as provided for under K.S.A. 9-1402, and
amendments thereto. Pooled investments of public moneys made by trust
departments under this paragraph shall be subject to the same terms, conditions
and limitations as are applicable to the municipal investment pool established by
K.S.A. 12-1677a, and amendments thereto.
(h) The investments authorized in subsections (d), (e), (f) or (g) of this
section shall be utilized only if the banks, savings and loan associations and
savings banks eligible for investments authorized in subsection (b), cannot or will
not make the investments authorized in subsection (b) available to the city at
interest rates equal to or greater than the investment rate, as defined in
subsection (g) of K.S.A. 12-1675a, and amendments thereto.
(i) In selecting a depository pursuant to subsection (b), if a bank, savings
and loan association or savings bank eligible for an investment deposit
thereunder has an office located in the city and such financial institution will make
such deposits available to the city at interest rates equal to or greater than the
investment rate, as defined in subsection (g) of K.S.A. 12-1675a, and
amendments thereto, and such financial institution otherwise qualifies for such
1-21
deposit, the governing body shall select one or more of such eligible financial
institutions for deposit of funds pursuant to this section. If no such financial
institution qualifies for such deposits, the city shall select for such deposits one or
more eligible banks, savings and loan associations or savings banks which have
offices in the county or counties in which all or a part of the city is located which
will make such deposits available to the city at interest rates equal to or greater
than the investment rate, as defined in subsection (g) of K.S.A. 12-1675a, and
amendments thereto, and which otherwise qualify for such deposits.
(Code 2010)
1-705. PROCEDURES AND RESTRICTIONS. The city clerk shall periodically
report to the governing body as to the amount of money available for investment
and the period of time such amounts will be available for investment, and shall
submit such recommendations as deemed necessary for the efficient and safe
management of city finances. The recommendations of the city clerk shall
provide for an investment program which shall so limit the amounts invested and
shall schedule the maturities of investments so that the city will, at all times, have
sufficient moneys available on demand deposit to assure prompt payment of all
city obligations. (Code 1991, 1-703)
1-706. CUSTODY AND SAFEKEEPING. Securities purchased pursuant to this
article shall be under the care of the city clerk, city treasurer and city manager
and shall be held in the custody of a state or national bank or trust company, or
shall be kept by such officers in a safety deposit box of the city in a bank or trust
company. Securities in the original or receipt form held in the custody of a bank
or trust company shall be held in the name of the city, and their redemption,
transfer, or withdrawal shall be permitted only upon the written instruction of the
city officers. Securities not held in the custody of a bank or trust company shall
be personally deposited by such officer in a safety deposit box in the name of the
city in a bank or trust company, access to which shall be permitted only in the
personal presence and under the signature of two of the abovementioned officers.
(Code 2010)
1-707. SALE OR TRANSFER. If, in order to maintain sufficient moneys on demand
deposit in any fund as provided in 1-705, it becomes necessary to transfer or sell
any securities of such funds, the officers specified in 1-706 may transfer said
securities to any other fund or funds in which there are temporarily idle moneys,
or shall sell such securities, and for such purpose they shall have authority to
make any necessary written direction, endorsement or assignment for and on
behalf of the city. (Code 2010)
1-708. INTEREST ON TIME DEPOSITS. The city clerk shall deposit the interest on
invested idle funds as required or authorized by law. (Code 2010)
1-22
ARTICLE 8. LIBRARY BOARD
1-801. LIBRARY BOARD. The mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the city
council, a library board for the city. The library board shall consist of seven
members in the manner and for terms as provided by law. The mayor shall be ex
officio a member of such board with the same powers as appointed members, but
no person holding any city office shall be appointed a member of such board
while holding such office. All members appointed to the library board shall be
residents of the city. Vacancies occasioned by removal from the city, resignation
or otherwise shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. No person who
has been appointed to the library board for two consecutive four year terms shall
be eligible for further appointment to such board until two years after expiration of
the second term. Members of the library board shall receive no compensation for
their services as such but shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses in
attending meetings and in carrying out their duties as members. (Code 1975, 1-
901)
1-802. LIBRARY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS CONTRIBUTION FUND. (a) The City of
Augusta, in accordance with the provisions in K.S.A. 12-16, 102, as amended,
does hereby establish a Library Employee Benefits Contribution Fund for the
purpose of paying the Augusta Public Library’s share of employee benefits
prescribed herein after.
(b) The cost of employee benefits authorized for payment from the fund
created by part (1) of this section shall include the following: Employer
contributions for Social Security, Medicare, Worker’s Compensation,
Unemployment Insurance, health care costs, employee benefit plans and
employee retirement and pension programs. (Ord. 1752; Code 2010)
1-23
ARTICLE 9. OLD CITY RECORDS
1-901. DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN RECORDS. (a) The officers and employees
of the city charged with the custody or having in their custody the following
records, documents or other papers may destroy the same after they have been
on file for the period stated:
(1) Claims and any purchase orders attached thereto, five years.
(2) Warrants or warrant checks, whether originals or duplicates,
that have been paid, five years.
(3) Duplicates of receipts or stubs of receipts issued, three years.
(4) Duplicates of utility bills sent to customers, three years.
(5) Bookkeeping or accounting records of utility customer's
accounts, three years, except that the period for the records of deposits to
guarantee the payment of bills or the return of meters shall begin when the
account is closed or the customer ceases to receive service.
(6) Duplicates or stubs of licenses issued for license fees or taxes,
three years.
(7) Bonds of officers or employees, 10 years, the period to begin at
the termination of the term of the bond.
(8) Insurance policies, five years, the period beginning at expiration
of the policy unless a claim is pending.
(9) Canceled checks, five years.
(10) Requisition and duplicate purchase orders, three years.
(11) Bonds and coupons, if any, stamped paid or canceled and
returned by the fiscal agent, five years, the period beginning at the date of
maturity of the bond or coupon. One bond of each issue shall be retained
permanently or shall be offered to the state historical society.
(b) The original of records, documents or other papers listed in subsection
(a) may be destroyed at any time if reproduced on film, as provided in K.S.A. 12-
122, and amendments thereto, and such film shall be retained for a period not
less than required for the original records.
(K.S.A. Supp. 12-120; Code 1975, 1-1001; Code 1991)
1-902. RECORDS TO BE PRESERVED. Nothing in section 1-1001 of this article
shall be deemed to apply to records, documents or papers not specifically
mentioned nor to authorize the destruction of records, documents or papers which
in their nature should be preserved permanently, nor to prohibit destruction of
records, documents or papers obviously of only temporary value after a
reasonable time. (K.S.A. 12-121; Code 1975, 1-1002)
1-24
ARTICLE 10. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
1-1001. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS. The affairs and administrative
functions of the city shall be divided into departments, the city manager having full
power and authority to appoint or employ any department head or employee
within each and every department, except that when the business of the city, in
the discretion of the city manager, does not require the employment of persons in
any department, he or she may dispense with such department or employees
therein, until such time, as, in his or her discretion, a need exists for such
department or employees.
1-25
ARTICLE 11. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
1-1101. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The director of public safety of the public
safety department shall be the emergency management director of the city and
shall act in this capacity pursuant to all applicable state statutes and city
ordinances. (Code 1991)
1-26
ARTICLE 12. PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION
1-1201. FORMATION. (a) The City, by appropriate ordinance, may create a public
building commission for the purposes of acquiring a site or sites for and
constructing, reconstructing, equipping and furnishing, or purchasing or otherwise
acquiring, a building or buildings or other facilities of a revenue producing
character. Such building or buildings or facilities shall be maintained and operated
for (i) a county courthouse, (ii) the housing and accommodation of county offices
or county business, (iii) city offices, (iv) independent living facilities for senior
citizens, or (v)such other purposes as are commonly carried on in connection with
such facilities or in county courthouses and general city buildings, including
administrative offices for school districts and housing, accommodations and
parking facilities for offices of state and federal agencies.
(b) A public building commission created by the City may acquire land and
facilities adjacent to or near any educational institution under the supervision and
control of the state board of regents or may acquire by lease, land and facilities
constituting a part of the campus of any such institution. Any public building
commission may construct, reconstruct, equip and furnish such facilities on such
land and lease such land and facilities to the official governing body of such
institution. Any such lease entered into shall pledge the net revenue from such
land and facilities. The City also may pledge such funds as may be necessary
from those which are provided to be paid over to the board of trustees from the
annual tax levy as provided by K.S.A. 76-3a07, and amendments thereto. The
governing body of the City is hereby authorized to designate any surplus from
such tax levy as may be necessary to guarantee the rentals under any such
lease, and the City is hereby exempted from the provisions of K.S.A. 101101 to
10-1122, inclusive, and 79-2925, and amendments thereto, to the extent
necessary to enable the City to make a covenant to effect such guarantee.
(c) A public building commission authorized under this Charter Ordinance
and K.S.A.12-1757 et seq. shall have the power to do all things necessary or
incidental to the purpose of constructing or acquiring or enlarging, furnishing and
operating and maintaining buildings or facilities to be made available for use by
governmental agencies. and non-profit corporations organized under the laws of
this state.
1-1202. BONDING. (a) Any revenue bonds proposed to be issued by a public
building commission created by the City shall be issued as provided in K.S.A.
104201 et seq. and amendments thereto, except to the extent that such statutes
are in conflict with this article or K.S.A. 12-1757 et seq Before any revenue bonds
are authorized or issued under the provisions of this article and K.S.A. 12-1757 et
seq., the public building commission shall adopt a resolution specifying the
amount of such bonds and the purpose of the issuance thereof.
(b)(1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) (2) of this section the
resolution shall provide that if within 30 days after the last date of publication of
the resolution a petition in opposition to the resolution, signed by not less than 5%
of the electors of the City or by not less than 5% of the electors of the county or
school district if the lease is with such entity, is filed with the county election
officer, the board of county commissioners shall submit the question to the voters
at an election called for that purpose or at the next general election. Except as
1-27
otherwise provided in subsection (b) (2) of this section, such resolution shall be
published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper or
in a newspaper having general circulation in the county if the lease is with a
county or school district.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) (1) of this
Section, a resolution of a public building commission adopted within one
year from the date of this Charter Ordinance authorizing the issuance of
revenue bonds to finance the acquisition of an independent living facility for
senior citizens, shall be published once in the official City newspaper and
shall not be subject to petition in opposition of the resolution.
(c) No construction contract shall be let or approved by a public building
commission until after the expiration of the protest period provided under this
section, provided that, with respect to revenue bonds authorized by a resolution
described in subsection (b)(2) of this Section, the public building commission may
let or approve a construction contract upon publication of such resolution once in
the official City newspaper. (Code 2010)
2-1
CHAPTER II. ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Dogs and Cats
Article 3. Other Animals
____________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-101. DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) Abandon - includes the leaving of an animal by its owner or other person
responsible for its care or custody without making effective provisions for its proper
care.
(b) Animals - means all vertebrate and invertebrate animals such as but not
limited to bovine cattle, horses and other equines, hogs, goats, dogs, cats, rabbits,
sheep, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, and other fowl or wild animals,
reptiles, fish, bees or birds that have been tamed, domesticated or captivated.
(c) Animal Control Officer - means any person employed by, contracted with
or appointed by the City for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this law, or
any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing or permitting of animals, control
of animals or seizure and impoundment of animals, and includes any state, county
or municipal public safety officer, dog warden, constable or other employee, whose
duties in whole or in part include assignments which involve the seizure or taking
into custody of any animal.
(d) Animal Shelter - means the facility or facilities operated by the city or its
authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals under the
authority of this chapter or state law.
(e) At-Large. - An animal shall be deemed to be at-large if off the premises
of its owner and not under the immediate responsive control of a responsible
person.
(f) Attack - means violent or aggressive physical contact with a person or
domestic animal or violent or aggressive behavior that confines the movement of a
person, but not limited to, cornering or circling a person.
(g) Bite - means any actual or suspected abrasion, scratch, puncture, tear,
bruise, or piercing of the skin, caused by any animal, which is actually or
suspected of being contaminated or inoculated with the saliva from the animal,
directly or indirectly, regardless of the health of the animal causing such bite.
(h) Cat - means any member of the species felis catus, regardless of sex.
(i) Dangerous Dogs - means any dog which is known to its keeper or
harborer, or reasonably should be known to its keeper or harborer, to have a
propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to
otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. It is hereby
declared to be the policy of this city that keepers and harborers of dogs that are of
a size and breed that allow the animal to be capable of inflicting life threatening
2-2
injuries upon human beings are held to a very high standard of care regarding their
knowledge of such propensity, tendency or disposition as to their animal and to
confine and restrict movement of such animals. In determining whether or not a
keeper or harborer of such an animal should know reasonably about such
propensities, tendencies or dispositions the municipal court shall apply a very high
standard. The following breeds shall be presumed to be dangerous animals and
all provisions shall apply to their care and confinement:
(1) The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dogs;
(2) The American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dogs;
(3) The American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dogs;
(4) The Rottweiler breed of dogs;
(5) The Wolf hybrid or Tundra Shepherd breed of dogs;
(6) Any dog that has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breeds of dogs known as Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
American Staffordshire Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, Rottweiler,
Wolf Hybrid or Tundra Shepherd;
(7) Any dog kept or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose of
dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting; or any dog not owned
by a governmental or law enforcement unit used primarily to guard
public or private property.
(j) Dog - means any member of the species canis familiaris, regardless of
sex.
(k) Euthanize - means the humane destruction of an animal, which includes,
but is not limited to, the proper injection of a substance that quickly and painlessly
terminates the life of an animal or by any of those methods provided in K.S.A. 47-
1718.
(l) Exotic Animal - means those animals not indigenous to North America
and animals of any species, the majority of whose population is feral.
(m) Fowl - means all animals that are included in the zoological class aves,
which shall include, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas
and pigeons.
(n) Harbor - means any person who shall allow any animals to habitually
remain, lodge, or to be fed within his or her home, store, yard, enclosure or place
of business or any other premises where he or she resides or controls.
(o) Humane Live Animal Trap - means any cage trap that upon activation
encloses an animal without placing any physical restraint upon any part of the
body of such animal.
(p) Immediate Control - means the regulation and supervision by a
competent person so that an animal is unable to run or get loose at will.
(q) Kennel - means any establishment, commercial or otherwise,
maintained for breeding, rearing, grooming, boarding, or otherwise harboring in an
enclosure in one location only, more than three dogs, three cats, or more than a
combination of three dogs and cats.
(r) Livestock - includes, but is not limited to cattle, horses, goats, sheep or
other animals commonly regarded or used as farm or ranch animals.
(s) Neutered - means any male or female cat or dog that has been
permanently rendered sterile.
(t) Own - means and includes own, keep, harbor, shelter, manage,
possess, or have a part interest in any animal. If a minor owns any such animal
2-3
subject to the provisions of this chapter, the head of the household of which such
minor is a member shall be deemed to own such animal for the purposes of this
chapter.
(u) Owner - means the one who owns, or his or her employee, agent, or
other competent person into whose charge an animal has been placed by the
actual owner as described in the subsection above.
(v) Person(s) - means any individual, firm, association, joint stock company,
syndicate, partnership or corporation.
(w) Shelter - means all pens, houses, or fenced enclosures, where animals
are confined, such as, but not limited to, hutches, cotes, lofts, kennels, warrens,
feed lots, barns, stables, or other buildings or enclosures.
(x) Vaccination - means an injection of a vaccine, approved by the State
Board of Public Health and administered by a licensed veterinarian for the purpose
of immunizing an animal against rabies.
(y) Veterinarian - means a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the
State of Kansas.
(z) Vicious Animals - means any animal with a known propensity, tendency
or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals; or any animal which attacks a human
being or domestic animal without provocation; any animal owned or harbored
primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or any animal trained for fighting; any
animal which is urged by its owner or harborer to attack, or whose owner or
harborer threatens to provoke such animal to attack any public safety officer while
such officer is engaged in the performance of official duty.
(Ord. 1893, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-102. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; DUTY TO IMPOUND; CITATION
ALTERNATIVE. (a) There is hereby created the position of animal control officer
for the city and such officer shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
Any person employed by the city as an animal control officer and commissioned by
the Director of Public Safety of the city shall have such powers and authority as
allowed by law in the enforcement of this chapter. All animal control officers shall
be subject to the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Safety.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), it shall be the duty of the animal
control officer to take up and impound all animals found in the city in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
(c) As an alternative to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, any
public safety officer or the animal control officer may issue a citation to the owner,
harborer or keeper of an animal in violation of this chapter, and the person
receiving the citation shall, appear in the municipal court of the city to answer the
charged violation of this chapter.
(d) It is unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to identify himself or herself and provide verification of
his/her correct name, address, date of birth and any other information
reasonably necessary to correctly identify such person when asked to
do so by animal control or public safety officer when the officer has
probable cause to believe that this person when asked to do so by
animal control or public safety officer when the officer has probable
cause to believe that this person has violated a section of this article.
2-4
(2) Interfere with, molest, injure or prevent the animal control or law
enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of their duties.
(Code 1991)
2-103. SAME; CAPTURE/DESTRUCTION. When deemed necessary by public
safety officers or the animal control officer for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city, such officers and/or their agents may:
(a) Place a humane trap on public property or a requesting resident's
property for the purpose of capturing any animal defined in this chapter as creating
a nuisance in the city;
(b) Use any tranquilizer guns, humane traps, or other suitable devices to
subdue and capture any animal that is deemed by the animal control officer, in his
or her discretion, to be of a danger to itself or to the public health and safety.
(c) Use firearms or other suitable weapons to destroy any rabid animal, any
vicious animal as defined in section 2-115, or any animal creating a nuisance as
defined in section 2-111, where such animal is impossible or impractical to catch,
capture or tranquilize.
(Code 1991)
2-104. SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY; UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE. (a) The animal
control officer or any public safety officer shall have the right of entry upon any
private unenclosed lots or lands for the purpose of collecting any animal whose
presence thereupon is a violation of this chapter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the animal control
officer in the exercise of his or her duties.
(Code 1991)
2-105. MUNICIPAL POUND ESTABLISHED. A municipal pound shall be
established to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Such a pound may be
operated by a contractor and all services required herein may be provided by a
contractor. When so contracted, the pound shall have the following services and
facilities as a minimum:
(a) Adequate pickup and impounding of all stray and ownerless dogs and
cats and animals otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Group holding facilities for stray, ownerless and unvaccinated animals
impounded for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Individual isolation facilities for sick, biting, rabid and suspected rabid
animals.
(d) Facilities for the humane destruction of animals.
(Code 1991)
2-106. BREAKING POUND. (a) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to
open, unlock, break open or attempt to break open the pound, or to take or let out
any animal placed therein, or take or attempt to take from an authorized officer of
this city any animal taken up by him or her under the provisions of this chapter, or
in any manner interfere with or hinder any authorized officer or employee of this
city in catching, taking up, or impounding any animal.
2-5
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than those duly
authorized, to care for, feed, attempt to feed, or interfere in any way with the care
of impounded animals.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-107. KEEPING ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or
person in charge of any premises in the city to possess and maintain any animal or
fowl within the city or permit to be maintained thereon any stable, shed, pen or
other place where horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats or swine, or undomesticated
animals are kept. This provision shall not apply to:
(a) The maintaining of a stockyard or sales barn for the loading, unloading,
temporary detention and sale of such livestock, if the location of such stockyard or
sales barn does not otherwise violate the zoning ordinances of the city;
(b) The maintaining of dogs which are regulated by Article 2 of this chapter;
(c) The maintaining of non-poisonous and non-vicious animals and fowl
which are commonly kept as household pets, such as cats, hamsters, rabbits,
parakeets, and comparable animals, when kept as household pets and in a safe
and sanitary manner in accordance with section 2-113 of this chapter;
(d) The transporting of animals through the city by ordinary and customary
means.
(Ord. 1469, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-108. ANIMAL TRAPS. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, place, set out, or
deploy any animal trap aboveground, which makes use of a spring gun, spring
jaws, clamping devices, cutting or stabbing mechanism or any other devices that
will damage or severely injure any animal when caught or trapped by the device or
trap; except that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of animal traps that
are so designed to trap and hold animals without injuring the animals. (Code
1991)
2-109. NUISANCE; ANIMAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any animal to keep or maintain such animal in the city so as to constitute
a nuisance. For the purpose of this section, "nuisance" is defined as any animal
which:
(a) Molests or interferes with persons in the public right-of-way;
(b) Attacks or injures persons, or other domestic animals;
(c) Damages public or private property other than that of its owner or
harborer by its activities or with its excrement;
(d) Scatters refuse that is bagged or otherwise contained;
(e) Causes any condition which threatens or endangers the health or wellbeing
of persons or other animals.
(f) By loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping or other noise or
action, unreasonably disturbs any person or neighborhood within the corporate
limits of the city. It shall be the duty of any person harboring or keeping such loud
or noisy animal or animals to abate the condition, and if he/she fails to do so, the
city may abate it by taking up, impounding and/or disposing of the animal(s) at the
expense of the owner.
2-6
If a summons is issued charging a violation of this provision, a subpoena shall
also be issued to the complainant to testify to the nuisance under oath. (Ord.
1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-110. ANIMAL CONFINES; SHELTERS. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or maintain any animal in any yard, structure or area that is not clean, dry
and sanitary, free from debris and offensive odors that annoy any neighbor, and
devoid of rodents and vermin.
(b) Excrement shall be removed at least once each week from any animal
shelter, pen or yard area where animals are kept, or more often if necessary to
prevent or control odors, fly breeding, or rodent infestation. If excrement is stored
on the premises by any animal owner, it shall be stored in adequate containers
with fly-tight lids, and all such stored or accumulated wastes shall be disposed of
at least once each week.
(c) All animal shelters, pens and yards shall be so located that adequate
drainage is obtained, normal drying occurs, and standing water is not present.
(d) All animal shelters and board fences confining animals shall be
maintained in good repair, and all animal shelters and board fences confining
animals subject to residential and commercial classification shall be protected from
deterioration by painting or comparable treatment.
(e) All premises on which animals are kept shall be subject to inspection by
the animal control officer, duly authorized public safety officer, or public health
official. If the officer or official determines from such inspection that the premises
are not being maintained in a clean and sanitary manner, he or she shall notify the
owner of the animals in writing to correct the sanitation deficiencies within 24 hours
after notice is served on the owner. Any animal kept under any condition which
could endanger the public or animal health or create a health nuisance may be
impounded. Animals shall be released after fees are paid and cause for
impoundment has been corrected.
(f) Animal Enclosure Regulations. No person shall as owner, lessee or
occupant, maintain any pen or other enclosure where any animals are kept closer
than 25 feet to the dwelling house of another, or shall permit the same to remain
uncleaned to the annoyance of any citizen of the city.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-111. SAME; STOCKYARDS; COMMERCIAL HOLDING PENS. Animal shelters
owned or operated as a stockyard or commercial holding pen shall be adequately
maintained and cleaned as often as is necessary, as determined by the health
officer, to control fly breeding or to control other conditions adversely affecting the
public health including the following:
(a) Collected fecal material and other solid organic waste shall be disposed
of at a sanitary landfill, fertilizer processing plant, or by proper dispersal on land
used for agricultural purposes.
(b) Grain or protein feed shall be stored in tightly covered rodent- proof
metal containers or rodent-proof bins.
(c) Premises subject to the terms of this section shall be maintained free of
rodent harborage.
2-7
(d) Wherever reasonable, use shall be made of anti-coagulant rodenticides
for the control of rodents and organo-phosphorus insecticides for the control of
flies or any other effective chemical means for the control of rodents and flies.
(e) Wherever reasonable, use shall be made of soil sterilants and
herbicides or other effective means for the control of weeds and grass around
structures and buildings.
(f) Enclosures including fences where animals such as horses, cows,
sheep and goats are maintained shall be constructed in a manner, using
dimension lumber materials, or other effective means to prevent such animals from
breaking out or causing hazard to persons or property.
(g) The solid wastes accumulated from the cleaning of animal shelters and
holding pens maintained by persons subject to a residential classification permit as
herein provided shall be stored in metal containers, with tight- fitting metal lids, and
all such stored or accumulated wastes shall be disposed of at least once each
week.
(h) Holding lots, pens and floors of sheds and buildings where animals are
held and which are maintained by persons subject to a commercial, industrial or
agricultural classification permit according to the terms of this chapter shall be
surfaced with concrete or asphaltic materials and that the drainage system of such
surfaced areas shall include proper retaining walls and traps to control the waste
from draining into watercourses and such drainage system shall be subject to the
approval of the health officer. The health officer shall waive this standard for
domestic animal holding operations where such animal holding is longer than 24
hours for any domestic animal involved or where dirt lots are more appropriate to
the proper care of cattle, horses or sheep.
(i) Solid wastes accumulated from the cleaning of animal shelters and
holding pens maintained by persons subject to a commercial, industrial or
agricultural permit according to the terms of this chapter shall be stored on
concrete slabs or other facilities, such as dirt lots on which is stockpiled manure
with an exposed perimeter as approved by the health officer; provided that all solid
waste shall be properly disposed of at least once each week or as may be
approved by the health officer.
(Code 1991)
2-112. DEATH OF ANIMALS. (a) All dead animals shall be disposed of by the
owner or keepers within 24 hours of the animal's death, by burial, incineration in a
facility approved by the animal control officer, by rendering or by other lawful
means approved by the animal control officer. No dead animal shall be dumped
on any public or private property.
(b) In the event the animal control officer or a public safety officer disposes
of the animal, the City shall be reimbursed for all cost incurred in the process.
(K.S.A. 47-1201; Code 1991)
2-113. VICIOUS ANIMALS. (a) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep, possess or harbor a vicious animal within the city. Impoundment of animals
whose owners have been cited for violation of this section shall be at the discretion
of the animal control officer. If the animal presents a clear and present danger to
the public health or safety, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his or
her agent to impound such animal.
2-8
(b) Complaint: Whenever a sworn complaint is filed in the municipal court
against the owner of an animal alleging that such animal is vicious and in violation
of this section, the municipal judge shall hold a hearing to determine whether or
not the animal is vicious within the meaning of this section and thereby in violation
of this section. The owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the time and
place of the hearing at least one week prior to the hearing. In making a
determination, the municipal judge shall consider the following:
(1) The seriousness of the attack or bite;
(2) Past history of attacks or bites;
(3) Likelihood of attacks or bites in the future;
(4) The condition and circumstances under which the animal is kept
or confined;
(5) Other factors which may reasonably relate to the determination of
whether or not the animal is vicious.
(c) Impoundment, muzzling and/or confinement of animal. The municipal
judge shall order the impoundment, the muzzling in accordance with subsection
(d) and/or the confinement of the animal accused of being in violation of this
section in a manner and location that will insure that it is no threat to persons or
other animals pending the outcome of the hearing. If such impoundment, muzzling
or otherwise safe confinement is not possible or if prior court orders to restrain
such animal have gone unheeded, the municipal judge may order the animal
immediately destroyed.
(d) Vicious Dogs to be Muzzled: It shall be the duty of every owner, keeper
or harborer of any dog in the city, which dog is vicious or has been known to bite,
chase, or run after any person or animal in the streets, alleys, or any public place
in the city, to keep the same muzzled with a good and sufficient wire or leather
muzzle, securely fastened so as to wholly prevent such dog from biting any animal
or person until such time as a determination has been made by the court as to
whether the dog is vicious or not. Any person owning, keeping or harboring any
dog within the city limits contrary to this section shall be guilty of a violation of this
code.
(e) Immediate Destruction: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent the animal control officer or any public safety officer from taking whatever
action is reasonably necessary to protect himself or herself or members of the
public from injury or danger, including immediate destruction of any vicious animal
without notice to the owner.
(f) Release of: If a complaint has been filed in the municipal court against
the owner of an impounded animal for a charge under this section, the animal shall
not be released except on the order of the municipal judge, who may also direct
the owner to pay all impounding fees in addition to any penalties for violation of
this chapter. The municipal judge may, upon making a finding that an animal is
vicious or that it represents a clear and present danger to the citizens or to other
animals in the community, order the animal to be destroyed in a humane manner
by the animal shelter. Surrender of an animal by the owner thereof to the animal
control officer does not relieve or render the owner immune from the decision of
the court, nor to the fees and fines which may result from a violation of this section.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-9
2-114. DANGEROUS DOGS; PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person or
legal entity to keep, harbor or in any way possess a dangerous dog as defined by
this article within the limits of the City of Augusta, Kansas. (Ord. 1893, Sec. 2;
Code 2010)
2-115. EXISTING DOGS; EXCEPTION. Any dogs described and defined as
dangerous by this article which reside within the City of Augusta, Kansas, at the
time of the effective date of this ordinance and shall have registered with the City
prior to the effective date, shall be allowed to remain in the City, subject to the
provisions of this article. Any dangerous dog which fails to register by the effective
date of this ordinance shall be removed from the City. If any dangerous dog which
remains in the City under this exception is found to be at large more than once, it
shall be removed from the City or destroyed. (Ord. 1893, Sec. 3; Code 2010)
2-116. SAME; CONFINEMENT. Any person who keeps or harbors a dangerous dog
under the exception to this article shall keep such dog confined as required in this
Section. Any such dogs shall be confined indoors by secure methods or in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or dog run made of at least nine-gauge chain
link with no more than 2” spacing. Such pen or dog run area must have sides at
least six feet high and be secured over the top with the same material provided for
the sides of the pen. Such pen or dog run area shall have a bottom incapable of
being penetrated by the dog and secure to the sides of the pen which must be
imbedded into the ground no less than one foot. Such pen and dog run shall be
locked with a key or combination lock whenever such dog or dogs are within the
pen or dog run. Allowing a dangerous dog to run free in an enclosed back yard is
strictly prohibited. All other dangerous dogs must be confined indoors or within a
secure fence at least 6ft. in height and constructed so that the dog cannot dig
under the fence nor climb over the fence. Any gate to the fence must be locked
with a key or combination lock at all times the dangerous dog is allowed to run free
within the fence. All dangerous dogs which are allowed to run free within the fence
must be muzzled and such muzzle shall allow the dog to drink but not bite. (Ord.
1893, Sec. 4; Code 2010)
2-117. SAME; LEASH AND MUZZLE. Any person keeping or harboring a dangerous
dog shall at any time the dog is not confined, have such dog securely restrained by
a leash with a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three
feet in length. Any person walking a dangerous dog or restraining such a dog on a
leash shall be an adult and be of sufficient strength to control said dog. No person
shall attempt to walk or restrain more than one (1) dangerous dog at a time. All
dogs defined by this ordinance as dangerous shall be muzzled when outside of
confinement by a device sufficient to prevent the dog from biting people or other
animals. (Ord. 1893, Sec. 5; Code 2010)
2-118. SAME; SPAY; NEUTER. Any dangerous dog confined and harbored within
the confines of the City of Augusta and which dog is more than six months of age
must be spayed or neutered within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance
or becoming six months of age. (Ord. 1893, Sec. 6; Code 2010)
2-10
2-119. SAME; TETHER PROHIBITED. Any person who harbors, owns or keeps a
dangerous dog is prohibited from placing such dog on a tether, rope or chain
which is attached to a tree or any other immovable object. (Ord. 1893, Sec. 7;
Code 2010)
2-120. REGISTRATION. Within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance, each
owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a dangerous dog shall register such dog
with the City Clerk. For each dangerous dog harbored and kept at a residence
there shall be an initial registration fee of $50.00 per dog for the first year and an
annual renewal fee of $25.00 per dog. At the time of registration the owner, keeper
or harborer of such dog must present two color photographs of such dog, clearly
showing the color and approximate size of the animal giving a side and front view.
The registration of such dog shall include the address, name, if any, of the animal,
and its breed. In such time as the animal is removed from the City, relocated within
the City, or such dog dies, this information must be given to the City Clerk within
10 days of the occurrence to correct the rolls of registration. (Ord. 1896, Sec. 1;
Code 2010)
2-121. INSURANCE. All owners, keepers or harborers of dangerous dogs within the
city must, within 30 days of the effective date of this article, provide proof to the
City Clerk of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $100,000 for
bodily injury to or death of any person or persons and for damage to property
owned by such persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or
maintenance of such animal. At the time of initial registration of such animals the
owner, keeper or harborer must present proof to the City Clerk of the required
insurance or at any other time thereafter when demanded by the City Clerk. Such
liability insurance shall provide that there shall be no cancellation of the policy
without first giving ten (10) days written notice of the cancellation to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 1893, Sec. 9; Code 2010)
2-122. PENALTIES. Any person or legal entity found to be in violation of the
provisions of this article, upon conviction, may be fined no less than $100.00 nor
more than $500.00 for the first conviction and no less than $100.00 nor more than
$1,000.00 for each subsequent conviction and/or confined for a period of up to six
months. In addition to the above penalties the court may prescribe for the violation
of this section, if the court finds, after notice to the keeper and harborer and an
opportunity for hearing, that such dangerous dog represents a continuing threat of
serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the Court may order
such animal destroyed. Each day a violation of any provision of this ordinance
occurs is considered a separate offense. (Ord. 1893, Sec. 10; Code 2010)
2-123. MISCELLANEOUS. (a) Any violation of this article shall make the dangerous
dog involved in the violation subject to impoundment by the Department of Public
Safety. Any dog that is impounded, after a hearing before the Municipal Judge,
may be euthanized by order of the Court.
(b) Any dog impounded under this article, which is eligible to be returned to
the owner, shall be returned to the owner only after payment of boarding fees and
other incidental charges incurred during the impoundment of the animal. Failure to
2-11
pay fees and charges and obtain the release within 48 hours shall make the
animal subject to destruction.
(c) If a dog is impounded under this ordinance as a dog prohibited within the
City, the owner shall have 48 hours to remove the dog from the City permanently.
Failure to remove the dog shall make the animal subject to destruction.
(Ord. 1896, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
2-124. RUNNING AT LARGE; FINE. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully allow any animal or fowl under his or her control to be or to run at large
within the city. Any animal or fowl found at large shall be impounded as provided
in section 2-117 or 2-207 (dogs).
(b) The owner of any dog or cat impounded for running at large without the
tag as required by this chapter shall be fined in any sum not less than $20.00 nor
more than $100.00 for the first offense and any sum not less than $30.00 nor more
than $200.00 for the second offense, and any sum not less than $40.00 nor more
than $300.00 for any subsequent offenses.
(c) Dogs must be secured by a leash, unless they are in a vehicle or within the
property limits of the owner or harborer. If unconfined on the property, the dog
must be under control of a responsible person and must be obedient to that
person’s voice commands; or the property should have adequate fencing or an
electronic fencing system and operating components. If an electronic fence is
utilized, the animal must be equipped with the necessary equipment required to
keep the animal confined.
(Ord. 1469, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-125. IMPOUNDMENT; FEE; NOTICE; RECORD. (a) The animal control officer or
public safety officer shall impound any animal or fowl found at large in the city
constituting a nuisance or otherwise in violation of this chapter in a suitable pound
or enclosure provided or contracted for by the city. The impounding officer shall
make diligent inquiry as to the owner of the animal and shall notify the owner
thereof of such impoundment as soon as reasonably possible.
(b) The city shall be entitled to receive from such owner an impoundment
fee plus the actual cost of feeding and maintaining the animal while impounded.
(c) In case the identity of the owner of the impounded animal or fowl cannot
be ascertained, the animal control officer or public safety officer shall, upon taking
any such animal into custody and impounding the same, make a record thereof,
with a description of the animal and the date and place taken into custody and the
place of impounding, and shall thereupon immediately post a public notice stating
that the animal, describing the same with the date and place of taking, has been
taken up, and that unless the charges of impounding the same, together with any
license fees due and unpaid, are paid within three business days from the date of
the notice, that the animal will be disposed of as provided in this code.
(d) The animal control officer shall submit a report each month to the
governing body showing the number of animals impounded and disposed of, and
the fees collected pursuant to this article and shall pay those fees to the city clerk
for credit to the general operating fund.
(Code 1991)
2-12
2-126. REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS. At any time before the sale or
destruction of any animal impounded under the provisions of this article, except for
animals impounded under sections 2-113 (vicious) and 2-127 (rabid), the owner
thereof may redeem the animal by paying the animal control officer or any person
in charge, the impounding fee and all costs incurred as a result of such
impoundment. (Code 1991)
2-127. IMPOUNDMENT OF RABIES SUSPECTS. (a) Any public safety officer or
animal control officer may take up, upon private or public property, any animal
which has bitten or scratched a person or other animal and impound the animal in
the city pound, securely penned and separated from other animals, or in a
veterinary hospital or animal care facility for a period of not more than 30 days
during which time the animal control officer shall determine whether or not such
animal is suffering from a disease and, if not, the animal control officer shall
authorize the release of the animal upon payment by the owner of the boarding fee
therefore. The animal control officer may authorize the keeping of any such
animal on the owner's premises if the owner produces a rabies vaccination
certificate showing that the animal has valid rabies vaccination protection.
Impoundment costs shall be borne by the owner. If in the opinion of the animal
control officer symptoms develop justifying a microscopic examination, then the
animal shall be killed and examination made by the state board of health.
(b) In lieu of the provisions of subsection (a), the owner of any such animal
may, at his or her own expense, take such animal to any duly qualified and
licensed veterinarian in the city for observation. Such veterinarian shall report his
or her findings in writing to the animal control officer. If in the opinion of such
veterinarian a microscopic examination is justified, then the animal shall be turned
over to the animal control officer or any public safety officer to be killed and
examination made by the state board of health.
(c) Any animal desired for observation by the animal control officer under
this section shall be delivered to the animal control officer or any public safety
officer upon demand and shall not be withheld, hidden or harbored. Any person
violating this provision shall be guilty of a violation of this code. Upon refusal of
any person to so deliver such animal, the municipal judge shall cause a warrant to
be issued for the arrest of such person, which warrant shall also provide for the
surrender of the animal and shall be lawful authority for the apprehending and
forcible taking of such animal.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-128. ANIMALS BITTEN BY RABID ANIMALS. Whenever a dog, cat or other
animal is bitten by a rabid animal or an animal later proved to have been rabid, it
shall be the duty of the owner of the animal that is bitten to report that fact to the
Department of Public Safety. It shall also be the duty of the owner of the bitten
animal to either destroy or have his or her bitten animal destroyed unless:
(a) The animal which was bitten had been vaccinated against rabies at least
three weeks before being bitten and has a current vaccination; and
(b) If the bitten animal has a current vaccination, it shall be confined for 90
days; and
2-13
(c) The bitten animal shall be released from confinement only upon written
order from the animal control officer, who declares the animal to be free of rabies;
and
(d) If the animal is found to have contracted rabies during confinement, it
shall be properly disposed of.
(Code 1991)
2-129. VEHICULAR ACCIDENTS INVOLVING ANIMALS. Any person who as the
operator of a motor vehicle strikes any animal shall stop at once and shall
immediately report such injury or death to the owner of such animal, or in the event
that the owner cannot be ascertained, and located, the operator shall at once
report the accident to the animal control officer or any public safety officer. (Code
1991)
2-130. EMERGENCY; PROCLAMATION. The mayor is hereby authorized whenever
in his or her opinion the danger to the public safety from rabid animals is made
imminent, to issue a proclamation ordering all persons owning any animal in the
city to confine the animal in a good and sufficient enclosure from which the animal
cannot escape, or fasten such animal by means of a chain on the premises where
the owner may reside, for such time as may be specified in such proclamation.
Any animal not confined during such time may be disposed of wherever found by
any public safety officer, or the animal control officer of the city. The owner of
such animal shall be prosecuted for such violation thereof. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1;
Code 1991)
2-131. MUZZLING. Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary for the protection
and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, he/she shall issue an order requiring all
dogs or cats kept within the city to be effectively muzzled for such length of time as
may be specified in the order, to prevent them from biting or injuring persons or
animals. Such order shall be published in the official newspaper of the city for
such period of time as the mayor may deem necessary. (Code 2010)
2-132. KENNELS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. Any person maintaining or operating
a kennel within the city must obtain a permit as herein provided. Written
application shall be made to the city clerk or his or her designated agent, which
shall include name and address of applicant, description, sex and type of all
animals kept or harbored on one premises for a period of longer than three months
during the permit period. Permits will not be required for veterinary hospitals,
animal clinics or public animal shelters. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1)
2-133. PERMIT PERIOD AND ISSUANCE. (a) Permit period shall begin January 1
and end December 31 of the same year. Applications for permits may be made 30
days prior to and up to 60 days after the beginning of the permit period. Upon
receipt of the permit application, the city clerk shall direct the animal control officer
to inspect the premises, enclosures and/or equipment of the applicant for
compliance with provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws. Following
approval by the animal control officer and payment of the applicable fee
hereinafter set out, a permit shall be issued.
2-14
(b) Annual Permit Fees:
(1) Class 1 Kennel (authorized to house less than eight dogs or cats
or combination of either) - $20.00;
(2) Class 2 Kennel (authorized to house eight or more dogs or cats
or combination of either) - $50.00.
(c) Any kennel existing prior to the adoption of these provisions shall be
allowed to continue in operation until discontinued by the owner at the time of
adoption of these provisions. Such privileges shall not be transferable to a
subsequent owner. The fees for such pre-existing kennels shall remain the same
as in effect prior to the adoption of these provisions.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1)
2-134. KENNELS REGULATED. Any person(s) operating a kennel within the city
shall comply with all other sections of this chapter, including but not limited to,
animals at large; licensing requirements; and cruelty to animals. Provided,
kennels may only be located in those areas as the zoning ordinances of the city
allow kennels to be maintained. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1)
2-135. REVOCATION. The city clerk may revoke a permit or license if the person
holding such permit or license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter or any
law governing the protection and keeping of animals. Any person whose permit or
license is revoked shall, within 10 days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals
owned, kept or harbored by such person and no part of the permit or license fee
shall be refunded. No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall
be issued a kennel permit. Any person having been denied a permit may not reapply
for a period of 30 days. Each re-application shall be accompanied by a $5
fee. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1)
2-136. ANIMAL WASTE. The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the
removal of any excreta deposited by his or her animal on public right-of-way,
recreation areas or private property. The owner of any animal shall not allow
animal waste to gather and remain on the premises of the owner in such quantities
which create unsanitary conditions or objectionable odors. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1)
2-15
ARTICLE 2. DOGS AND CATS
2-201. REGISTRATION AND VACCINATION REQUIRED; FEE. (a) Every owner of
any dog or cat over six months of age shall annually register with the city clerk his
or her name and address with the name, sex and description of each dog or cat
owned and kept within the city. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any newly
acquired dog or cat or any dog or cat brought into the city to fail to register such
animal within 30 days from acquisition or bringing the dog or cat into the city. It
shall be unlawful for the owner of any previously registered dog or cat to fail to
maintain current registration of such dog or cat.
(b) Upon registration, the owner shall present a current, completed
certificate of immunization against rabies. No registration shall follow without
evidence of this document, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat
over six months of age to fail to maintain effective rabies immunization of such dog
or cat.
(c) The owner or harborer of any dog or cat shall, at the time of registering
such dog or cat, present to the city clerk a certificate from an accredited
veterinarian showing that a male dog or cat has been neutered or a female dog or
cat has been spayed, if the dog or cat has been neutered or spayed.
(d) The city clerk shall collect an annual registration fee of $5.00 for each
neutered or spayed dog or cat, and $5.00 for each unneutered or unspayed dog or
cat.
(e) The registration shall be valid for one year from the date of registration;
provided that, vaccination may not be required if the owner of such dog or cat shall
exhibit a statement from a veterinarian certifying that such vaccination would be
injurious to such dog or cat due to its health.
(Ord. 1714, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
2-202. DOG OR CAT TAGS. It shall be the duty of the city clerk or designated
agent, upon a showing of current rabies immunization and receipt of the
registration fee hereinbefore required, to keep in a book suitable for the
registration of dogs or cats, the time of the registration, the name of the owner or
keeper, the number of the registration and the amount paid therefor, and shall
deliver to the owner or keeper of the dog or cat a certificate in writing, stating that
the person has registered the dog or cat and the number by which the dog or cat is
registered, and shall also deliver to the owner or keeper of the dog or cat a tag
with the registration number and the registration year thereon, which shall be, by
the owner or keeper, attached to the collar to be used on the dog or cat so
registered. When any tag has become lost during a registration period, the owner
of the dog or cat may request a duplicate tag for the remainder of the registration
period. When so requested, the city clerk shall, upon presentation of the
registration certificate, issue a duplicate of such tag upon the payment of $2.00
fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to take off or remove the city registration
tag from any dog or cat belonging to another, or remove the strap or collar on
which the same is fastened. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-16
2-203. SAME; COUNTERFEIT TAG. It shall be unlawful for any person to place on
any dog or cat a tag issued for any other dog or cat or to make or use any false,
forged or counterfeited tag or imitation thereof. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-204. EVIDENCE OF VACCINATION. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog
or cat kept within the city to fail to display a current certificate of immunization
against rabies issued by an accredited veterinarian evidencing the vaccination of
such dog or cat within two years, when requested by the animal control officer or
any public safety officer. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-205. EXCEPTIONS; VISITING DOGS OR CATS; SEEING EYE DOGS. (a) The
provisions of this article with respect to registration shall not apply to any dog or
cat owned by any person visiting or temporarily remaining within the city for less
than 30 days. However, such dogs or cats shall be kept under restraint by the
owner thereof at all times.
(b) License fees shall not be required for seeing eye dogs or governmental
public safety dogs.
(c) Assistance dogs that are listed as Dangerous Dogs, do not apply to the
exceptions in this section. The dangerous dogs listed in section 2-101 are illegal
within the city limits, and sections 2-114 to 2-123 will still be in effect.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-206. IMPOUNDMENT; RECORD; NOTICE; REDEMPTION; MINIMUM FEE.
(a) Any dog or cat found in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to impoundment by the city.
(b) A record of all dogs or cats impounded shall be kept by the city
containing the following information: color, sex, weight, height, identifying marks,
registration number (if any) and the date of impoundment.
(c) If the dog or cat impounded has a current registration tag attached to its
collar or if the impounding officer knows the identity of the dog or cat's owner, the
owner of such dog or cat, as shown by the records of the city clerk shall be notified
in writing as soon as possible or at least 24 hours before such dog or cat is
disposed of by destruction or sale. If, at the end of five days the city clerk has
been unable to locate the owner, or the owner, upon having been located, refuses
to claim or redeem said the dog or cat, then the dog or cat may be sold,
euthanized or otherwise disposed of.
(d) If the dog or cat impounded has no current registration tag and the
identity of the animal's owner is unknown to the animal control officer or the
impounding public safety officer then such impounding officer shall, upon taking
any such animal into custody and impounding the same, make a record thereof,
with a description of the animal and the date and place taken into custody and the
place of impounding, and shall thereupon immediately post a public notice stating
that the animal, describing the same with the date and place of taking, has been
taken up, and that unless the charges of impounding the same, together with any
license fees due and unpaid, are paid within three business days from the date of
the notice, that the animal will be disposed of as provided in this code. If within
three full business days the owner does not appear to claim the dog or cat, then
the dog or cat may be sold, euthanized or otherwise disposed of.
2-17
(e) If at any time before the sale or destruction of any dog or cat impounded
under the provisions of this article, the owner of an impounded dog or cat does
appear and redeem the dog or cat, it shall be turned over to the person claiming it
upon payment of any impoundment fees or penalties plus the actual costs of
impoundment, and upon compliance with the registration provisions of this article.
This subsection shall not apply to any dog or cat alleged as being vicious under
section 2-113 or suspected of rabies under section 2-127 of this code.
(f) Any dog or cat impounded may not be released without a current rabies
vaccination.
(g) Impoundment hereunder shall not preclude any court from imposing and
executing any fine which might otherwise be levied under this article for violation of
any of the provisions thereof; nor shall impoundment be a defense in any
prosecution commenced hereunder.
(h) The redemption of any dog or cat impounded for a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of such
provision by the person redeeming the dog or cat.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-207. DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS OR CATS. (a) Unclaimed dog or cat
is destroyed. If any dog or cat is not redeemed by its owner or harborer within the
time allowed for redemption as specified in section 2-206 thereof, the animal
control officer, any authorized public safety officer, any authorized veterinarian or
any duly authorized pound personnel may destroy such dog or cat or sell the same
for the costs of impoundment and keeping, plus any registration fee due for the
current year.
(b) Adoption of Unclaimed Dogs or Cats. Any person who desires to adopt
an animal remaining unclaimed after the three day holding period shall pay the
current claim and boarding fee as established in section 2-206, and in addition
shall comply with section 2-201, concerning obtaining a current license for the
adopted animal.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-208. CONFINEMENT OF DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT. Any unspayed female dog
or cat in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a
house, building or secure enclosure, and the area of enclosure shall be so
constructed that no other dog or cat or dogs or cats may gain voluntary access to
the confined animal except for purposes of planned breeding. Any animal that is in
the state of estrus (heat) and that is not properly confined, or any such animal that
is creating a neighborhood nuisances, shall be removed to a boarding kennel, to a
veterinary hospital or to the animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of the
confinement shall be paid by the owner. The owner of animals removed to the
animal shelter shall be charged at the rate established from time to time by the
animal shelter for routine confinement. (Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
2-209. IMPOUNDING ANIMALS WITHOUT LICENSES. It shall be the duty of the
public safety officers of the city, or the animal control officer or designated agent,
to take into custody and impound all dogs or cats found in the city, not provided
2-18
with or wearing a current license tag or other approved identification, as provided
in section 2-201 of this article. (Ord. 1714, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
2-210. LIMITS ON DOGS AND CATS. Within the city limits of Augusta, Kansas,
each household is allowed to maintain no more than three dogs, three cats, or no
more than a combination of three dogs and cats. (Code 2010)
2-19
ARTICLE 3. OTHER ANIMALS
2-301. EXOTIC ANIMALS. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to keep, maintain or have in his or her possession or under his or her control within
the city any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous wild animal or reptile, any
vicious or dangerous animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or
dangerous propensities.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or her
possession or under his or her control within the city any of the following animals:
(1) All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes.
(2) Apes: Chimpanzees; gibbons; gorillas, orangutans; and
saimangs.
(3) Baboons.
(4) Badgers.
(5) Bears.
(6) Bison.
(7) Bobcats.
(8) Cheetahs.
(9) Crocadilians, 30 inches in length or more.
(10) Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more.
(11) Coyotes.
(12) Deer; includes all members of the deer family, for example, whitetailed
deer, elk, antelope and moose.
(13) Elephants.
(14) Foxes.
(15) Game cocks and other fighting birds.
(16) Hippopotami.
(17) Hyenas.
(18) Iguanas.
(19) Jaguars.
(20) Leopards.
(21) Lions.
(22) Lynxes.
(23) Monkeys.
(24) Ostriches.
(25) Pumas; also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers.
(26) Raccoons.
(27) Rhinoceroses.
(28) Skunks.
(29) Tigers.
(30) Wolves.
(c) The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to bona fide zoos,
circuses, carnivals, educational institutions, or medical institutions, if:
(1) Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance
of the city.
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
2-20
(3) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape.
(d) The municipal judge shall have the authority to order any animal
deemed vicious confined, destroyed or removed from the city.
(Ord. 1467, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 2-301)
3-1
CHAPTER III. BEVERAGES
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Cereal Malt Beverages
Article 3. Alcoholic Liquor
Article 4. Private Clubs
Article 5. Drinking Establishments
Article 6. Caterers
Article 7. Temporary Permits
___________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-101. DEFINITIONS. Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly
indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section.
(a) Alcohol - means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid,
whether rectified or diluted, whatever the origin thereof, and includes synthetic
ethyl alcohol but does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
(b) Alcoholic Liquor - means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include any cereal
malt beverage.
(c) Caterer - means an individual, partnership or corporation which sells
alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, and provides services related to the serving
thereof, on unlicensed premises which may be open to the public, but does not
include a holder of a temporary permit selling alcoholic liquor in accordance with
the terms of such permit.
(d) Cereal Malt Beverage - means any fermented but undistilled liquor
brewed or made from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute, but does
not include any such liquor which is more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
(e) Class A Club - means a premises which is owned or leased by a
corporation, partnership, business trust or association and which is operated
thereby as a bona fide nonprofit social, fraternal or war veterans' club, as
determined by the State of Kansas, for the exclusive use of the corporate
stockholders, partners, trust beneficiaries or associates (hereinafter referred to as
members), and their families and guests accompanying them.
(f) Class B Club - means a premises operated for profit by a corporation,
partnership or individual, to which members of such club may resort for the
consumption of food or alcoholic beverages and for entertainment.
(g) Club - means a Class A or Class B club.
(h) Drinking Establishment - means premises which may be open to the
general public, where alcoholic liquor by the individual drink is sold.
(i) General Retailer - means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt
beverages at retail.
3-2
(j) Limited Retailer - means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt
beverages at retail only in original and unopened containers and not for
consumption on the premises.
(k) Place of Business. - Any place at which cereal malt beverages or
alcoholic beverages or both are sold.
(l) Temporary Permit - means a permit, issued in accordance with the laws
of the State of Kansas, which allows the permit holder to offer for sale, sell and
serve alcoholic liquor for consumption on unlicensed premises, open to the public.
(m) Wholesaler or distributor. - Any individuals, firms, copartnerships,
corporations and associations which sell or offer for sale any beverage referred to
in this chapter, to persons, copartnerships, corporations and associations
authorized by this chapter to sell cereal malt beverages at retail.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 1, Sec. 1; Ord. 1567, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
3-102. RESTRICTION ON LOCATION. (a) No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or
served by a person holding a license or permit from the city whose place of
business or other premises are located within 200 feet of any church or school the
distance to be measured from the nearest property line of such church or school to
the nearest portion of the building occupied by the premises.
(b) The distance location of subsection (a) above shall not apply to a club,
drinking establishment, caterer or temporary permit holder when the license or
permit applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation from
the governing body. The governing body shall grant such a waiver only following
public notice and hearing and a finding by the governing body that the proximity of
the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or safety.
(c) No license or permit shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor if the
building or use does not meet the zoning ordinance requirements of the city or
conflicts with other city laws, including building and health codes.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 1, Sec. 2; Code 1991)
3-103. MINORS ON PREMISES. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of 21 years to remain on any premises where the sale of alcoholic liquor is
licensed for on-premises consumption, or where a caterer or temporary permit
holder is serving alcoholic liquor.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator, person in charge or licensee of any
premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic liquor or a caterer or
temporary permit holder who is serving alcoholic liquor to permit any person under
the age of 21 years to remain on the premises.
(c) This section shall not apply if the person under the age of 21 years is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or if the licensed or permitted
premises derives not more than 50 percent of its gross receipts in each calendar
year from the sale of alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 1, Sec. 3; Code 1991)
3-104. CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. No person shall drink or
consume any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage on city owned public
property. (K.S.A. Supp. 41-719; Ord. 1784; Sec. 1; Code 2010)
3-3
3-105. PUBLIC SALE; CONSUMPTION. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, serve or dispense any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic beverage in any
public place not licensed to sell, serve or dispense such beverage at such public
place within or under the jurisdiction of the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any cereal malt
beverage or alcoholic beverage in any public place not licensed to sell and serve
such beverage for public consumption at such public place within or under the
jurisdiction of the city.
(c) For purposes of this section, the term "public place" shall include upon
any street, public thoroughfare, public parking lot or any privately owned parking
area made available to the public generally, within any parked or driven motor
vehicle situated in any of the aforesaid places or upon any property owned by the
state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless such property is leased to
others under K.S.A. 12-1740 et seq. if the property is being used for hotel or motel
purposes or purposes incidental thereto or is owned or operated by an airport
authority created pursuant to Chapter 27 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated.
(K.S.A. 41-719; Code 1991)
3-106. LICENSE REVOCATION. If an alcoholic liquor licensee has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, or the Kansas Liquor Control Act, the governing
body of the city, upon five days' written notice to the person holding such license to
sell alcoholic liquor, may permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a
period of not more than 30 days such license and the individual holding the license
may be charged in municipal court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor laws of
the city. (Code 1991, 3-111; Code 2010)
3-107. IMMEDIATE ENTRY. The right of immediate entry to and inspection of any
premises licensed as a club or drinking establishment or any premises where
alcoholic liquor is sold by a holder of a temporary permit, or any premises subject
to the control of any licensee or temporary permit holder, by any duly authorized
officer or agent of the director, or by any law enforcement officer, shall be a
condition on which every license or temporary permit is issued, and the application
for, and acceptance of, any license or temporary permit shall conclusively be
deemed to be the consent of the applicant and licensee or permit holder to such
immediate entry and inspection. Such right of immediate entry and inspection
shall be at any time when the premises are occupied and is not limited to hours
when the club or drinking establishment is open for business. Such consent shall
not be revocable during the term of the license or temporary permit. Refusal of
such entry shall be grounds for revocation of the license or temporary permit.
(K.S.A. 41-2613; Code 2010)
3-4
ARTICLE 2. CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES
3-201. LICENSE REQUIRED OF RETAILERS. (a) It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell any cereal malt beverage at retail without a license for each place of
business where cereal malt beverages are to be sold at retail.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, having a license to sell cereal malt
beverages at retail only in the original and unopened containers and not for
consumption on the premises, to sell any cereal malt beverage in any other
manner.
(K.S.A. 41-2702; Ord. 1563, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
3-202. APPLICATION. Any person desiring a license shall make an application to
the governing body of the city and accompany the application by the required
license fee for each place of business for which the person desires the license.
The application shall be verified, and upon a form prepared by the attorney general
of the State of Kansas, and shall contain:
(a) The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she has
resided within the State of Kansas;
(b) The particular place for which a license is desired;
(c) The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of
business is located;
(d) The names and addresses of all persons who hold any financial interest
in the particular place of business for which a license is desired.
(e) A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and not
less than 21 years of age and that he or she has not within two years immediately
preceding the date of making application been convicted of a felony or any crime
involving moral turpitude, or been adjudged guilty of drunkenness, or driving a
motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of any
other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States;
(f) Each application for a general retailer's license shall be accompanied by a
certificate from the city inspector certifying that he or she has inspected the
premises to be licensed and that the same comply with the provisions of chapter 8
of this code.
(g) Each application for a general retailer's license must be accompanied by
a certificate from the director of safety certifying that he or she has inspected the
premises to be licensed and that the same comply with the provisions of chapter 7
of this code.
The application shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by the
applicant, authorizing any governmental agency to provide the city with any
information pertinent to the application. One copy of such application shall
immediately be transmitted to the director of safety of the city for investigation of
the applicant. It shall be the duty of the director of safety to investigate such
applicant to determine whether he or she is qualified as a licensee under the
provisions of this chapter. The director of safety shall report to the city manager
not later than five working days subsequent to the receipt of such application. The
application shall be scheduled for consideration by the governing body at the
earliest meeting consistent with current notification requirements.
(Ord. 1563, Sec. 2; Code 1991; Code 2010)
3-5
3-202A. LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES. (a) All applications for a new and
renewed cereal malt beverage license shall be submitted to the city clerk 10 days
in advance of the governing body meeting at which they will be considered.
(b) The city clerk's office shall notify the applicant of an existing license 30
days in advance of its expiration.
(c) The clerk's office shall provide copies of all applications to the
department of public safety when they are received. The department of public
safety will run a records check on all applicants and the department of public
safety will inspect the premises in accord with Fire Prevention and Health and
Building codes. The department will then recommend approval, or disapproval, of
applications within five working days of the department's receipt of the application.
(d) The governing body may not consider any application for a new or
renewed license that has not been submitted 10 days in advance and been
reviewed by the above city departments.
(e) An applicant who has not had a cereal malt beverage license in the city
shall attend the governing body meeting when the application for a new license will
be considered.
(f) The City Council shall have the authority to waive the 10-day period set
forth in subsection (a) when good and sufficient reasons exist to do so and proper
review of the application has been completed by the appropriate City departments.
(Ord. 1563, Sec. 3; Code 1991; Code 2010)
3-203. LICENSE GRANTED; DENIED. (a) The journal of the governing body shall
show the action taken on the application.
(b) If the license is granted, the city clerk shall issue the license which shall
show the name of the licensee and the year for which issued.
(c) No license shall be transferred to another licensee.
(d) If the license shall be denied, the license fee shall be immediately
returned to the person who has made application.
(Ord. 1563, Sec. 4; Code 1991)
3-204. LICENSE TO BE POSTED. Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the place of business for which the license is issued. (Ord. 1563, Sec. 5;
Code 1991)
3-205. LICENSE, DISQUALIFICATION. No license shall be issued to:
(a) A person who has not been a resident in good faith of the state of
Kansas for at least one year immediately preceding application and a resident of
Butler County for at least six months prior to filing of such application.
(b) A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
(c) A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides.
(d) A person who, within two years immediately preceding the date of
making application, has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude, drunkenness, driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state
or of the United States.
(e) A partnership, unless all the members of the partnership shall otherwise
be qualified to obtain a license.
3-6
(f) A corporation if any manager, officer or director thereof or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock of such
corporation would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other
than citizenship and residency requirements.
(g) A corporation, if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock of such
corporation, has been an officer, manager or director, or a stockholder owning in
the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock, of a corporation which: (A) Has
had a retailer's license revoked under K.S.A. 41-2708 and amendments thereto; or
(B) has been convicted of a violation of the drinking establishment act or the cereal
malt beverage laws of this state.
(h) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
(i) A person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a retailer's license
for any reason other than citizenship, retailer residency requirements or age,
except that this subsection (i) shall not apply in determining eligibility for a renewal
license.
(j) A person whose spouse has been convicted of a felony or other crime
which would disqualify a person from licensure under this section and such felony
or other crime was committed during the time that the spouse held a license under
K.S.A. 41-2701, et. seq.
(Ord. 1563, Sec. 6; Code 1991; Code 2010)
3-206. RESTRICTION UPON LOCATION. (a) No license shall be issued for the
sale at retail of any cereal malt beverage on premises which are located in areas
not zoned for such purpose.
(b) It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense at retail any cereal malt beverage
at any place within the city limits that is within a 200-foot radius of any church or
school.
(c) Provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment holding a
private club license issued by the State of Kansas.
(d) The distance limitation of subsection (b) above shall not apply to any
establishment holding a cereal malt beverage license issued by the city when the
licensee has petitioned for and received a waiver of the distance limitation. The
governing body shall grant such a waiver only following public notice and hearing.
(K.S.A. 41-2704; Ord. 1563, Sec. 7; Code 1991)
3-207. LICENSE FEE. The rules and regulations regarding license fees shall be as
follows:
(a) General Retailer - for each place of business selling cereal malt
beverages at retail, $100.00 per calendar year.
(b) Limited Retailer - for each place of business selling only at retail cereal
malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on
the premises, $50.00 per calendar year.
Full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of the
year in which the application is made, and the licensee shall only be authorized to
operate under the license for the remainder of the calendar year in which the
license is issued.
3-7
(K.S.A. 41-2702; Ord. 1563, Sec. 8; Code 1991)
3-208. SUSPENSION OF LICENSE. The director of public safety, upon five days'
written notice, shall have the authority to suspend such license for a period not to
exceed 30 days, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other laws
pertaining to cereal malt beverages, which violation does not in his or her
judgment justify a recommendation of revocation. The licensee may appeal such
order of suspension to the governing body within seven days from the date of such
order. (Ord. 1563, Sec. 9; Code 1991)
3-209. LICENSE SUSPENSION/REVOCATION BY GOVERNING BODY. The
governing body of the city, upon five days' written notice, to a person holding a
license to sell cereal malt beverages shall permanently revoke or cause to be
suspended for a period of not more than 30 days such license for any of the
following reasons:
(a) If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false
information in the application therefor;
(b) If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article or has
become ineligible to obtain a license under this article;
(c) Drunkenness of a person holding such license, drunkenness of a
licensee's manager or employee while on duty and while on the premises for
which the license is issued, or for a licensee, his or her manager or employee
permitting any intoxicated person to remain in such place selling cereal malt
beverages;
(d) The sale of cereal malt beverages to any person under 21 years of age;
(e) For permitting any gambling in or upon any premises licensed under this
article;
(f) For permitting any person to mix drinks with materials purchased in any
premises licensed under this article or brought into the premises for this purpose;
(g) For the employment of any person under the age established by the
State of Kansas for employment involving dispensing cereal malt beverages;
(h) For the employment of persons adjudged guilty of a felony or of a
violation of any law relating to intoxicating liquor;
(i) For the sale or possession of, or for permitting the use or consumption
of alcoholic liquor within or upon any premise licensed under this article;
(j) The nonpayment of any license fees;
(k) If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under this
chapter;
(l) The provisions of subsections (f) and (i) shall not apply if such place of
business is also currently licensed as a private club.
(K.S.A. 41-2708; Ord. 1563, Sec. 10; Code 1991)
3-210. SAME; APPEAL. The licensee, within 20 days after the order of the
governing body revoking any license, may appeal to the district court of Butler
County and the district court shall proceed to hear such appeal as though such
court had original jurisdiction in the matter. Any appeal taken under this section
shall not suspend the order of revocation of the license of any licensee, nor shall
any new license be issued to such person or any person acting for or on his or her
3-8
behalf, for a period of six months thereafter. (K.S.A. 41-2708; Ord. 1563, Sec. 11;
Code 1991)
3-211. CHANGE OF LOCATION. If a licensee desires to change the location of his
or her place of business, he or she shall make an application to the governing
body showing the same information relating to the proposed location as in the
case of an original application. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of
$25.00 plus $25.00 State Revenue stamp fee for Limited Retailers. If the
application is in proper form and the location is not in a prohibited zone and all
other requirements relating to such place of business are met, a new license shall
be issued for the new location for the balance of the year for which a current
license is held by the licensee. (Ord. 1563, Sec. 12; Code 1991)
3-212. WHOLESALERS AND/OR DISTRIBUTORS. It shall be unlawful for any
wholesaler and/or distributor, his, her or its agents or employees, to sell and/or
deliver cereal malt beverages within the city, to persons authorized under this
article to sell the same within this city unless such wholesaler and/or distributor
has first secured a license from the director of revenue, state commission of
revenue and taxation of the State of Kansas authorizing such sales. (K.S.A. 41-
307:307a; Ord. 1563, Sec. 13; Code 1991)
3-213. BUSINESS REGULATIONS. It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe
the following regulations.
(a) The place of business licensed and operating under this article shall at
all times have a front and rear exit unlocked when open for business.
(b) The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business
shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and shall at all times be open to the
inspection of the police and health officers of the city, county and state.
(c) Except as provided by subsection (d), no cereal malt beverages may be
sold or dispensed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or
consumed between the hours of 12:00 a.m., and 6:00 a.m., or in a place of
business which is licensed to sell cereal malt beverage for consumption on the
premises, which derives not less than 30 percent of its gross receipts from the sale
of food for consumption on the licensed premises, closing hours for clubs shall
conform to K.S.A. 41-2614 and any amendments thereto.
(d) Cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic liquor is
allowed by law to be served on premises which are licensed pursuant to K.S.A.
41-2701 et seq., and licensed as a club by the State Director of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
(e) The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at all
times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club under a
license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall be open to
the police and not to the public.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the licensee
to become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license has been
issued.
(g) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license has
been issued.
3-9
(h) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell or permit the
sale of cereal malt beverage to any person under 21 years of age.
(i) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
gambling in the place of business for which such license has been issued.
(j) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
person to mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in said place of business
or brought in for such purpose.
(k) No licensee shall employ any person who has been judged guilty of a
felony.
(Ord. 1679, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
3-214. PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PREMISES. The following conduct by a cereal
malt beverage licensee, manager or employee of any licensed cereal malt
beverage establishment is deemed contrary to public welfare and is prohibited:
(a) Remaining or permitting any person to remain in or upon the premises
who exposes to view any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola
or any portion of males/females pubic hair, anus, buttocks or genitals;
(b) Permitting any employee on the licensed premises to touch, caress or
fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals of any other employee or any
patron;
(c) Encouraging or permitting any patron on the licensed premises to touch,
caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva, or genitals of any employee;
(d) Performing or permitting any person to perform on the licensed
premises acts of or acts which simulate:
(1) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, or any other sexual act
which is prohibited by law; or
(2) Touching, caressing or fondling such persons' breasts, buttocks, anus or
genitals.
(e) Using or permitting any person to use on the licensed premises, any
artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the acts prohibited by
paragraph (d) of this section.
(f) Showing or permitting any person to show on the licensed premises any
motion picture, film, photograph, electronic reproduction, or other visual
reproduction depicting:
(1) Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, or any sexual act which is prohibited by law;
(2) The touching, caressing or fondling of the buttocks, anus,
genitals or the female breasts;
(3) Scenes in which a person displays the buttocks, anus, genitals or
the female breasts.
(g) As used in this section, the term "premises" means the premises
licensed by the city as a cereal malt beverage, club, or drinking establishment and
such other areas, under the control of the licensee or his or her employee or
employees, that are in such close proximity to the licensed premises that activities
and conduct of persons within such other areas may be viewed by persons on or
within the licensed premises. (Code 1991)
3-215. SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED. All parts of the licensed premises
including furnishings and equipment shall be kept clean and in a sanitary
3-10
condition, free from flies, rodents and vermin at all times. The licensed premises
shall have at least one restroom for each sex easily accessible at all times to its
patrons and employees. The restroom shall be equipped with at least one lavatory
with hot and cold running water, be well lighted, and be furnished at all times with
paper towels or other mechanical means of drying hands and face. Each restroom
shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities which shall be of sanitary design
and readily cleanable. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self closing and toilet
paper at all times shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be
provided for waste material and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall
be covered. The restrooms shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition and
free of offensive odors and shall be at all times subject to inspection by the city
inspector. (Ord. 1563, Sec. 15; Code 1991; Code 2010)
3-11
ARTICLE 3. ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
3-301. STATE LICENSE REQUIRED. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
for sale, offer for sale, or expose for sale or sell any alcoholic liquor as defined by
the "Kansas liquor control act" without first having obtained a state license to do
so.
(b) The holder of a license for the retail sale in the city of alcoholic liquors
by the package issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control shall
present such license to the city clerk when applying to pay the occupation tax
levied in section 3-302 and the tax shall be received and a receipt shall be issued
for the period covered by the state license.
(Ord. 1567, Sec. 3; Code 1991)
3-302. OCCUPATIONAL TAX. (a) There is hereby levied an annual occupation tax
of $150.00 on any person holding a license issued by the state director of alcoholic
beverage control for the retail sale within the city of alcoholic liquors for
consumption off the premises. Such tax shall be paid by the retailer to the city
clerk before business is begun under an original state license and shall be paid
within 10 days after any renewal of a state license.
(b) Alcoholic liquor distributor's license for the first and each additional
distributing place of business operated in the city by the same licensee and
wholesaling and jobbing alcoholic liquors, except beer - $300.00.
(c) Beer distributor's license, for the first and each additional wholesale
distributing place of business operated in the city by the same licensee and
wholesaling or jobbing beer containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight
- $50.00.
(Ord. 1567, Sec. 2; Code 1991)
3-303. POSTING OF RECEIPT. Every licensee under this article shall cause the city
alcoholic liquor retailer's occupation tax receipt to be placed in plain view, next to
or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord.
1567, Sec. 3; Code 1991)
3-304. HOURS OF SALE. No person shall sell at retail any alcoholic liquor:
(a) On any Sunday;
(b) On Decoration Day or Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day;
(d) Before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on any day when the sale thereof is
permitted.
(K.S.A. 41-712; Ord. 1679, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
3-305. BUSINESS REGULATIONS. It shall be unlawful for a retailer of alcoholic
liquor to:
(a) Permit any person to mix drinks in or on the licensed premises;
(b) Employ any person under the age of 21 years in connection with the
operation of the retail establishment;
(c) Employ any person in connection with the operation of the retail
establishment who has been adjudged guilty of a felony;
3-12
(d) Furnish any entertainment in his or her premises or permit any pinball
machine or game of skill or chance to be located in or on the premises; or
(e) Have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, cask, or other
containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in the original package.
(f) Sell, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver, or permit the sale, gift
or procuring of any alcoholic liquor to or for any person under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 1567, Sec. 5; Code 1991)
3-306. RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION. (a) No person shall knowingly or
unknowingly sell, give away, furnish, dispose of, procure, exchange or deliver, or
permit the selling, giving away, furnishing, disposing of, procuring, exchanging or
delivering of any alcoholic beverage in any building, structure or premises, for
consumption in such building or upon such premises if such consumption is within
200 feet from the nearest property line of any school or church, the distance to be
measured from the nearest property line of such church or school to the nearest
portion of the building occupied by the premises.
(b) The distance location of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a
club, drinking establishment, caterer or temporary permit holder when the license
or permit applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation
from the governing body. The governing body shall grant such a waiver only
following public notice and hearing and a finding by the governing body that the
proximity of the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or safety.
(c) no license or permit shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor if the
building or use does not meet the zoning requirements of the city or conflicts with
other city laws, including building and health codes.
(K.S.A. 41-710; Code 1991)
3-13
ARTICLE 4. PRIVATE CLUBS
3-401. LICENSE REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person granted a private
club license by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized
by such license within the city without first obtaining a local license from the city
clerk. (Ord. 1562, Art. 3; Sec. 1; Code 1991)
3-402. LICENSE FEE. (a) There is hereby levied an annual license fee on each
private club located in the city which has a private club license issued by the state
director of alcoholic beverage control, which fee shall be paid before business is
begun under an original state license and within five days after any renewal of a
state license. The city license fee for a Class A club shall be $100.00 and the city
license fee for a Class B club shall be $250.00.
(b) All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the
city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and
the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period
covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic
beverage ordinances of the city.
(c) The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state
license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.
(d) Every licensee shall cause the city club license to be placed in plain
view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises. (Ord. 1569, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
3-403. BUSINESS REGULATIONS. (a) No club licensed hereunder shall allow the
serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.
(b) Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail
sale of cereal malt beverages for on-premises consumption at any time when
alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises.
(c) No club membership shall be sold to any person under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 3, Sec. 3; Code 1991)
3-14
ARTICLE 5. DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
3-501. LICENSE REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person granted a drinking
establishment license by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor
authorized by such license within the city without first obtaining a city license from
the city clerk. (Ord. 1562, Art. 2; Sec. 1; Code 1991)
3-502. LICENSE FEE. (a) There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the
amount of $250.00 on each drinking establishment located in the city which has a
drinking establishment license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage
control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state
license and within five days after any renewal of a state license.
(b) All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the
city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and
the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period
covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic
beverage ordinances of the city.
(c) The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state
license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.
(d) Every licensee shall cause the city drinking establishment license to be
placed in plain view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 2, Sec. 2; Code 1991)
3-503. BUSINESS REGULATIONS. (a) No drinking establishment licensed
hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.
(b) Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail
sale of cereal malt beverage for on-premises consumption at any time when
alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 2, Sec. 2; Code 1991)
3-15
ARTICLE 6. CATERERS
3-601. LICENSE REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by the
State of Kansas as a caterer to sell alcoholic liquor by the drink, to sell or serve
any liquor by the drink within the city without obtaining a local caterer's license
from the city clerk. (Ord. 1562, Art. 4, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
3-602. LICENSE FEE. (a) There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the
amount of $250.00 on each caterer doing business in the city who has a caterer's
license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control, which fee shall
be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five
days after any renewal of a state license.
(b) All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the
city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and
the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period
covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic
beverage ordinances of the city.
(c) The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state
license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.
(d) Every licensee shall cause the caterer license to be placed in plain view
on any premises within the city where the caterer is serving or mixing alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 4, Sec. 2; Code 1991)
3-603. BUSINESS REGULATIONS. (a) No caterer licensed hereunder shall allow
the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day. (Ord. 1562, Art. 4, Sec. 3; Code 1991)
3-604. NOTICE TO DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT. Prior to any
event at which a caterer will sell or serve alcoholic liquor by the individual drink,
the caterer shall provide written notice to the director of public safety at least 48
hours prior to the event if the event will take place within the city. The notice shall
contain the location, name of the group sponsoring the event, and the exact date
and times the caterer will be serving. (Ord. 1562, Art. 4, Sec. 4; Code 1991)
3-16
ARTICLE 7. TEMPORARY PERMITS
3-701. PERMIT REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person granted a temporary
permit by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor within the city
without first obtaining a local temporary permit from the city clerk. (Ord. 1562, Art.
5, Sec. 1; Code 1991)
3-702. PERMIT FEE. (a) There is hereby levied a temporary permit fee in the
amount of $25.00 per day on each group or individual holding a temporary permit
issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control authorizing sales within
the city, which fee shall be paid before the event is begun under the state permit.
(b) Every temporary permit holder shall cause the temporary permit receipt
to be placed in plain view on any premises within the city where the holder of the
temporary permit is serving or mixing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 5, Sec. 2; Code 1991)
3-703. CITY TEMPORARY PERMIT. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct an event under a state issued temporary permit without first applying for a
local temporary permit at least seven days before the event. Written application for
the local temporary permit shall be made to the city clerk and shall clearly state:
(1) the name of the applicant;
(2) the group for which the event is planned;
(3) the location of the event;
(4) the date and time of the event;
(5) any anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services.
(b) Upon presentation of a state temporary permit, payment of the city's
temporary permit fee and a written application as provided for in subsection (a),
the city clerk shall issue a local temporary permit to the applicant if there are no
conflicts with any zoning or other ordinances of the city.
(c) The city clerk shall notify the chief of police whenever a temporary
permit has been issued and forward a copy of the permit and application to the
chief of police.
(Ord. 1562, Art. 5, Sec. 3; Code 1991)
3-704. PERMIT REGULATIONS. (a) No temporary permit holder shall allow the
serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. at any event for which a temporary permit has been issued. (Ord.
1562, Art. 5, Sec. 4; Code 1991)
4-1
CHAPTER IV. BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Article 1. Administrative Code
Article 2. Building Code
Building Standards
Dwelling Construction Under the
Building Code
Guidelines for Manufactured Housing
Installations
Article 3. Electrical Code
Article 4. Plumbing Code
Article 5. Mechanical Code
Article 6. Housing Code
Article 7. Landscaping and Urban Forestry Code
Article 8. Numbering Buildings
Article 9. Moving Buildings
Article 10. Dangerous and Unfit Structures
Article 11. International Private Disposal Code
Article 12. International Fuel Gas Code
Article 13. International Property Maintenance Code
____________________
ARTICLE 1. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
4-101. INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE INCORPORATED. (a) The code known
as the International Building Code, 2003 Edition, with Appendix Chapters C, E, F,
G, H and I, recommended by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is
hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article, save and
except such portions as are hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or amended,
as authorized and in the manner prescribed by the statutes of the State of Kansas.
(b) Section 1007 of Chapter 10 of the International Existing Building Code,
2003, as adopted by the City of Augusta, shall be amended by adding the
following subsections as follows:
(1) 1007.12 Canopies/Awnings. Canopies/awnings shall reflect historic
character, shall be fabricated of modern cloth material, may have a fixed
metal frame, or a historic flexible frame that can be rolled in or out. Projection
shall be a minimum of 2' and a maximum of 8'. Existing flat metal awnings
directly above the storefront may be retained if a modern cloth valance or skirt
is added to the face of the metal awning.
(2) 1007.13 Historic Colors. Historic colors- All new building exterior
paint colors and awning colors shall be based on historic colors as developed
by various paint manufacturers, such as Sherwin Williams “Victorian Color
Chart” colors.
(c) Section 1008 of Chapter 10 (Existing Construction) of the International
Existing Building Code, 2003, as adopted by the City of Augusta, shall be
amended by changing the following subsections as follows:
4-2
(1) 1008 Signs. Historically, signs used in the designated main street
area were relatively simple. They varied in size and location, but most were
basic painted panels with simple lettering types. Others were painted directly
on the building wall. If it was illuminated, an indirect light source was typical.
These general features of sign design shall be continued.
(2) 1008.3.1. Flush-mounted wall signs may be considered. Maximum
2'’ projection from wall measured front-to-back of sign.
(3) 1008.5.4 The use of plastic on the exterior of a sign shall be
considered only when it is compatible with the surrounding architecture and
that architecture is no longer judged to be historic by the Main Street Design
Committee.
(Ord. 1868, Sec. 1A; Code 2010)
4-102. DELETIONS. The International building Code, incorporated by reference in
4-101 herein shall have the following sections deleted:
(a) Section 101.4.7 Energy.
(b) Section 105.2; Item 2; Fences.
(c) Section 105.2; Item 6; Sidewalks & Driveways.
(d) Section 105.7; Placement of Permit and Section
(e) 109.3.5 Lath or gypsum board inspection shall be deleted in their
entirety.
(f) Section 109.3.7; Energy Efficiency Inspections.
(Ord. 1820; Ord. 1868; Code 2010)
4-103. AMENDMENTS. The International Building Code, Incorporated by reference
in 4-101 herein shall have the following section amended:
(a) Section 101.4.1 shall be amended to read National Electrical Code,
1999 Edition.
(b) Designated Main Street Area. The designated Main Street area shall be
encompassed by the following boundaries: on the north by the old railroad right of
way; on the south by Second Avenue; on the west by the north-south alley
between Walnut Street and State Street; and on the east by School Street.
(c) Permit For Work Within Main Street Area. Any application for a building
permit for work within the designated Main Street area shall contain a detailed
scope of work showing all proposed alterations and changes. Upon receipt of
such an application, the Building Official shall submit the application to the Main
Street Design Committee of the City for review.
(d) Review of Application. The Main Street Design Committee shall review
the application to determine if the proposed work complies with the building code
regulations which apply to the Main Street area. Within fifteen days of the receipt
of said application, the committee shall submit to the Building Official a written
summary of their review containing their proposed changes and alterations of the
scope of work, if any. The scope of work within the application shall be amended
by the applicant to comply with the written summary of the Main Street Design
Committee.
(e) Issuance of Permit. The building permit may be issued only after the
Building Official finds the scope of work complies with the recommendations of the
Main Street Design Committee.
4-3
(f) Section 106.5 Retention of Construction Documents. Shall be amended
to read: “One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the
code official until such construction receives its final inspection and an occupancy
permit is issued. The construction documents shall be forwarded to the Fire
Department or the owner of the building at the determination of the Fire Chief.”
(g) Designated Main Street Area. The designated Main Street area shall be
encompassed by the following boundaries: on the north by the old railroad right of
way; on the south by Second Avenue; on the west by the north-south alley
between Walnut Street and State Street; and on the east by School Street.
(h) Permit For Work Within Main Street Area. Any application for a building
permit for work within the designated Main Street area shall contain a detailed
scope of work showing all proposed alterations and changes. Upon receipt of
such an application, the Building Official shall submit the application to the Main
Street Design Committee of the City for review.
(i) Review of Application. The Main Street Design Committee shall review
the application to determine if the proposed work complies with the building code
regulations which apply to the Main Street area. Within fifteen days of the receipt
of said application, the committee shall submit to the Building Official a written
summary of their review containing their proposed changes and alterations of the
scope of work, if any. The scope of work within the application shall be amended
by the applicant to comply with the written summary of the Main Street Design
Committee.
(j) Issuance of Permit. The building permit may be issued only after the
Building Official finds the scope of work complies with the recommendations of the
Main Street Design Committee.
(Ord. 1928; Ord. 1868; Code 2010)
4-104. ADDITIONS. The International Building Code, Incorporated by reference in
Section 4-101 herein shall have the following additions:
(a) Section 102.7 LOCATION OF USED STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.
No person, firm or corporation shall transport, ship, haul or move any used or
previously occupied building, shed, duplex, residence or any other type of used
structure onto any lot in any subdivision to the City of Augusta, except that such
prohibition shall not apply to any area which is zoned Industrial District.
(b) Section 102.7.1 REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE. If determined by the
Building Official that a prohibited structure has been illegally located in violation of
this section, then notice shall be given to the owner of the lot and the contractor
responsible for placing the structure on the lot giving each of them a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, to remove the structure. If the parties notified
shall fail to act within the specified period, then the City shall have the right to
cause the structure to be removed. The City shall have the further right to recover
the cost of removal from either party in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(c) Section 102.8 MOVING BUILDINGS. All applications to move a
building, house, derrick or other structure shall specify the day and hour said
moving is to commence and the route through the city streets over which the
building, house, derrick or other structure shall be moved and stating whether it will
be necessary to cut and move, raise, or in any way interfere with any wires, cables
or other aerial equipment of any public or municipally-owned utility, and if so, the
application shall also state the name of the pubic or municipally-owned utility, and
4-4
the time and location that the applicant's moving operations shall necessitate the
cutting, moving, raising or otherwise interfering with such aerial facilities.
(d) Section 102.9 DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE. The
occupant of each premises and/or contractor of a construction or demolition
project shall collect and remove or arrange for the collection and removal of all
demolition and construction waste produced on such premises or in relation to a
demolition or construction project. Demolition and construction waste shall be
collected and removed on a continuing basis as produced on the premises or in
relation to a demolition construction project. In no case shall such waste remain
on the premises or in relation to demolition or construction project for a period
longer than thirty days. All demolition and construction waste collected shall be
covered prior to disposal. Such demolition and construction waste shall be
disposed of at a licensed solid waste processing or licensed disposal facility.
(e) Section 105.3.3 PERMIT ISSUING. Permits shall be issued to
authorized licensed contractors and home owners working under Section 116.8.
Section 105.3.4 WORKING UNDER PERMIT. No person shall allow any other
person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by a contractor
except personnel in his/her employ. Home owners may not obtain a permit under
Section 116 and hire any individual, company, firm or corporation to do the actual
work.
Section 105.3.5 CONTRACTOR WORKING UNDER PERMIT. The
General, Building or Residential Contractor is permitted to obtain the plumbing,
electrical and mechanical permits as well as the building permit before start of
construction. The Inspection Department will mail a copy of the permit to the
appropriate sub-contractor. The General, Building or Residential Contractor is
responsible for the notification to the Inspection Department should the
subcontractor be changed for any reason. The subcontractor shall contact the
Inspection Department and request inspections. The Building Official may refuse
to accept a General, Building or Residential Contractor from purchasing the subcontractor's
permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this article.
(f) Section 108.1.1 CONTRACTOR PAYING PERMIT FEES. The General,
Building or Residential Contractor may pay the permit fees for plumbing, electrical
and mechanical permits when applying for the permits under Section 105.3.3.
(g) Section 108.2 SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES.
Section 108.2.1 BUILDING PERMIT FEES. Building Valuation Data shall be
determined by (1) the Contractor's Bid Price, or (2) the Building Valuation Data
Tables, based on the April 2000 Valuation rounded to the nearest whole dollar
based on (.01 to .49 shall be rounded down and .50 to .99 shall be rounded up)
printed in the "Building Standards" magazine published by the International
Conference of Building Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California
90601-2298. The charges and fees for permits shall be established from time to
time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas.
(h) Section 112.4 BOARD OF APPEALS. The Board of Appeals shall
consist of five (5) members, appointed by the Mayor of the City of Augusta,
Kansas. The Board shall consist of the Senior Electrician, Plumber, Mechanic
and building/Residential Contractor of the Building Trades Board; plus one (1)
licensed Architect, Structural Engineer or Public Engineer and one (1) licensed
Real Estate Agent. Such appointment shall be made before the first day of May,
every three years. The Board of Appeals shall use the guidelines set fourth in the
4-5
various international codes as adopted by the City relating to the general topics of
Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical and Property Maintenance. The Board
shall meet on call of the Building Official. The Board shall appoint one (1) of it's
members to be Secretary of the Board.
(i) Section 113.4.1 PENALTIES. Any person, firm or corporation violating
or failing to comply with the provisions of this code, the technical codes or
ordinances provided for in Chapter IV of the City Code, shall be fined in Municipal
Court a sum:
First Conviction - not less than $50 nor more than $100
Second Conviction - not less than $100 nor more than $300
Each Subsequent Conviction - not less than $300 nor more than $500 and/or
be confined for a period not to exceed ten (10) days and/or have his/her
contractor license suspended for a period of thirty (30) to one hundred eighty (180)
days.
Section 113.4.2 COURT BOND. The Municipal Court Bond shall be the
maximum amount listed for each conviction and has been set by the Municipal
Court Judge. The Inspection Department shall keep a record of all court cases and
convictions.
(j) Section 116. BOARD OF BUILDING TRADES. There is hereby
established in this jurisdiction a Board of Building Trades consisting of nine (9)
members appointed by the Mayor of the City of Augusta, Kansas. Such
appointments shall be made before the first day of May, every three (3) years.
The Board shall include one (1) City Council Member who shall be the President of
the Board; three members of the Board shall be a licensed Master Plumbing
Contractor, a licensed Master Electrical Contractor and a licensed Master
Mechanical Contractor; three members of the Board shall be either a Master or
Journeyman Plumbing Contractor, Electrical Contractor and Mechanical
Contractor; one (1) member shall be a licensed Building Contractor and one (1)
member shall be either a licensed Building or Residential Contractor. The
Inspection Department shall act as Secretary to the Board and have custody of its
records.
The Board shall meet on call of the President or the Building Official.
(k) Section 116.1 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF BUILDING
TRADES.
Section 116.1.1 The Board is authorized to review and make
recommendations to the Governing Body concerning the City Codes of
building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, housing and other related codes and
ordinances.
Section 116.1.2 The Board is authorized to formulate City Policies concerning
the building trades and model codes as adopted by the City upon review by the
Governing Body.
Section 116.1.3 The Board shall set the qualifications required for an
individual to take the State of Kansas Trade Examinations.
Section 116.1.4 The Board is authorized to review and make
recommendations to the Governing Body concerning the examination fees and
licensing fees.
Section 116.1.5 The Board is authorized to conduct public hearings
concerning trade licensing removal and make recommendations to the Governing
4-6
Body concerning an individual's or company's violation of the codes, rules,
regulations, policies and ordinances.
(l) Section 116.2 POLICIES. All City Polices concerning the building
trades shall be in effect after approval of the Governing Body and having been
published once in the official city newspaper. The Inspection Department shall
mail a copy of all new policies to each licensed individual contractor. The
Inspection Department shall keep an official record of all City Policies and make
the same available to the general public during regular business hours.
(m) Section 116.3 BUILDING TRADES LICENSES REQUIRED. Any
person, firm, or corporation desiring to engage in or work at the business of
Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical (Heating and Air Conditioning and/or
Refrigeration), Building, Siding, Roofing, Fencing, Swimming Pool Installer,
Building Mover or Lawn Sprinkler Installer shall be required to obtain the proper
license from the City of Augusta prior to engaging in such work and/or business.
(n) Section 116.3.1 LICENSE TYPES. There is hereby created the
following categories of Licenses required by the City of Augusta, Kansas:
Section 116.3.1.1 MASTER ELECTRICIAN. A person who is qualified,
licensed and equipped to properly lay out and plan the installation, repair and
maintenance of electrical systems.
Section 116.3.1.2 JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN. A person who is qualified,
licensed and equipped to properly install and repair electrical systems, for and
under the direction of a qualified Master Electrician.
Section 116.3.1.3 HELPER ELECTRICIAN. A person who is eighteen (18)
years or older who is licensed to learn the electrical trade under the direct
supervision of a Journeyman or Master Electrician.
Section 116.3.1.4 MASTER PLUMBER. A person who is qualified, licensed
and equipped to properly lay out and plan the installation, repair and maintenance
of plumbing systems.
Section 116.3.1.5 JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER. A person who is qualified,
licensed and equipped to properly install and repair plumbing systems under the
direction of a qualified Master Plumber.
Section 116.3.1.6 HELPER PLUMBER. A person who is eighteen (18) years
or older who is licensed to learn the plumbing trade under the direct supervision of
a Journeyman or Master Plumber.
Section 116.3.1.7 MASTER MECHANICAL SPECIALIST. A person who is
qualified, licensed and equipped to properly lay out and plan the installation, repair
and maintenance of Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration systems.
Section 116.3.1.8 JOURNEYMAN MECHANICAL SPECIALIST. A person
who is qualified, licensed and equipped to properly install and repair Heating, Air
Conditioning and Refrigeration systems.
Section 116.3.1.9 HELPER MECHANICAL SPECIALIST. A person who is
eighteen (18) years or older who is licensed to learn the mechanical trade under
the direct supervision of a Journeyman or Master Mechanical Specialist.
Section 116.3.1.10 GENERAL BUILDING CONTRACTOR. A person who is
qualified, licensed and equipped to build, construct, alter, repair, add to, remodel
or wreck any building or structure, or any portion thereof, for which a permit is
required and unlimited in scope, including high rise construction.
Section 116.3.1.11 BUILDING CONTRACTOR. A person who is qualified,
licensed and equipped to build, construct, alter, repair, add to, remodel or wreck
4-7
any building or structure, or any portion thereof, for which a permit is required.
Limited to commercial, industrial, residential building, not to exceed three (3)
stories in height.
Section 116.3.1.12 RESIDENTIAL CONTRACTOR. A person who is
qualified, licensed and equipped to build, construct, alter, repair, add to, remodel
or wreck any residential building or structure, or any portion thereof for which a
permit is required. Limited to one-, two- and three-family residential buildings not
exceeding two (2) stories in height.
NOTE: General, Building and Residential Contractors are not required to obtain
the following separate types of contractor licenses; except for the House Moving
Contractor's License. The work allowed by these licenses is understood to be
included as part of the General, Building and Residential Contractor's License.
Section 116.3.1.13 FENCE CONTRACTOR. A person who is qualified,
licensed and equipped to build, construct, alter, repair, add to or wreck any fence
for which a permit is required. A Fence Contractor must successfully complete a
Fence Contractor's Examination provided by the Inspection Department that
covers the fence regulations.
Section 116.3.1.14 ROOFING CONTRACTOR. A person who is qualified,
licensed and equipped to install, repair and replace roof covering. Work may
include, but not limited to, roof deck insulation, roof coating, painting and covering,
including use of sheet metal and installation of other sheet metal products
incidental to roofing work.
Section 116.3.1.15 SWIMMING POOL CONTRACTOR. A person who is
qualified, licensed and equipped to install, repair and replace swimming pools,
including the pumps, pool heater, solar pool heaters, filter, chlorinators and that
piping incidental to the recirculating system and concrete slab work.
Section 116.3.1.16 HOUSE MOVING CONTRACTOR. A person who is
qualified, licensed and equipped to move, haul or transport any house, building,
derrick, or other structure of the height, when loaded for movement, of sixteen (16)
feet or more from the surface of the highway, road, street or alley, or a width of
eight (8) feet or more or which cannot be moved at a speed of four (4) miles per
hour or faster, upon, across or over any street, alley or sidewalk. No examination
is required to obtain the House Moving Contractor's License.
Section 116.3.1.17 LAWN SPRINKLER CONTRACTOR. A person who is
qualified, licensed and equipped to lay out, design, install, test and repair lawn
sprinkler systems. Including, but not limited to, piping, low voltage electrical
system and back flow installation. A lawn sprinkler contractor must have
successfully completed the State Certification for Backflow Prevention and Testing
of Backflow Devises.
(o) Section 116.3.2 CONTRACTOR LICENSE AND EXAMINATION FEES.
The charges and fees for Contractor Licenses and Examination Fees shall be
established from time to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of
Augusta, Kansas.
(p) Section 116.3.3 LICENSE EXPIRATION. All trade licenses shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date the license was issued. Failure to
renew a license after one hundred eighty (180) days shall require a review by the
Board of Building Trades. The Board may require the individual license holder to
take the State Examination (if not holding a State Certificate) or ICBO Building
Contractor's Examination for that trade and/or double the license fee. Any
4-8
contractor who does not have the State Certification will have to have the back
flow prevention devise tested and certified by a licensed contractor who has the
State Certification. Any contractor who does not have the State Certification as
provided in section 116.4.3 shall have the back flow prevention devise tested and
certified by a licensed contractor with the State Certification.
(q) Section 116.4 BUILDING TRADES EXAMINATIONS REQUIRED. All
building trades licenses shall require testing by a nationally recognized testing
agency or major jurisdiction acceptable to the Inspection Department.
Section 116.4.1 BLOCK STATE EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION.
Master and Journeymen Electrical, Plumbing and Mechanical (Heating & Air
Conditioning) contractors shall have successfully passed the Block State
Examination with a minimum score of 75% and received a certification from the
sponsoring jurisdiction. EXCEPTION: Those contractors who hold a valid
contractor's license do not have to obtain the Block Certification so long as they
maintain their license on a yearly basis. Any contractor who fails to maintain their
license within one hundred eighty (180) days of the license due date shall be
required to either take the Block Certification Examination or appeal to the Building
Trades Board to be reinstated.
Section 116.4.2 BLOCK, ICBO OR MAJOR JURISDICTION EXAMINATION.
General, Building, Residential, Roofing, Siding, Swimming Pool Installers shall
have successfully passed the Block or ICBO State Examination with a minimum
score of 75% and received a certification from the sponsoring jurisdiction. The
Inspection Department may accept a major jurisdiction's examination based on
information concerning the examination given. Individuals may appeal the decision
of the Inspection Department if refused a license based on the major jurisdiction's
examination. The provisions of this section shall become effective on May 1, 2001.
EXCEPTION: Those contractors who hold a valid contractor's license do not have
to obtain the Block or ICBO Certification so long as they maintain their license on a
yearly basis. Any contractor who fails to maintain their license within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the license due date shall be required to either take the Block
Certification Examination or appeal to the Building Trades Board to be reinstated.
Section 116.4.3 STATE CERTIFIED BACK FLOW PREVENTION
INSTALLER AND TESTER.
Any contractor requesting a Lawn Sprinkler Installer License must have
successfully completed the State of Kansas Back Flow Prevention Installer and
Testing certification. The provisions of this section shall become effective on May
1, 2001.
EXCEPTION: Those contractors who hold a valid Lawn Sprinkler Installer's
contractor's license do not have to obtain the State Certification so long as they
maintain their license on a yearly basis. Any contractor who fails to maintain their
license within one hundred eighty (180) days of the license due date shall be
required to either take the Block Certification Examination or appeal to the Building
Trades Board to be reinstated.
Section 116.4.4 FENCE CONTRACTOR'S EXAMINATION AND
CERTIFICATION. Any contractor requesting a Fence Contractor's License shall
take and successfully complete with a score of not less than 75% an examination
provided by the Inspection Department covering the fence regulations adopted by
this jurisdiction. The provisions of this section shall become effective on May 1,
2001.
4-9
(r) Section 116.5 INSURANCE COVERAGE REQUIRED. Any person, firm or
corporation having a contractors license or obtaining a permit as set forth in this
section shall maintain a minimum liability insurance coverage of three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000).
(s) Section 116.6 WORK BY CONTRACTOR.
Section 116.6.1 PERMITS, LICENSES, INSURANCE AND INSPECTIONS.
General, Building, Residential, House Moving, Roofing, Siding, Fence, Swimming
Pool and Lawn Sprinkler Contractors require one (1) individual be licensed to
procure the proper permits from the Inspection Department. The contractor license
holder shall be responsible for each project which requires a permit and
inspection; to insure that all subcontractors obtain proper licenses and insurance
coverage as required by this section, insure to the best of his/her ability that the
project complies with all the technical codes and ordinances adopted by the City;
and all required inspections are made by the Inspection Department at the proper
time of construction.
Section 116.6.2 MASTER LICENSED CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
Master Licensed Electrical, Plumbing and Mechanical Specialist shall procure the
proper permits from the Inspection Department. The State of Kansas Trade
Examination Certification is required to obtain a Master or Journeyman license
from this jurisdiction. Helper electrical, plumbing and mechanical licenses are
issued without any testing required. The master shall be responsible for each
project which requires a permit and inspection; to insure that all employees are
properly licensed; that all helpers have direct supervision at all times by either a
Master or Journeyman licensed employee; shall inspect all work done by a
journeyman and/or helper to insure all work complies with all the technical codes
and ordinances adopted by the City; and all required inspections are made by the
Inspection Department at the proper time of construction.
Section 116.6.3 CONTRACTORS WORKING TOGETHER ON THE SAME
JOB.
Electrical, Plumbing and Mechanical Contractors obtaining permits for companies
or individuals not in the direct employment of the contractor and the use of the
second companies or individuals subcontractors, journeymen and helper licensed
individuals shall be responsible for each project; insuring that all individuals on the
job are licensed as Helpers; ensuring the proper permits are obtained from the
Inspection Department; all required inspections are made by the Inspection
Department; shall be required to be on the project job site during the time of
construction or installation of building service equipment; personally inspect the
project for compliance with all the technical codes and ordinances adopted by the
City; and shall be on the job site when the Inspection Department makes all
inspections.
Section 116.6.4 SUBCONTRACTING. Licensed contractors may subcontract
certain major jobs which require additional manpower, under the following
conditions:
1. Approval by the Building Official shall be required in writing prior to issuing
any permits.
2. A Master or Journeyman in his/her employ shall be on the job site at all
times.
3. The subcontractor shall obtain journeymen and/or helper licenses as
required by the City.
4-10
4. The Master contractor shall inspect all work prior to the call for inspection
by the Inspection Department.
(t) Section 116.7 WORK BY OWNER OF A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING.
Section 116.7.1 PERMITS, INSPECTIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND
LIMITATIONS. The owner of a single-family dwelling, who occupies said dwelling
shall not be required to pass any examination, obtain any license or post insurance
coverage in order to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, convert or perform
any work on the dwelling, including such work on the electrical, plumbing, heating
and air conditioning and structure contained therein. The owner is required to
obtain the proper permits from the Inspection Department. Such permits shall be
marked "WORK BY OWNER." The permit shall clearly state and set out all work
to be done by the owner and such work shall be inspected by the Inspection
Department as is normally required for such work. Inspections made by the
Inspection Department shall not exceed what is normally required for said work
and any additional inspections required will precipitate an additional charge to the
owner. The Inspection Department and it's personnel shall not teach, instruct,
design or lay out any work to be done by the owner. All work done by the owner
shall comply with the technical codes and ordinances adopted by the City.
Section 116.7.2 EXCEPTIONS to Section 116.6.1. The home owner shall not
tap the City Main Sewer Line. The tap of the City Main Sewer Line shall be done
by a licensed Master Plumber under a separate plumbing permit. The home owner
shall not install the Electrical Service Entrance consisting of the electrical panel,
main breaker, meter enclosure, riser and weather head or underground conduit to
a pad mount transformer. The service entrance shall be installed by a licensed
Master Electrician under a separate electrical permit.
Section 116.7.3 LIMITATIONS. The home owner is permitted to build one (1)
single-family dwelling every five (5) years. The home owner is permitted one (1)
major electrical wiring project every three (3) years. The home owner is not
permitted to hire any individual, firm, company or corporation to accomplish any
work under his/her permits. Any work not accomplished by the owner must be
by a licensed individual, firm, company or corporation and a separate permit shall
be issued by the Inspection Department to cover the scope of the work. No
property owner is allowed to build, construct, repair, replace, remodel, add to, or
do any work which requires a permit in any dwelling he or she owns, but does not
live in, including rental single-, two- or multiple-family dwellings, commercial or
industrial buildings and structures. All work accomplished on the above mentioned
dwellings, buildings and structures must be done by properly licensed individuals,
firms, companies and corporations.
(u) CHAPTER 36 FENCES.
Section 3601 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
Section 3601.1 A building permit shall be required to install and/or replace an
existing fence in the City of Augusta, Kansas. The property owner may obtain the
building permit for a fence when he/she is doing the actual construction. A
property owner shall not be permitted to obtain a building permit for any fence and
hire an unlicensed contractor to install the fence.
Section 3601.2 Building Permit Fees:
The charges and fees for Building permit Fees shall be established from time
to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas.
4-11
(v) Section 3602 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
Section 3602.1 PROPERTY STAKES TO DETERMINE PROPERTY LINES.
The Inspection Department may require a licensed survey be made to determine
the property lines, when the corner bars cannot be located, or when there is any
doubt as to the location of the property line.
Section 3602.2 FINAL INSPECTION. Final inspection on privacy and chain
link fences to determine compliance with these regulations.
Section 3602.3 MASONRY FENCES. Masonry fences shall require a footing
inspections, wall inspections and drainage openings.
(w) Section 3603 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. New and
Replacement Fences.
Section3603.1 DISTANCES FROM PROPERTY LINES. All types of fences
shall be constructed adjacent or on the property lines. The Inspection Department
may grant an exception based on a plot plan for those fences that are not intended
to cover the entire yard. For example, fences around patios and swimming pools.
Parallel fences are not permitted unless approved by the Inspection Department
and only if the two fences are of different construction materials.
Section 3603.2 CHAIN LINK FENCES. All chain link fences shall be
constructed according to the manufacturer's recommendations and instructions.
Chain link fences with privacy inserts shall comply with the requirements for wood
privacy fences.
Section 3603.3 ELEVATIONS. All wood and chain link privacy fences shall
maintain a minimum elevation above grade of three inches. ( a three inch distance
between the ground [soil] and the bottom of the fence ) The fence may have open
mesh fencing material to fill in the three inch separation between the bottom of the
fence and the ground [soil].
Section 3603.4 PROPERTY PIN PROTECTION. No fence support post shall
be installed within two feet of any property pin. No masonry fence shall be
installed within two feet of any property pin.
Section 3603.5 SOLID MASONRY FENCES. All solid masonry fences shall
have drainage openings approved by the Inspection Department that will permit
the passage of storm water. No solid masonry fence shall be installed or
constructed on a utility and drainage easement without approval of the Inspection
Department and the City Engineer.
Section 3603.6 UTILITY and DRAINAGE EASEMENTS. Wood and chain link
privacy fences may be installed or constructed on a utility and drainage easement
under the following requirements:
Section 3603.6.1 FENCE CONSTRUCTION BELOW MINIMUM
ELEVATIONS. The bottom edge of the fence shall maintain the required three
inch elevation above grade (ground) and shall maintain such grade to the property
line. The area between the grade and the bottom of the drainage swale shall
consist of a minimum two inch lattice work, two inch open chain link, 1/2 inch
rebars on two inch centers or one inch nominal treated or fir lumber spaced two
inches on center with the edge of the boards facing the drainage swale.
Section 3603.6.2 MAJOR DRAINAGE EASEMENT RESTRICTIONS. No
fence shall be constructed in a drainage easement that constricts, diverts, dams or
in any way impedes the natural flow of water onto, through or out of any yard or
property.
4-12
Section 3603.6.3 No fence of any design shall be placed in a Major Drainage
Easement. Said fence shall stop at the edge of the drainage easement.
(x) Section 3604 REQUIRED GATES AND REMOVABLE SECTIONS.
Section 3604.1 PERSONNEL GATES. All fences are required to have a
personnel gate facing the principal street for the use of City Utility Meter Readers.
All fences that do not cross a utility or drainage easement shall be required to
install a minimum four foot gate onto the utility or drainage easement.
Section 3604.2 UTILITY and DRAINAGE EASEMENT GATES. All fences that
cross a utility or drainage easement shall have gates or removable sections the
width of the easement on each side property line. All fences enclosing a utility
electrical transformer or manhole shall provide an access gate or lift out section
that will provide adequate egress for utility crews.
(y) Section 3605 STAKING REQUIREMENTS.
Section 3605.1 RESPONSIBILITY. It is the contractor's or property owner's
responsibility to locate the property pins for the lot prior to staking and calling for
an inspection.
Section 3605.2 SURVEY. The Inspection Department may require a lot
survey to determine the property corners if they cannot be determined by the
contractor or home owner.
(z) Section 3606 REQUIRED SETBACKS AND WORKING CLEARANCES
Section 3606.1 PROPERTY PINS. All fence posts shall maintain a two-foot
clearance from all property pins. The Inspection Department may grant
permission to construct a fence three inches or higher above a property pin.
Section 3606.2 ELECTRIC TRANSFORMER. All fences shall maintain a
three-foot clearance from the sides and back and a four foot clearance from the
front of an electric transformer.
Section 3606.3 UTILITY MANHOLE. All fences shall maintain a one-foot
clearance from the rim of any utility manhole.
Section 3606.4 BUILDING SETBACK LINES. Privacy fences shall not be
constructed past the front building setback line facing the principle street. Privacy
fences located on a corner lot may construct the fence to the side property line.
Fences located in the front building set back shall not be over three foot in height.
Fences may taper from the six foot allowance at the building set back line to three
foot at the front property line. No fence shall be constructed that will block any
Public or Shared driveway or sidewalk.
(aa) A new appendix “K”, entitled New Construction and Signs;
Designated Main Street Area, shall be added to the International Building
Code and shall read as follows:
APPENDIX K
NEW CONSTRUCTION AND SIGNS; DESIGNATED MAIN STREET AREA
K101 NEW CONSTRUCTION. It is intended this appendix shall set forth
design principles for all new construction of buildings and structures of any kind
within the designated Main Street area. New buildings and additions to existing
buildings, shall be compatible with and promote the historic character of Main
Street area. Creativity in design is encouraged so long as it is compatible with the
overall design goals of the area. The replication of historic styles, typical for the
relative time period of surrounding buildings, is permitted. Interpretations of
traditional building of the same era of surrounding buildings, which are similar in
scale and overall character, are acceptable.
4-13
K102 SITE PLAN. All new construction shall orient the new building on the lot
so that the walls of the building are parallel to the lot lines and the front façade of
the building faces the street in a manner similar to historic pattern in this area. In
addition, the alignment of the front façade shall be on the front lot line as was the
practice historically.
K103 MASS AND SCALE. New construction shall appear similar in mass and
scale to historic structures found in the designated area. Floor-to-floor heights,
especially the first floor height, shall appear to be similar to those seen historically
in the block, as seen from the exterior.
K104 ROOF SHAPE. The roof of a new building shall be visually compatible
and not contrast greatly with the room shape and orientation of surrounding
building.
K105 WINDOWS. Upper story windows with vertical emphasis are required.
Windows should be trimmed with painted wood or other historically compatible
material. This trim shall have a dimension similar to that used historically. Window
dimensions that are similar to those used traditionally are required. If they are
used, the dividing frame elements, or muntins, in a window should be similar in
dimension to those used traditionally. Windows on lower floors shall appear to
have divided lights. Snap-in muntins, used on both sides of the glass may be
considered also. Muntins located between two panes of glass shall not be
permitted.
K106 ENTRANCES. New building entrances shall have a similar appearance
to those seen historically in the designated area and shall be in scale with the
overall façade. The primary entrance shall face the street. Contemporary
interpretations of historic building entrances are acceptable, provided they
maintain a similar scale and character as historic buildings. Doors shall be rimmed
with wood or painted metal. The trim shall be of a dimension similar to that used
historically.
K107 LOADING DOCKS AND DOORS. New construction shall incorporate
loading docks of a design similar to those of traditional and historic design.
Openings from the docks shall be similar in size and depth to loading docks seen
in the designated area. Contemporary interpretations of loading dock doors which
are similar in scale and character as those seen in the area are acceptable.
K108 MATERIALS. Simple material finishes are mandatory and matte
finishes are preferred. Polished stone is not permitted. Materials shall appear
similar to those used historically and traditional materials are mandatory. New,
state-of-the-art materials may be considered for limited applications. New
materials shall have a demonstrated durability in this environment.
K109 SOLID-TO-VOID RATIO. The ratio of window-to-wall shall be similar to
that seen traditionally on commercial storefront buildings in the area.
K110 ALINGMENT OF FAÇADE MATTER. New buildings shall maintain the
alignment of horizontal elements along the block, including building cornices.
Window sills, moldings and cornices are among those elements that may be seen
to align.
K201 SIGNS. Historically, signs used in the designated Main Street area
were relatively simple. They varied in size and location, but most were basic
painted panels with simple lettering types. Others were painted directly on the
building wall. If it was illuminated, an indirect light source was typical. These
features of sign design shall be continued.
4-14
K202 SIGN CONTEXT. Sign design should consider the building front as a
part of overall sign design and integrate façade composition into the sign. Signs
should be proportionate to the building so as not to dominate the appearance of
the building. A master sign plan should be developed to use for sign design
decisions. Signs should be mounted to fit within existing architectural features and
be in scale with façade of the building.
K203 PERMITTED SIGNS. The types of signs allowed in the designated
Main Street area are as follows:
1. flush mounted
2. pole mounted/monument
3. projecting
4. window
5. directory
K203.1 FLUSH MOUNTED SIGNS. Such signs should be mounted flat
to the wall or façade and, when feasible, aligned with other signs on the
block. When using decorative mouldings to outline a sign, the sign should fit
within the mouldings. In no case should a sign hide or obscure significant
architectural features of the façade or wall.
K203.2 POLE MOUNTED SIGNS. A pole mounted or monument sign
may be used as long as it does not interfere with movement on a public way.
No pole mounted or monument signs shall have an effective area greater
than fifteen (15) square feet and not more than fifteen (15) feet in height.
K203.3 PROJECTING SIGNS. A projecting sign should be located near
the business entrance and should be located near the business entrance and
should be at least eight feet above the sidewalk. Other restrictions and
approval may be required by other ordinances of the City if the sign
overhangs a public way.
K203.4 WINDOW SIGNS. Signs may be painted on windows provided
the sign covers no more than twenty five percent of the glass surface of the
window.
K203.5 DIRECTORY SIGNS. Where several businesses share a
building, smaller single panel should be aligned into a single arrangement to
form a directory. When possible, the signs combined to make a directory
should be of a similar background and lettering.
K203.6 INAPPROPRIATE SIGNS. Signs which are out of character
with typical signs of the historic period of surrounding buildings shall not be
permitted. No sign shall move, rotate, flash or change brightness unless the
sign already exists and has historic significance.
K204 SIGN MATERIAL. Signs in the designated Main Street area shall be
made of materials which were commonly used during the time period of the
surrounding buildings such as painted wood and metal. No unfinished materials
including unpainted wood are permitted and no plastic exterior signs are permitted.
K205 SIGN CONTENT. Colors for signs must be compatible with the color
scheme of the building. In general, no more than three colors should be used in a
sign. Lettering or typeface shall be compatible and in keeping with the historic
character of the area. Lettering should not exceed ten inches in height. Hard to
read and overly intricate lettering are not permitted. Historic painted signs which
exist now shall be preserved.
4-15
K206 SIGN LIGHTING. All sign lighting shall be compatible with the historic
character of the area and shall originate from an indirect source. The light source
shall be directed at the sign from an external shielded lamp. Internal illumination
of a sign is not permitted. No sign shall be illuminated by fluorescent lights or
backlighting. The use of neon and/or incandescent bulbs is recommended unless
an excessive amount of neon lighting becomes visually obtrusive.
(bb) Chapter 1. Administration, Section 101 General, Section 101.9
Restrictions. The use of the International Existing Building Code is restricted
to buildings and structures located in Assembly, Commercial and Industrial
zoned areas and such building or structure was constructed before 1950.
(Ord. 1820; Ord. 1868; Ord. 1920; Code 2010)
4-16
ARTICLE 2. BUILDING CODE, BUILDING STANDARDS, DWELLING CONSTRUCTION
UNDER THE BUILDING CODE, HOUSING STANDARDS
4-201. INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE INCORPORATED. The code
known as the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, recommended by the
International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby incorporated by reference
herein and made a part of this article, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or amended, as authorized and in the
manner prescribed by the statutes of the State of Kansas. (Ord. 1868, Sec. 1B;
Code 2010)
4-202. AMENDMENTS. The International Residential Code incorporated by
reference in section 4-201 herein shall be amended as follows:
(a) Section 703.2 of Chapter 7 shall be amended to read as follows:
Water-resistive barrier. One layer of No. 15 asphalt felt, free from holes and
breaks, complying with ASTM D 226 for Type I felt or other approved waterresistive
barrier shall be applied over studs or sheathing of all exterior walls prior to
window or door installation. Such felt or material shall be applied horizontally, with
the upper layer lapped over the lower layer not less than 2 inches (51 mm).
Where joints occur, felt shall be lapped not less than 6 inches (51 mm) material
other than felt shall be installed as per manufacturer’s directions. The felt or other
approved material shall be continuous to the top of walls and terminated at
penetrations and building appendages in a manner to meet the requirements of
the exterior wall envelope as described in Section R703.1.
Exception: Omission of the water-resistive barrier is permitted in the following
situations:
1. In detached accessory buildings.
2. Under exterior wall finish materials as permitted in Table R703.4.
3. Under paperbacked stucco lath when the paper backing is an
approved weather-resistive sheathing paper.
(b) Table R703.4 of Chapter 7 of the International Residential Code, 2003,
as adopted by the City of Augusta, shall be amended to read as follows:
Change the Column heading “Sheathing Paper Required” to “Water-Resistive
Barrier Required”. Remove all “No’s” to “Yes’s” under this column. Remove all
references to “Note g” in the table. Remove “g” under the legend descriptions for
this table. (Ord. 1952; Code 2010)
4-203. ADDITION. The International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, shall have the
following additions:
(a) Section R108.2 Fee Schedule shall have the following addition at the
end of the section, "See the International Building Code, Section 108.2.2."
(b) Section R112.1 General shall have the following addition at the end of
the section, "See the International Building Code, Section 112.4."
(c) Section R113.4 Violation Penalties shall have the following addition at
the end of the section, "See the International Building Code, Section 113.4.1."
(d) Chapter 44 FENCES. See Chapter 36 FENCES in the International
Building Code, 2003 Edition.
(Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-17
4-204. DELETIONS. The International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, incorporated
by reference in Section 4-201 shall have the following deletions:
(a) Section R105.2 Items #2 Fences and #5 Sidewalks and Driveways shall
be deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-205. DWELLING CONSTRUCTION UNDER THE UNIFORM BUILDING CODE
INCORPORATED. That certain uniform code known as the "Dwelling Construction
Under the Uniform Building Code, 1991 Edition," recommended by the
International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road,
Whittier, California 90601, is hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a
part of this article, save and except such portions as are hereinafter or may
hereafter be deleted or amended, as authorized and in the manner prescribed by
the statutes of the State of Kansas. (Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-206. DELETIONS. None. (Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-207. AMENDMENT. None. (Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-208. ADDITION. None. (Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-209. GUIDELINES FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING INSTALLATIONS
INCORPORATED. The guideline known as the "Guidelines for Manufactured
Housing Installations, 1991 Edition, with Appendix A and B," recommended by the
International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road,
Whittier, California 90601, is hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a
part of this article save and except such portions as are hereinafter or may
hereafter be deleted or amended, as authorized and in the manner prescribed by
the statutes of the State of Kansas. (Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-210. DELETIONS. The Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installations,
incorporated by reference in section 4-209 herein shall have the following sections
deleted:
(a) Section 305(c) INSPECTION RECORD CARD
(b) Section 503(a) SKIRTING OR PERMANENT PERIMETER
ENCLOSURES.
(Ord. 1692; Code 2010)
4-211. AMENDMENT. None. (Ord. 1692; Code 2010)
4-212. ADDITION. The guidelines for manufactured housing installations,
incorporated by reference in section 4-209 herein shall have the following
additions:
Section 503(a) SKIRTING OR PERMANENT PERIMETER ENCLOSURES.
Skirting or permanent perimeter enclosures shall read as follows: Skirting or
permanent perimeter enclosures shall be installed when a permanent concrete
foundation around the perimeter of the manufactured home is not provided.
Skirting shall be of material suitable for exterior exposure and contact with the
ground. Permanent perimeter enclosures shall be constructed of materials as
required by the building code for regular foundation construction. Skirting shall be
4-18
installed in accordance with the skirting manufacturer's installation instructions.
Skirting shall be adequately secured to assure stability, to minimize vibration and
susceptibility to wind damage, and to compensate for possible frost heave.
Skirting shall be installed not later than 30 days after the manufactured home is
placed on the permanent foundation.
(Ord. 1692; Code 2010)
4-19
ARTICLE 3. ELECTRICAL CODE
4-301. NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE INCORPORATED. The code known as the
“National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition,” recommended by the National Fire
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269, is
hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article, save and
except such portions as are hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or amended,
as authorized an in the manner prescribed by the statutes of the State of Kansas.
(Ord. 1861; Code 2010)
4-302. DELETIONS. The National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, shall have the
following sections deleted:
(a) Table 300.5, Column 1, Direct Burial Cables or Conductors shall be
deleted in its entirety.
(b) Article 527.6(A) Ground-Fault Protection for Personnel. (A) Receptacle
Outlets. Shall have the reference to 30-amprere receptacle outlets deleted.
(Ord. 1861; Code 2010)
4-303. ADDITIONS. The National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, shall have the
following additions:
Article 210.23(A) 15- and 20-Amprere Branch Circuits. No more than eight (8)
devices shall be installed on any 15-Amprere Branch Circuit nor more than twelve
(12) devices shall be installed on any 20-Ampere Branch Circuit. For the purpose
of this article, switches and devices which do not utilize or supply power shall not
be counted as devices.
Article 230.27 Means of Attachment. It shall be the responsibility of the
electrical contractor to provide and install the means of attachment for the service
entrance conductors.
Article 230.70(A)4 Commercial and Industrial Locations:
1. Located inside the building within six (6) feet of an unlocked exit
door to the exterior of the building. The exit door shall be marked “Electrical
Main Disconnect” and an arrow pointing the direction of the disconnect from
the door. The Safety Department shall be provided a key to this door if it is to
be locked.
2. Located on the exterior of the building in a rain tight enclosure. The
disconnects may be locked, provide the Safety Department can use standard
bolt cutters to open the enclosure (panel).
3. Located at the utility pole or pad mounted transformer. The
disconnects may be locked, provided the Safety Department can use
standard bolt cutters to open the enclosure (panel).
Article 230.70(A) 4 Residential Locations. Where the main electrical panel is
located as to require more than fifteen (15) feet of unfused service entrance
conductors inside a residential dwelling or structure, there shall be installed a main
disconnecting device on the exterior of the dwelling or structure. (FPN) The
electrical panel is considered a subfed panel and must be connected to the main
disconnect on the exterior of the dwelling or structure with four (4) wire grounded
conductors.
4-20
Article 300.5(A) Direct Buried Cable. Direct Buried Power Cables are not
permitted in this jurisdiction. All Power cables installed underground shall be
installed in raceways approved (Listed) for Direct Burial.
Article 300.5(A) 1 Conduit Sizing. All service conductors shall be installed in
conduit as follows:
100 Ampere, Single-Phase - 2 inch conduit.
200 Ampere, Single-Phase - 3 inch conduit.
Three-Phase shall be installed in accordance with Electrical Distribution
Department Requirements.
Article 590.4(D) Receptacles. All temporary construction services shall have
installed a standard NEMA L6, 30-Ampere, 250-volt, 2 pole, 3 wire receptacle and
all cords shall have installed a standard NEMA L6, 30-Ampere, 250-volt, 2 pole, 3
wire grounding type twist lock cap.
Article 430.1(A) Horsepower Rating. All motors of three (3) horse power or
larger shall be three-phase rated where three-phase power is supplied by this
jurisdiction. Existing motors of three horsepower or larger which are single-phase
shall remain in service until such time as the motor or unit is replaced by a threephase
motor or unit. Written permission by the Building Official is required to install
or replace single-phase motors or units when three-phase power is available.
Article 336-4 uses not permitted. Occupancies in districts zoned
Commercial or Industrial except for Single-Family Dwellings.
Section 1206 – Inspections. (A) All mobile home and manufactured home
units moved into the City of Augusta, Kansas, shall require a gas connection
inspection. The mobile and manufactured home unit’s internal gas piping shall be
tested according to the provisions set forth in Section 1206 (c)(2) by a Master
Plumber as licensed by the City of Augusta, Kansas.
(Ord. 1861; Ord. 1663; Code 2010)
4-304. AMENDMENTS. The National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, shall have the
following amendments:
(a) Article 527.6(A) Receptacle Outlets. Shall have the first sentence
amended to read: “All 125 volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-ampre
receptacle outlets that are not part of the permanent wiring of the building
or structure and that are in use by personnel shall have ground-fault
circuit interrupter protection for personnel.”
(Ord. 1861; Code 2010)
4-21
ARTICLE 4. PLUMBING CODE
4-401. INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE INCORPORATED. The code known
as the International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, recommended by the
International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby incorporated by reference
herein and made a part of this article, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or amended, as authorized and in the
manner prescribed by the statutes of the State of Kansas. (Ord. 1868, Sec. C;
Code 2010)
4-402. ADDITION. The International Plumbing Code, incorporated by reference in
section 4-401 herein shall have the following additions:
(a) Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule shall have the following added to the end
of the section, "See the International Building Code, Section 108.2.2."
(b) Section 108.4 Violation Penalties shall have the following added to the
end of the section, "See the International Building Code, Section 113.4.1."
(c) Section 109.1 Appeals board. Add "See the International Building Code,
Section 112 Appeals Board."
(d) Section 107.1.4 All mobile home and manufactured home units moved
into the City of Augusta shall require a gas connection inspection. The mobile and
manufactured home unit's internal gas piping shall be tested according to the
provisions set forth in the International Fuel Gas Code, 2000 Edition.
(e) Section 608.8 LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. All lawn sprinkler
systems receiving potable water from the City or receiving non-potable water from
a private well shall be protected against back flow by the installation of an
approved pressure-vacuum breaker installed a minimum of 12 inches above the
highest point on the lawn sprinkler system and before any branch lines.
Section 608.8.1 TESTING. All new lawn sprinkler systems shall have the
pressure-vacuum breaker tested before the system is approved by the Inspection
Department. All existing back flow prevention devices, including pressure-vacuum
breakers shall be tested annually. All test results shall be documented on an
official form provided by the Inspection Department. The Inspection Department
shall maintain all testing records in the Address Folder File.
(f) Section 701.1.2 SEWER LINE ELEVATIONS. All basement drain piping
shall have a minimum five (5) foot fall (elevation) between the bottom of the lowest
drain piping to the top of the main sewer line. Where this condition can not be
met, the installation of an approved sewer ejector with check valve is mandatory.
Manual shut-off valves or backflow prevention valves are not considered a
substitute for the required sewer ejector.
Section 701.1.3 SEWER TAPS. All sewer taps shall be made with an
approved saddle and clamps or epoxy bonding and concrete back fill.
(g) Section 917.1 GENERAL. Add to the end of the section, "Permission
shall be required from the Inspection Department and noted on the Plumbing
Permit."
(Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-403. DELETIONS. The International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, shall have the
following deletions:
4-22
(a) Section 109.2 Membership of board, Section 109.2.1 Qualifications,
Section 109.2.2 Alternate members, and Section 109.2.3 Chairman shall be
deleted in their entirety.
(b) Section 605.4 Water service pipe. Delete the sentence, "Plastic water
service piping shall terminate within 5 feet (1524mm) inside the point of entry into
a building."
(c) Section 606.2 Location of shutoff valves. Delete item #2 in it's entirety.
(Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-404. AMENDMENTS. The International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, shall have
the following amendments:
(a) Section 305.5 Pipes through or under footings or foundation walls. The
last sentence in the section shall be amended to read "Such sleeve shall be 1/2
pipe size greater than the pipe passing through the wall."
(b) Section 606.1 Location of full-open valves. Amend Item #2 to read, "On
the discharge side of every water meter larger than one-inch."
(c) Section 904.1 Roof extensions. Amend to read twelve (12) inches.
(Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-23
ARTICLE 5. MECHANICAL CODE
4-501. INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE INCORPORATED. The code
known as the International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, recommended by the
International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby incorporated by reference
herein and made a part of this article, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or amended, as authorized and in the
manner prescribed by the statutes of the State of Kansas. (Ord. 1868, Sec. 1E;
Code 2010)
4-502. DELETION. The International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, shall have the
following deletions:
(a) Section 109 MEANS OF APPEAL shall be deleted in it's entirety.
(Ord. 1868; Code 2010)
4-503. AMENDMENT. None. (Ord. 1868; Code 2010)
4-504. ADDITIONS. The International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, shall have the
following additions:
(a) Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule shall have the following added, “See the
International Building Code, Section 108.2.2.”
(b) Section 108.4 Violation Penalties shall have the following added, “See
the International Building Code, Section 113.4.1.”
(c) Section 109 Means of Appeal shall have the following added, “See the
International Building Code, Section 112.4.”
(Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-24
ARTICLE 6. HOUSING CODE
4-601. UNIFORM HOUSING CODE INCORPORATED. That certain code known as
the “Uniform Housing Code, 1991 Edition,” recommended by the International
Conference of Building Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California
90601, is hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article,
save and except such portions as are hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or
amended as authorized by and in the manner prescribed by the statutes of the
State of Kansas. (Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-602. DELETIONS. Deletions to the Uniform Housing Code incorporated by
reference in section 4-601 herein shall be as follows:
(a) Section 1102 Recording of Notice and Order.
(b) Section 1602 Report Transmitted to Council – Set for Hearing.
(c) Section 1603 Protest and Objections – How Made.
(d) Section 1604 Hearing of Protests.
(e) Section 1605 Personal Obligation or Special Assessment.
(f) Section 1606 Contest.
(g) Section 1607 Authority for Installment Payment of Assessments with
Interest.
(Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-603. AMENDMENTS. None. (Ord. 1629; Code 2010)
4-604. ADDITIONS. The Uniform Housing Code, incorporated by reference in
section 4-601 herein shall have the following additions:
A. Section 201(c)1 WEEDS, GRASS AND OTHER VEGITATION. The
owner of any lot or piece of land within the City shall keep the lot or pieces of land
free and clear of all weeds, grass and other vegetation by cutting or destroying all
such weeds, grass and other vegetation before the same blossoms or matures or
attains a size of six (6) inches on occupied property or twelve (12) inches on
unoccupied property. Nothing in this section shall affect or impair the rights of the
City under the provisions of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, Chapter 2, Article 13
and amendments thereto, relating to the control and eradication of certain noxious
weeds.
B Section 303(a) INSPECTION STANDARDS. No person shall be found
in violation of this code unless the building official or his representative, after a
reasonable inquiry and inspection of the premises, believes that the conditions
exist of a quality and appearance prohibited by this code and/or contrary to the
health, safety and general welfare of the community exists on the premises in
question. Such belief shall be supported by evidence of the unsightly conditions or
other acts prohibited by this code, the technical codes or other regulations of the
City.
C Section 401 DEFINITIONS.
1. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean any motor vehicle
which is not currently registered or tagged pursuant to KSA 8-126 to 8-149
inclusive, as amended; or parked in violation of the code; or incapable of
moving under its own power; or in a junked or wrecked condition.
4-25
2. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE shall mean a secondary structure
detached from the principal structure but on the same premises, including but
not limited to, garages, sheds, barns or out-buildings.
3. COMMERCIAL or INDUSTRIAL shall mean used or intended to
be used primarily for other than residential purposes.
4. GARBAGE shall mean without limitation any accumulation of
animal, fruit or vegetable waste matter that results from the handling,
preparations, cooking, serving, delivering, storage or use of foodstuffs.
5. PREMISES shall mean any lot, plot or parcel of land including the
structures thereon. Premises shall also mean any lot, plot or parcel of land
without any structures thereon.
6. REFUSE shall mean garbage, trash and any other discarded
material of whatever description or composition.
7. RESIDENTIAL shall mean used or intended to be used primarily
for human habitation.
8. TRASH shall mean combustible waste consisting of, but not
limited to: papers, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, furniture,
bedding, rags, leaves, yard trimmings, or tree branches and non-combustible
waste consisting of, but not limited to: metal, tin, cans, glass crockery,
plastics, mineral matter, ashes or street rubbish and sweepings.
D. Section 1001(k1). UNLAWFUL ACTS. It shall be unlawful for any
person to allow to exist on any residential, commercial or industrial premises
conditions which are detrimental to adjoining property, the neighborhood or the
City. For the purposes of this section the unlawful acts shall be allowing to be
scattered over the parking, leaving, depositing or accumulating on the yard of any
premises the following described materials but not in limitation thereof: lumber,
wire, metal, tires, concrete, masonry products, plastic products, supplies,
equipment, machinery, auto parts, abandoned motor vehicles, furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, televisions, sinks, bicycles, lawn mowers, junk, refuse, garbage,
trash or other such items of personal property.
E. Section 1101(b)3(iv). If the building official has determined that an
unlawful act exist on the premises, lot or parcel of land in violation of Section
1001Ik1 the order to abate the conditions causing the violation to be corrected
within fifteen (15) days from the date of the mailing of the notice to alleviate the
exterior conditions and/or fifteen (15) days from the date of the mailing of the
notice to request a hearing before the Board of Appeals.
F. Section 1101(b)3(v). If the building official has determined that weeds,
grass and other vegetation are not kept cut or are not destroyed in violation of
Section 201(c)1 of this article, the order shall require five (5) days written notice if
the owner or agent is known or ten (10) days notice in the official city newspaper if
the owner or agent is unknown. Where the owner shall refuse to comply with said
notice, or where the owner is unknown, the building official shall have such weeds,
grass or other vegetation cut or destroyed by a private contractor.
4-26
ARTICLE 7. LANDSCAPING AND URBAN FORESTRY CODE
4-701. PURPOSE. The Governing Body of the city recognizes the importance of the
urban forest to the quality of life in the city. The Governing Body declare it to be a
policy of the city that city property be landscaped to enhance the natural beauty of
the city; that the street environment be made hospitable through landscaping; and
that residents of the city be encouraged to participate in beautification efforts
through installing and maintaining quality landscaping on private property. (Ord.
1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-702. DEFINITIONS. The following terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
(a) Community Forest - means all park trees, private trees and street trees
as a total resource.
(b) Diseased Tree - means a tree that by reason of injury or disease
constitutes a hazard to life and property, or harbors insects or disease which
represent a threat to other trees within the city.
(c) Landscaping - means to change the natural features of a plot of ground
so as to make it more attractive, as by adding lawns, frees, bushes, earthen works,
rocks, boulders, other natural materials and lighting.
(d) Landscaping Plan - means a plan designed by a landscape architect
describing the changes and additions that are proposed to change the natural
features of a plot of ground.
(e) Park Trees - means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all, other areas owned by,
or under the control of, the city.
(f) Parking - means that portion of street right-of-way lying between the
back of the curb or the edge of the traveled way, and the adjacent private property
line on the same side of the street.
(g) Private Trees - means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation located on private property.
(h) Sight Triangle - means a triangle area at a street intersection in which
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as
to impede driver vision between a height of 2 1/2 feet to 8 feet above the grades of
the outside edge of the street surface of the intersecting streets, measured from
the point of intersection of the property lines 30 feet in both directions along the
streets.
(i) Street Trees - mean trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody
vegetation on land lying between the property lines on either side of all arterial and
collector streets within the city.
(j) Top - means to cut back limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
diameter within the trees crown, to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy
and disfigure the tree.
(Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-703. STREET TREES; LIST. A list of preferred and recommended street trees
species, which shall consist of small, medium and large trees, shall be established
from time to time by the Park Department, and a copy of the current list shall be
4-27
maintained in the Inspection Department and the Butler County Extension Office.
Copies of the list shall be provided without charge to persons requesting the same.
(Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-704. ON-SITE INSPECTIONS. The Park Superintendent, Inspection Department,
or other duly authorized agent of the city may inspect the work along arterial and
collector streets to determine that the work is accomplished according to the
approved landscaping plan. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-705. INTERFERENCE WITH COMMUNITY FOREST DUTIES. It is unlawful for
any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city or any of its representatives
or agents while engaged in planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or
removing any tree within the community forest, or performing any other duties or
responsibilities prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-706. CARE OF COMMUNITY FOREST. (a) The city may, in its discretion, plant,
prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within all rights-of-way,
public easements, streets, alleys, lanes squares and public grounds, as may be
necessary to insure the public safety or to preserve or enhance the beauty of such
public grounds.
(b) The city may remove any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power
lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is seriously affected
by insects or disease.
(Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-707. TREE PROTECTION. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach wire, rope,
chain, sign or any other material to any tree on any public street, alley or public
property; except when used as a preservation practice. The Inspection Department
may exempt certain trees on any street, alley or public property from protection
and have them removed when in the way of public improvements. (Ord. 1877,
Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-708. TRIMMING TREES BY PUBLIC OR PRIVATE UTILITIES. It shall be lawful
for public and private utility companies owning transmission lines in the City to cut
or trim trees or other growths in the parking, public ways, utility or drainage
easements of the City which shall interfere with the transmission lines or utility
meters. The public or private utility shall first notify the owner or occupant of the
abutting property either verbally or in writing before work is commenced. (Ord.
1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-709. TREE TOPPING. It is unlawful for any person, to top any street tree, park
tree, or other tree on public property; provided, that trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, and trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical, may be topped when authorized by the
City of Augusta. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-710. INFECTED OR INFESTED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. Whenever
the City or a State or Federal authority finds that tree(s) located upon private
4-28
property within the City are infected or infested with or harbors any tree or plant
disease or insect pest or larvae, the uncontrolled presence of which may constitute
a hazard to or result in the damage or destruction of other trees in the community,
the property owner shall treat or remove any such designated tree within a time
specified by written notice of the City. The property owner shall treat said tree
within 10 days after notification or remove the same within 15 days after
notification. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-711. DEAD TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. Property owners shall be
responsible for the removal of any dead tree posing a hazard to any structure,
fence, utility, street or alley, or pose a danger as an attractive nuisance to children.
Said tree shall be removed within 15 days after notification. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2;
Code 2010)
4-712. TREE SCULPTURES. Upon written approval of the City of Augusta, private
property owners may elect to remove the upper portion of any tree and reserve the
bottom of the free including the trunk to be made into a tree sculpture. The tree
sculpture must be commenced within thirty days and completed within sixty days
after the upper tree has been removed. Any tree sculpture, which becomes
damaged, infected or infested must be removed according to the provisions of this
article. Tree sculptures shall only apply to trees located on private property. No
tree located in the street parking shall be made into a tree sculpture and shall be
removed in its entirety. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-713. REMOVAL OF TREE STUMPS. If any tree, shrubbery or hedge in the
parking is cut down, it shall be the duty of the person or persons doing such work
to take out the entire tree, shrubbery or hedge, including the trunk and stump and
to remove the debris from the parking and property and to fill the hole(s) lift by the
removal of the stump(s) with dirt in such a manner that no hole shall be left in the
parking. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-714. PRIVATE LIMITATIONS TOP URBAN FORESTRY AND LANDSCAPING.
No owner of property abutting upon any Residential Street, Alley, Utility or
Drainage Easements shall plant any free, shrubbery or hedge nor construct any
landscaping in the street parking, alley or utility and drainage easements. No
owner or occupant in the city shall replant any tree, shrubbery or hedge currently
existing on any street parking, alley or utility and drainage easements which is
removed for any reason. No owner or occupant in the city shall plant, grow, care
for, keep or cultivate any mulberry or thorny locust frees. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code
2010)
4-715. STREET TREE REQUIREMENTS. The following requirements shall guide
the planting of street trees in the parking of all arterial and collector streets, and
private trees located adjacent to the street parking:
(a) Arterial and Collector street requirements.
(1) The developer or home owners association located along an
arterial and collector street must provide liability insurance in the amount of
$300,000. The insurance policy shall add the City of Augusta as an additional
insured as its interests may appear pertaining to the planting of street trees.
4-29
The liability, insurance, policy must be maintained for the life of the street
landscaping and tree planting. The City reserves the right upon failure of the
developer or home owners association to maintain the liability insurance, to
have all landscaping and tree planting removed from the street parking at the
expense of the developer or home owners association.
(2) The developer or home owners association shall have prepared
a landscaping plan to include the location and species of trees to be planted
in the street parking. Said plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect.
(3) The landscaping plan and liability insurance policy shall be
presented to the Inspection Department for approval prior to planting.
(4) All tree planting shall be accomplished by a professional
landscaping company or an individual or company with sufficient equipment
and knowledge to accomplish the work under the supervision of the City park
supervisor.
(5) The City park supervisor shall report all progress on the project to
the Inspection Department.
(6) The developer or home owners association shall be responsible
for the maintenance and upkeep of all landscaping and urban forestry located
in the street parking on arterial and collector streets which have been
approved by the City. The City reserves the right upon failure of the developer
or home owners association to maintain the landscaping and urban forestry,
to have all landscaping and urban forestry removed from the street parking at
the expense of the developer or home owners association.
(b) Spacing and location of street trees.
(1) Street trees shall not be planted in the sight triangle as defined
by this article.
(2) Street trees may be planted no closer together than 30 feet
between small trees; 40 feet between medium trees; and 50 feet between
large trees. Exceptions can be granted by the Inspection Department.
(3) Street trees may be planted in the parking where there is more
than 6 feet between the edge of the sidewalk and the curb of the street. Street
trees shall be planted no closer than 3 feet from a sidewalk or a street.
Exceptions can be granted by the Inspection Department.
(4) No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet from any fire
hydrant.
(5) No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet from any street
light.
(Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-716. CLEARANCE OVER STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS, WALKWAYS
AND SIDEWALKS. Maintenance of adequate clearance over streets and
walkways shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner. A clearance of
8 feet must be maintained over walkways and sidewalks. A clearance of 14 feet
must be maintained over streets, alleys and public ways subject to truck traffic.
(Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-717. UTILITIES. No street trees other than those species listed as small trees may
be planted under or within 10 feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within 5
4-30
feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within 5 feet of any underground
municipal water line, sewer line, transmission line or other public utility. The City
shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it obstructs
the view of drivers to observe traffic, traffic control devices, or signs. (Ord. 1877,
Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-718. ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER RIGHTS. The owner of property abutting
upon any street, alley, utility or drainage easements shall have such title in and
property in growing trees, shrubbery and hedges upon his/her own property, and
upon existing frees, shrubbery and hedges currently growing upon the parking
situated in front of such real estate between the curb line and the property line. An
abutting property owner shall have the right to perform normal tree care on street
trees in conformity with this chapter and any other applicable regulations. The
abutting property owner shall also have the right to maintain existing landscaping
upon the parking. No new landscaping shall be permitted to be installed in the
street parking, alley, utility or drainage easement. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-719. ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES. It shall be the duty of
every property owner of lots abutting upon any sidewalk or public way of the city,
or adjacent to the street parking, alley, utility or drainage easement to plant, care
for, grow, keep or cultivate any trees, shrubbery or hedge on such adjoining
property or upon the parking abutting upon or adjacent thereto in violation of this
ordinance.
It is hereby made the duty of the owner or occupant of any premises abutting
on any street, avenue or alley in the city to cut, trim or remove, in accordance with
the provisions of this article, all trees and shrubbery growing in the city and
existing landscaping, which may constitute any hazard or any sight obstruction to
any vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon the streets and sidewalks. (Ord. 1877, Sec.
2; Code 2010)
4-720. NOTICE TO OWNER, OCCUPANT. Notice to cut any trees, boughs,
shrubbery or limbs to conform to the provisions of this article shall be served by
the duly appointed public officer upon the owner or occupant of the abutting
premises by both regular mail and registered mail. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code
2010)
4-721. ABATEMENT BY THE CITY. If such owner or occupant shall not within 30
days thereafter cause such damaged, diseased or obstructing trees, boughs,
shrubbery or limbs to be removed as provided in accordance with the provisions of
this article, then the City shall forthwith remove them. Proper pruning season will
be taken into consideration. This section, however, shall not be construed as
waiving the rights of the City to prosecute under the provisions of this article. (Ord.
1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-722. ASSESSMENT OF COSTS. The costs of abatement of any condition
prohibited by this article by the City shall be assessed and charged against the lot
or parcel of land on which the condition existed. The City Clerk shall, at the time of
certifying other City taxes to the County Clerk, certify the costs of abatement of
any condition prohibited by this article by the City; and the County Clerk shall
4-31
extend the same on the tax roll of the County against the property upon which
such condition existed. Such costs shall be collected by the County Treasurer and
paid to the City as other city taxes are collected and paid. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2;
Code 2010)
4-723. VIOLATION; PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, be subject to a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or equivalent community service. For the
purpose of this chapter, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
tree on which such violation exists. (Ord. 1877, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
4-32
ARTICLE 8. ADDRESSING CODE
4-801 INSPECTION DEPARTMENT AUTHORIZED TO ASSIGN NUMBERS.
The City Inspection Department shall decide the correct number to assign each
dwelling, building or lot. The Inspection Department shall provide each city
department, postal authority and serving utilities with a correct list of address
numbers. (Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-802 FORMULA FOR ASSIGNING STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS.
(a) Odd numbers shall be given to lots, buildings and structures on
the South side of East-West streets and on the West side of North-South
streets.
(b) Even numbers shall be given to lots, buildings and structures on
the North side of East-West streets and on the East side of North-South streets.
(c) Address numbers shall commence at Second Avenue and each
block shall receive 100 numbers. Blocks in excess of 1,000 feet shall be
assigned 100 numbers for each 600 feet.
(d) Address numbers for East-West streets shall commence with the
center line of State street and an imaginary line running North from the center
line of State street where it intersects Kelly Avenue, and each block shall
receive 100 numbers. Blocks in excess of 1,000 feet shall be assigned 100
numbers for each 600 feet.
(e) East-West Prefixes. All streets running East of State street shall be
designated with the prefix "East," and all streets running West of State street
shall be designated with the prefix "West."
(f) All streets, avenues, etc., within a specific platted subdivision
which are not laid out according to East-West or North-South directions, may be
numbered according to the lots and blocks, provided the numbers are
consecutive with all odd numbers on one side of the street and even numbers
on the opposite side of the street.
(g) If at all possible, no address shall be numbered A, B, C, etc.
(h) Special housing units may have one street address and have
building or apartment numbers assigned to each unit.
(i) The owner(s) of a Manufactured Home Park, Mobile Home Park
or Recreational Vehicle Park shall assign lot numbers to each rental space. The
park owner shall provide the Inspection Department with an address map of the
park. The Inspection Department will provide copies of the map to all city
departments, postal authorities and serving utilities. (Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-803 PLACING NUMBERS. The figures of each number put on any dwelling,
building or other structure shall not be less than four (4) inches in height and
shall be conspicuously placed on the front of the dwelling, building or structure
facing the street. Manufactured homes and mobile homes shall have the figures
of each number not less than three (3) inches in height and shall be
conspicuously placed on the end of the manufactured/mobile home facing the
common street. The placing of numbers on the lots in a recreational vehicle
park shall have figures of each number not less than three (3) inches in height
4-33
and shall be conspicuously placed on a sign or placed on the electrical service
panel. (Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-804 BUILDING TO BE NUMBERED BEFORE OCCUPIED. All new
dwellings, buildings or structures requiring a number under this article shall be
numbered before said building is occupied. (Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-34
ARTICLE 9. MOVING BUILDINGS
4-901. BUILDING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY. The city manager or his or her
authorized designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
this article and appointment of an inspector. (Code 1991)
4-902. PERMIT REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall move, haul, or
transport any house, building, derrick, or other structure of the height when loaded
for movement of 16 feet or more from the surface of the highway, road, street or
alley, or a width of eight feet or more or which cannot be moved at a speed of four
miles per hour or faster, upon, across or over any street, alley or sidewalk in this
city without first obtaining a permit therefor. (K.S.A. 17-1914; Code 1991)
4-903. SAME: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. All applications for permits required
under the provisions of this article shall be made in writing to the inspection
department specifying the day and hour said moving is to commence and the route
through the city's streets over which the house, building, derrick or other structure
shall be moved and stating whether it will be necessary to cut and move, raise, or
in any way interfere with any wires, cables or other aerial equipment of any public
or municipally-owned utility, and if so, the application shall also state the name of
the public or municipally-owned utility, and the time and location that the
applicant's moving operations shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or
otherwise interfering with such aerial facilities. (K.S.A. 17-1915; Code 1991)
4-904. SAME; INSURANCE REQUIRED. A public liability insurance policy issued by
an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Kansas, in the
amount of $100,000 per person, $300,000 per accident as to personal injury, and
$50,000 property damage may be permitted in lieu of a bond. (Code 1991)
4-905. SAME; FEE. Before any permit to move any house or structure is given
under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall pay a fee of not less than
$25 to the city clerk; plus the additional cost for the time for any city crews involved
in such moving. (Code 1991)
4-906. ROUTE; DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL. The inspection department shall,
upon filing of the above application, refer the same to the chief building official or
his or her authorized designee to check the proposed route and determine if it is
practical to move such house or other structure over the route proposed. If it shall
appear that such route is not practical and another route may be used equally well
with less danger to street and travel, then he or she may designate such other
route as the one to be used and shall notify the applicant of the same. The
building official may also require the planking of any street, bridge or culvert or any
part thereof to prevent damage thereto. It shall also be the duty of the chief
building official or his or her authorized designee to inspect the progress of moving
any house or other structure to see that the same is being moved in accordance
with the provisions of this article. (Code 1991)
4-35
4-907. NOTICE TO OWNERS. (a) Upon issuance of a moving permit the applicant
shall give not less than 15 days written notice to any person owning or operating
any wires, cables or other aerial equipment along the proposed route of the intent
to move the structure, giving the time and location that the applicants moving
operation shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or interfering of any wires,
cables or other aerial equipment.
(b) The notice provision of subsection (a) shall not apply where the person
owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment has waived their
right to advance notice.
(c) Should the moving operation be delayed, the applicant shall give the
owner or his or her agent not less than 24 hours advance notice of the actual
operation.
(K.S.A. 17-1916; Code 1991)
4-908. DUTY OF OWNERS. (a) It shall be the duty of the person or the city owning
or operating such poles or wires after service of notice as provided herein, to
furnish competent lineman or workmen to remove such poles, or raise or cut such
wires as will be necessary to facilitate the moving of such house or structure. The
necessary expense which is incurred thereby shall be paid by the holder of the
moving permit.
(b) The owner of any wires, cables or other aerial equipment, after service
of notice as provided in section 4-907, shall be liable to the permit holder for
damages in an amount not to exceed $100 per day for each day the owner shall
fail or refuse to accommodate the permit holder's moving operations.
(K.S.A. 17-1917; Code 1991)
4-909. INTERFERING WITH POLES; WIRES. It shall be unlawful for any person
engaged in moving any house or other structure to raise, cut or in any way
interfere with any wires or poles bearing wires or any other aerial equipment.
(K.S.A. 17-1918; Code 1991)
4-910. DISPLAY OF WARNING LIGHTS. It shall be the duty of any person moving
any of the structures mentioned in this article upon or across any street, alley or
sidewalk or other public place, in this city, to display red light thereon in such a
manner as to show the extreme height and width thereof from 30 minutes after
sunset to 30 minutes before sunrise. (Code 1991)
4-36
ARTICLE 10. DANGEROUS AND UNFIT STRUCTURES
4-1001. PURPOSE. The governing body has found that there exist within the
corporate limits of the city structures which are unfit for human use or habitation
because of dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire or accidents,
structural defects or other conditions which render such structures unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise inimical to the general welfare of the city, or conditions
which provide a general blight upon the neighborhood or surrounding properties. It
is hereby deemed necessary by the governing body to require or cause the repair,
closing or demolition or removal of such structures as provided in this article.
(K.S.A. 12-1751; Code 1991)
4-1002. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms
shall have the following meanings:
(a) Public Officer means the city manager or his or her authorized
representative.
(b) Structure shall include any building, wall, superstructure or other
structure which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having
a location on the ground.
(K.S.A. 12-1750; Code 1991)
4-1003. PUBLIC OFFICER; DUTIES. The public officer is hereby authorized to
exercise such powers as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article, including the following:
(a) Inspect any structure which appears to be unsafe, dangerous or unfit for
human habitation;
(b) Have authority to enter upon premises at reasonable hours for the
purpose of making such inspections. Entry shall be made so as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to any person in possession of the structure. If entry is
denied, the public officer may seek an order for this purpose from a court of
competent jurisdiction;
(c) Report all structures which he or she believes to be dangerous, unsafe
or unfit for human habitation to the governing body;
(d) Receive petitions as provided in this article.
(Code 1991)
4-1004. PROCEDURE; PETITION. Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer
by at least five residents charging that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit
for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the public officer on his or her own
motion that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, he or
she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
report such findings to the governing body. (Code 1991)
4-1005. SAME; NOTICE. The governing body upon receiving a report as provided in
section 4-1004 shall by resolution fix a time and place at which the owner, the
owner's agent, any lienholder of records and any occupant of the structure may
appear and show cause why the structure should not be condemned and ordered
repaired or demolished. (K.S.A. 12-1752; Code 1991)
4-37
4-1006. SAME; PUBLICATION. (a) The resolution shall be published once each
week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of each week. At least 30 days
shall elapse between the last publication and the date set for the hearing.
(b) A copy of the resolution shall be mailed by certified mail within three
days after its first publication to each owner, agent, lienholder and occupant at the
last known place of residence and shall be marked "deliver to addressee only."
(K.S.A. 12-1752; Code 1991)
4-1007. SAME; HEARING, ORDER. (a) If, after notice and hearing, the governing
body determines that the structure under consideration is dangerous, unsafe or
unfit for human use or habitation, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in
support of such determination and shall cause the resolution to be published once
in the official city newspaper and a copy mailed to the owners, agents, lienholders
of record and occupants in the same manner provided for the notice of hearing.
The resolution shall fix a reasonable time within which the repair or removal of
such structure shall be commenced and a statement that if the owner of such
structure fails to commence the repair or removal of such structure within the time
stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the work is completed, the
governing body will cause the structure to be razed and removed.
(b) If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure can be made at
a cost which shall not exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure,
the owner of the property shall, within the time specified in the order, repair, alter
or improve the structure to render it safe and fit for human use or habitation, or
shall vacate and close the structure until such time as he has complied with the
order.
(c) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be made
at a cost of 50 percent or less of its fair market value, the owner shall, within the
time specified in the order, remove or demolish the structure.
(Code 1991)
4-1008. DUTY OF OWNER. Whenever any structure within the city shall be found to
be dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall be the duty and
obligation of the owner of the property to render the same secure and safe or to
remove the same. (Code 1991)
4-1009. SAME; FAILURE TO COMPLY. (a) If, within the time specified in the order,
the owner fails to comply with the order to repair, alter, improve or vacate the
structure, the public officer may cause the structure to be repaired, altered,
improved, or to be vacated and closed.
(b) If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply with
the order to remove or demolish the structure, the public officer may cause the
structure to be removed and demolished.
(Code 1991)
4-1010. SAME; MAKE SITE SAFE. Upon removal of any structure, the owner shall fill
any basement or other excavation located upon the premises and take any other
action necessary to leave the premises in a safe condition. If the owner fails to
4-38
take such action, the public officer may proceed to make the site safe. (Code
1991)
4-1011. ASSESSMENT OF COSTS. (a) The cost to the city of any repairs,
alterations, improvements, vacating, removal or demolition by the public officer,
including making the site safe, shall be reported to the city clerk.
(b) The city shall give notice to the owner of the structure by restricted mail
of the cost of removing the structure and making the premises safe and secure.
The notice shall also state that payment of the cost is due and payable within 30
days following receipt of the notice.
(c) If the costs remain unpaid after 30 days following receipt of notice, the
city clerk may sell any salvage from the structure and apply the proceeds or any
necessary portion thereof to pay the cost of removing the structure and making the
site safe. Any proceeds in excess of that required to recover the costs shall be
paid to the owner of the premises upon which the structure was located.
(d) If the proceeds of the sale of salvage is insufficient to recover the cost,
or if there is no salvage, the city clerk shall, at the time of certifying other city
taxes, certify the unpaid portion of the costs to the county clerk who shall extend
the same on the tax roll of the county.
(K.S.A. 12-1755; Code 1991)
4-1012. IMMEDIATE HAZARD. When in the opinion of the governing body any
structure is in such condition as to constitute an immediate hazard requiring
immediate action to protect the public, the governing body may direct the public
officer to erect barricades or cause the property to be vacated, taken down,
repaired, shored or otherwise made safe without delay. Such action may be taken
without prior notice to or hearing of the owners, agents, lienholders and occupants.
The cost of any action under this section shall be assessed against the property as
provided in section 4-1012. (K.S.A. 12-1756; Code 1991)
4-1013. APPEALS FROM ORDER. Any person affected by an order issued by the
governing body under this article may, within 30 days following service of the
order, petition the district court of the county in which the structure is located for an
injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order
pending final disposition of the case. (Code 1991)
4-1014. SCOPE OF ARTICLE. Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate
or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any
provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish
violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to
and supplemental to the powers conferred by the constitution, any other law or
ordinance. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise or to exercise those powers
granted specifically by K.S.A. 12-1750:1756. (Code 1991)
4-39
ARTICLE 11. INTERNATIONAL PRIVATE DISPOSAL CODE
4-1101. INTERNATIONAL PRIVATE DISPOSAL CODE INCORPORATED. That
certain international code known as the "International Private Disposal Code, 2003
Edition," recommended by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby
incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or amended, as
authorized and in the manner prescribed by the statutes of the State of Kansas.
(Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-1102. DELETIONS. The International Private Disposal Code, 2003 Edition, shall
have the following deletions:
(a) Section 109.2 Membership of board, Section 109.2.1 Qualifications, Section
109.2.2 Alternate members, and Section 109.2.3 in their entirety. (Ord. 1820;
Code 2010)
4-1103. AMENDMENTS. There are no amendments to the International Private
Disposal Code, 2003 Edition. (Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-1104. ADDITIONS. The International Private Disposal Code, 2003 Edition, shall
have the following additions:
(a) Section 106.4.2 Fee Schedule. See the International Building Code, Section
108.2.2.
(b) Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. See the International Building Code,
Section 113.4.1.
(c) Section 109.1 Appeals Board. Add "See the International Building Code,
Section 112 Appeals Board." (Ord. 1820; Code 2010)
4-40
ARTICLE 12. INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE
4-1201 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE INCORPORATED. That certain
international code known as the "International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 Edition,"
recommended by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby
incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter or may hereafter be deleted or amended, as
authorized and in the manner prescribed by the statutes of the State of Kansas.
(Ord. 1868; Code 2010)
4-1202 DELETIONS. The International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, shall have the
following deletions:
Section 109 MEANS OF APPEAL shall be deleted in it's entirety. (Ord. 1868;
Code 2010)
4-1203 AMENDMENTS. There are no amendments to the International Fuel Gas
Code, 2003 Edition. (Ord. 1868; Code 2010)
4-1204 ADDITIONS. The International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 Edition, shall have the
following additions:
(a) Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule shall have the following added, "See the
International Building Code, Section 108.2.2."
(b) Section 108.4 Violation Penalties shall have the following added, "See
the International Building Code, Section 113.4.1."
(c) Section 109 Means of Appeal shall have the following added, "See the
International Building Code, Section 112.4."
(d) "Section 105.5 All mobile home and manufactured home units moved
into the City of Augusta shall require a gas connection inspection. The mobile and
manufactured home unit's internal gas piping shall be tested according to the
provisions set forth in the International Fuel Gas Code, 2000 Edition. (Ord. 1868;
Code 2010)
4-41
ARTICLE 13. INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
4-1301 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE INCORPORATED.
That certain international code known as the "International Property Maintenance
Code, 2003 Edition," recommended by the International Code Council,
Incorporated, is hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this
article, save and except such portions as are hereinafter or may hereafter be
deleted or amended, as authorized and in the manner prescribed by the statutes of
the State of Kansas. (Ord. 1888; Code 2010)
4-1302 DELETIONS. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition,
shall have the following deletions:
(a) Section 103.1 General. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
(b) Section 106.4 Violation penalties. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
(c) Section 106.6.6 Court Review. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
(d) Section 111 Means of Appeal. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
(Ord. 1888; Code 2010)
4-1303 AMENDMENTS. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition,
shall have the following amendments:
(a) Section 101.1 Title. Shall be amended to read "These regulations shall
be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Augusta, Kansas,
hereinafter referred to as "This Code."
(b) Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Shall be amended to read
"Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be
done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International
Existing Building Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify
or set aside any provision of the adopted Zoning Regulations."
(c) Section 104.3 Inspections. Shall be amended to read "The code official
shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by
approved agencies, the Inspection Department, Safety Department, Public Works
and other departments of the city. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority."
(d) Section 104.4 Right of entry. Shall be amended to read "The code
official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code are
authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject
to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is
refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law. It shall be unlawful to interfere with any such authorized officer or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code."
(e) Section 104.5 Identification. Shall be amended to read "The code
official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code shall carry
proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this code."
4-42
(f) Section 104.7 Department records. Shall be amended to read "The
code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the
department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained
in the official records as long as the premises, building or structure to which such
records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other
regulations.
(g) Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Shall be amended to read "Any
person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance
with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall
be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with,
the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order
or direction made pursuant hereto."
(h) Section 106.4.1 Penalties. Shall be amended to read "Section 106.4
Penalties."
(i) Section 107.2 Form. Shall be amended to read "Such notice prescribed
in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all the following:
1. Be in writing.
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is
being issued.
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit, structure or
premises into compliance with the provisions of this code.
5. Inform the property owner of the right to appeal and/or request an
informal hearing before the Code Official or Deputy Code Official as provided
in Section 106.2.1 of this code.
6. Include a statement that if the violation is not abated as directed and
no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, a resolution will be
presented to the Governing Body to abate such violation and assess the cost
thereof against such property.
(j) Section 107.3 Method of service. Shall be amended to read "Such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. One notice sent by regular mail and one notice sent by certified mail
return receipt requested to the same responsible person at the same address.
2. If the certified mail is returned as unclaimed and the regular mail
notice is not returned with the same, the responsible person is deemed to
have been notified if the code official posts a copy of the notice on the
property, hangs a copy of the notice on the door, delivers the notice personally
or contacts the person by telephone.
3. In the event the name or address of the responsible person (s) are
unknown and the official notice returns unclaimed and the same cannot be
ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect
shall be made by the Code Official and filed with the City Clerk, and the
serving of the official notice or resolution shall be made by publishing the
same once each week for two consecutive weeks on the same day in the
4-43
official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises
where such conditions exist."
(k) Section 108.1 General. Shall be amended to read "When a
structure is found by the Governing Body to be unsafe, or when a structure is
found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code. When equipment is found by
the code official to be unsafe, such equipment shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
(l) Section 108.1.3 Structures unfit for human occupancy. Shall be
amended to read "A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the
Governing Body finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the
degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary,
vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by
this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public."
(m) Section 108.2 Closing of vacant structures. Shall be amended to read
"If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not
in danger of structural collapse, the Governing Body may authorize the code
official to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure
closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to
close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the Governing Body
shall authorize the code official to cause the premises to be closed and secured
through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private
persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which
the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be
collected by any other legal resource."
(n) Section 108.3 Notice. Shall be amended to read "Whenever the
Governing Body has condemned a structure or the code official has condemned
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on
the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in
accordance with Section 107.3. if the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be
placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in
Section 107.2."
(o) Section 108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Shall be amended to read "Any
occupied structure condemned by the Governing Body and placarded by the code
official shall be vacated as ordered by the Governing Body. Any person who shall
occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any
owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a
placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the
penalties provided by this code."
(p) Section 109.1 Imminent danger. Shall be amended to read "When, in
the opinion of the Governing Body, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse
of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or
when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the
4-44
presence of toxic fumes, gasses or materials, or operation of defective or
dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official
shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Governing Body." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except
for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing
the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same."
(q) Section 109.2 Temporary Safeguards. Shall be amended to read
"Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the
Governing Body there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code
official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of
openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal
procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action
to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency."
(r) Section 110.1 General. Shall be amended to read "The Governing
Body shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure,
which in the Governing Body's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made
safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at
the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of
any structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such
structure."
(s) Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Shall be amended to read
"Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International
Building Code, International Residential Code, International Fire Code,
International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Existing
Building Code, National Electrical Code, Zoning and Subdivision Regulations, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
(t) Section 302.3 shall be amended to read "Section 302.3 Sidewalks,
driveways, parking lots, street, street parking and alley ways. All sidewalks,
walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a
proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. Each
person in the city shall keep the sidewalks, gutters, and public alleys clean and
clear of mud, filth, dirt, debris, trash, litter and other substances, and weeds and
grass, and shall also keep any grass median area between the property line and
the street curb in front of or adjacent to any such property mowed and free from
filth, debris, trash, litter and weeds, and shall also keep the sidewalks in front of
and adjacent to any such property free and clear of any accumulation of snow and
ice which present a hazard to pedestrians. If any such building abuts directly upon
a public street, that portion of such public street so abutting the building shall be
kept clean and clear of filth, dirt, debris, trash, litter and other substances."
(u) Section 302.4 Weeds. Shall be amended to read "See Ordinance
Number 1730."
(v) Section 302.9 Defacement of property. Shall be amended to read "No
person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface
4-45
of any structure, building, sidewalk or street on any private or public property by
placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair."
(w) Section 604.2 Service. Shall be amended to read "The size and usage
of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Dwelling units
shall be served by a three-wire, 120.240 volt, single-phase electrical service having
a rating of not less than 100 amperes." (Ord. 1888; Code 2010)
4-1304 ADDITIONS. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition,
shall have the following additions:
(a) "Section 101.3.1 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to promote the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Augusta, Kansas and to
protect neighborhoods against physical, visual and economic deterioration."
(b) "Section 103.1 General. The code official shall be the City Manager of
Augusta, Kansas."
(c) Section 103.5 Fees. Shall have the following sentence added "The
department of property maintenance shall charge all administrative, publication,
notifications and other fees to the property in violation."
(d) Section 104.1 General. Shall have the following sentence added "The
code official may assign enforcement duties to the Inspection Department, the
Safety Department, Public Works and other departments of the city."
(e) Section 106.1 Unlawful acts. Shall have the following sentence added
"It shall be unlawful to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance
of a nuisance, substandard property, building or structure maintenance."
(f) "Section 106.2.1 Informal Hearing. Whenever the Code Official or
Deputy Code Official determines that there has been a violation of this Code, the
Code Official or Deputy Code Official may arrange with the alleged violator for an
informal discussion of violations, and whether repair, correction or demolition is
justified. If a satisfactory solution to the violations, either by correction, demolition
or removal, is not forthcoming, the Code Official shall abate the conditions as
provided by this code."
(g) "Section 106.5.1 Municipal Judge may direct abatement and assess
costs. If, upon trial and conviction for causing or maintaining any violation as
defined and prohibited by this code and other ordinances of this city, it shall appear
that the violation complained of continues to exist, the municipal judge may, in
addition to the penalty imposed for causing or maintaining such violation, make an
order directing the code official to abate the violation forthwith and report the
expense thereof to the municipal judge, who may make such cost a part of the
judgment in addition to the fine and/or imprisonment imposed. Such costs shall be
collected in the same manner as other fines and penalties."
(h) "Section 106.6 Abatement by the Governing Body. If a person to
whom a notice has been sent, pursuant to this code, has neither alleviated the
conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the
Governing Body within the time period specified, the Code Official may present in
writing, to the City Clerk a request for a hearing before the Governing Body. In all
cases involving condemnation, demolition and the forceful loss or removal of
4-46
private property, the Code Official shall request, in writing to the City Clerk, for a
hearing before the Governing Body."
"Section 106.6.1 Hearing date and notification of the same. Upon receipt of a
request for a hearing, the City Clerk shall notify, in writing, the Governing Body of
such request at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The Governing Body shall,
by resolution, determine a date for the hearing. The City Clerk shall publish the
Resolution once each week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of the
week in the official city newspaper. The hearing shall be at least 15 days after the
first publication. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person or
persons in violation as provided by Section 107.3 of this Code."
"Section 106.6.2 Hearing before the Governing Body. All hearings before the
Governing Body shall be open to the public. The person to whom a notice has
been sent and their legal counsel, the Code Official and any person whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The person to
whom a notice was sent, legal counsel and Code Official may introduce such
witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and proper by the Governing
Body. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence,
but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. A simple majority of
the Governing Body shall constitute a quorum."
"Section 106.6.3 Disqualification of Council Member. A Council Member shall
not hear a case in which that member has a personal, professional or financial
interest."
"Section 106.6.4 Abatement resolution. Upon finding of fact, the Governing
Body shall pass a resolution of abatement which shall be published once in the
official city newspaper and serve notice on the person in violation as provided in
Section 107.3 of this Code.
In cases involving vehicles on private property the resolution shall fix a
reasonable time within which the violation(s) is to be corrected. The resolution
shall further direct the code official to have the vehicle(s) removed from the
property, impounded and disposed of according to Kansas Law at the owner's
expense.
In cases involving the upkeep of premises (exterior yard), the resolution shall
fix a reasonable time within which the violation(s) is to be corrected and a
statement that if the owner of such violation(s) fails to commence abatement of the
violation(s) within the time stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the
violation(s) is abated the Governing Body shall direct the code official to either hire
a private contractor or use city personnel and equipment to abate the violation(s) at
the property owner's expense.
In cases involving buildings and structures, mandatory repair, condemnation
or demolishing the resolution shall fix a reasonable time within which the owner
shall obtain a building permit to repair or demolish the building or structure and fix
a reasonable time to complete said repairs or removal. The resolution shall further
direct the code official to hire a private contractor or use city personnel to demolish
the building or structure if no building permit has been issued within the time
established or the owner fails to diligently make the required repairs or demolition
of the building or structure. Such demolition shall be at the expense of the
property owner. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the
4-47
City shall be assessed against the property as a Special Assessment or lien
against the property."
"Section 106.6.5 Special assessment. The Code Official shall submit all bills
and expenses incurred in abating a violation to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall
send the property owner of record a copy of the assessment and allow 30 days for
payment in full. The City Clerk shall have the resolution and special assessment
recorded with the Butler County Register of Deeds and a copy of the special
assessment recorded with the Butler County Clerk for inclusion on the property tax
rolls if the property owner of record fails to pay the assessment at the end of the
required 30 days."
(i) "Section 110.5 Costs of demolition by the Governing Body. The cost of
demolition by the Governing Body shall be a lien upon the property upon which the
cost was incurred and such lien, including as a part thereof an allowance of his or
her costs and necessary attorney's fees and title search, shall be assessed as a
special assessment upon the lot or parcel of land on which the structure was
located as provided in Section 106.5 of this code."
(j) Section 111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have
the right to appeal to the Governing Body, provided that a written request for
appeal shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk within the time specified in the
notice. An application of appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of
this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Section 111.2 Hearing date and notification of the same. Upon receipt of a
request for a hearing, the City Clerk shall notify, in writing, the Governing Body of
such request at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The Governing Body shall,
by resolution, determine a date for the hearing. The City Clerk shall publish the
Resolution once each week on the same day of the week for two consecutive
weeks in the official city newspaper. The hearing shall be at least 30 days after the
second publication. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person or
persons in violation as provided by Section 107.3 of this Code.
Section 111.3 Hearing before the Governing Body. All hearings before the
Governing Body shall be open to the public. The person to whom a notice has
been sent and their legal counsel, the Code Official and any person whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The person to
whom a notice was sent, legal counsel and Code Official may introduce such
witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and proper by the Governing
Body. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence,
but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. A simple majority of
the Governing Body shall constitute a quorum.
Section 111.4 Disqualification of Council Member. A Council Member shall
not hear a case in which that member has a personal, professional or financial
interest.
Section 111.5 Abatement resolution. Upon finding of fact, the Governing Body
shall pass a resolution of abatement which shall be published once in the official
city newspaper and serve notice on the person in violation as provided in Section
107.3 of this Code.
4-48
In cases involving vehicles on private property the resolution shall fix a
reasonable time within which the violation(s) is to be corrected. The resolution
shall further direct the code official to have the vehicle(s) removed from the
property, I pounded and disposed of according to Kansas Law at the owner's
expense.
In cases involving the upkeep of premises (exterior yard), the resolution shall
fix a reasonable time within which the violation(s) is to be corrected and a
statement that if the owner of such violation(s) fails to commence abatement of the
violation(s) within the time stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the
violation(s) is abated the Governing Body shall direct the code official to either hire
a private contractor or use city personnel and equipment to abate the violation(s) at
the property owner's expense.
In cases involving buildings and structures, mandatory repair, condemnation
or demolishing the resolution shall fix a reasonable time within which the owner
shall obtain a building permit to repair or demolish the building or structure and fix
a reasonable time to complete said repairs or removal. The resolution shall further
direct the code official to hire a private contractor or use city personnel to demolish
the building or structure if no building permit has been issued within the time
established or the owner fails to diligently make the required repairs or demolition
of the building or structure. Such demolition shall be at the expense of the
property owner. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the
City shall be assessed against the property as a Special Assessment or lien
against the property."
Section 111.6 Special assessment. The Code Official shall submit all
bills and expenses incurred in abating a violation to the City Clerk. The City Clerk
shall send the property owner of record a copy of the assessment and allow 30
days for payment in full. The City Clerk shall have the resolution and special
assessment recorded with the Butler County Register of Deeds and a copy of the
special assessment recorded with the Butler County Clerk for inclusion on the
property tax rolls if the property owner of record fails to pay the assessment at the
end of the required 30 days.
(k) "Section 202 General Definitions."
Cellar. Any portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
Dilapidation, Deterioration or Disrepair. Any condition characterized by, but
not limited to: holes, breaks, rot, decay, crumbling, cracking, peeling, or flaking
paint, rusting, or other evidence of physical damage, neglect, lack of maintenance,
excessive use or weathering.
Exterior structure. Those parts of a structure which are exposed to the
weather or subject to contact with the elements; including, but not limited to:
sidings, facings, veneers, masonry, roofs, foundations, porches, screens, shutters,
windows, doors or sings.
Junk. The storage of all old appliances, equipment, or parts thereof, all old
iron or other scrap metal, automobile tires, cardboard, old lumber, old wood and
mattresses, which items are not being used for their intended purposes, and does
not include orderly stacked firewood.
4-49
Motor Vehicle. Any automobile, truck, tractor, farm machinery, motorcycle,
motorized bicycle or other device designed and used for transportation of persons
or property which, as originally built, contained an engine, regardless of whether it
contains an engine at any other time.
Motor Vehicle, Abandoned. Any motor vehicle which is not currently
registered or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149 inclusive, as amended; any
motor vehicle which does not carry motor vehicle liability insurance pursuant to
K.S.A. 40-3101, as amended; or parked in violation of this code; or incapable of
moving under its own power; placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks,
blocks, or other supports; or in a junked or wrecked condition.
Motor Vehicle, Inoperable. Any motor vehicle which cannot be driven upon
the public streets for reason including but not limited to being in a condition of
being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or
unable to perform the function or purpose for which it was originally constructed.
Motor Vehicle, Junk. Any vehicle which is wrecked, scrapped, ruined,
partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned and/or without a valid automobile
license tag.
Nuisances. Any condition which is injurious to health, or is a potential health
hazard, or is indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use
of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by
an entire community or neighborhood, or by a majority of persons subjected to the
condition, such condition being no less a nuisance because the extent of the
annoyance or damage inflicted is unequal. Nuisances shall include, but not limited
to:
1. Garbage, junk, rubbish and trash deposited on the exterior of the
property, street parking or alley way or stored in an accessory building on the
property.
2. Abandoned, inoperable or junked motor vehicle.
3. Open storage of construction materials unless neatly stacked and
covered.
4. Open storage of salvage materials in any residential or
commercial district.
5. Open storage of appliances including refrigerators, freezers,
stoves, microwaves, power tools, and similar tools.
6. Interior furniture stored, maintained or used on the exterior of a
dwelling or dwelling unit which is so dilapidated and deteriorated as to be a
potential accident hazard, a harborage for insects, rodents or vermin or which
emits offensive odors.
7. Buildings, structures, privies, sheds, barns, garages, tool houses
and vacant houses and commercial structures which have become so
dilapidated and deteriorated as to be a potential accident hazard, rat
harborage, attractive nuisance to children or to be offensive to the senses.
8. Dead animals or animal excrement not managed or disposed of
in a sanitary manor.
9. Wastewater discharge or allowed to accumulate, improper water
impoundments or lack of adequate drainage in such a manner that it does or
may allow direct human contact with human or animal excrete, organic or
4-50
inorganic pollution of ground or surface water, breeding of insects, harboring
or attraction of rodents, or the emission of offensive odors.
10. Excessive noise resulting from home hobby work, commercial or
industrial processes.
11. The discharge into the atmosphere of any gaseous or particulate
matter resulting from the combustion, reduction, processing or manufacturing
of materials in industrial or commercial operations which cause or may cause
injury to the health of individuals, damage to business or property or cause
annoyance to a majority of persons so subjected.
12. Growth of noxious weeds and/or unwanted or unkempt
vegetation over ten (10) inches high, and unkempt shrubs, hedges and trees
on any premises and in streets and alleys in front of and abutting on any
premises in the city.
Salvage Material. Materials of some value that are obtained from the
disassembly of various kinds of machinery, mechanical appliance, and/or the
demolition of buildings or structures.
Street or Highway. The entire width between property lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic. Where the word 'highway' or the word 'street' is used
in this code, it means street, avenue, boulevard, thoroughfare, traffic way, alley
and any other public way for vehicular travel by whatever name unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
Temporary Housing. Any tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, motor home,
camping trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, house or building or other
structure, or to any utilities on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive
days, except when located in a mobile home park zoned by the City.
Trash. Any combustible waste consisting of, but not limited to: papers,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rags, leaves, yard
trimmings, or tree branches and noncombustible waste consisting of, but not
limited to: metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, plastics, mineral matter, ashes, bricks,
masonry, rocks, or street rubbish and sweepings."
(l) "Section 301.4 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to
allow to exist on any premises, conditions which are injurious to the health, safety
or general welfare of the residents of the community or conditions which are
detrimental to adjoining property, the neighborhood or the city."
(m) Section 302.1 Sanitation. Add the following sentence at the end of the
section. "It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any nuisance
within the city as defined by this code."
(n) 302.5 Rodent harborage. Add the following sentences at the end of the
section. "Every occupant of a single dwelling shall be responsible for the
extermination of any rodents, other vermin therein or on the premises. Wherever
two or more occupants are in the same building, the owner or operator of the
building shall be responsible for such extermination."
(o) Section 302.8 Motor vehicles. Add the following sentences at the end
of the section. "Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside a garage
or similar accessory building in residential areas. Painting of vehicles is prohibited
4-51
in commercial or industrial areas unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth."
(p) "Section 302.8.1 Off road title. For the purposes of these regulations,
an "off road title or off road tag" shall not be an acceptable title or tag."
(q) "Section 302.8.2 Inspection. Vehicles which have been cited as being
Abandoned, Inoperable or in a Junked condition, shall be driven to the Inspection
Department during normal working hours to be inspected. The inspector shall
insure the vehicle is properly tagged, registered and insured."
(r) Section 303.2 Enclosures. Add the following exception at the end of the
section. "A swimming pool, hot tub or spa shall be acceptable in lieu of fencing
and gates so long as the cover is securely secured to the pool, hot tub or spa when
not occupied."
(Ord. 1888; Code 2010)
5-1
CHAPTER V. BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Article 1. Solicitors, Canvassers, Peddlers
Article 2. Pawnbrokers and Precious Metal Dealers
Article 3. Adult Entertainment Establishments and Hotels
Article 4. Escort Services
____________________
ARTICLE 1. SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS
5-101. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this article, the following words shall be
considered to have the following meanings:
(a) Soliciting - shall mean and include any one or more of the following
activities:
(1) Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
(2) Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or
purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or
(3) Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication.
(b) Residence - shall mean and include every separate living unit
occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any
type of building or structure.
(c) Canvasser or Solicitor - shall mean any individual, whether resident of
the city or not, whose business is mainly or principally carried on by traveling either
by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take
orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the
future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of
the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on
such sales or not. Such definition shall include any person, who, for himself,
herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building,
structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop
or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery.
(d) Peddler - shall mean any person, whether a resident of the city or not,
traveling by foot, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place
to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden
truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or
making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from
place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive
vehicle, railroad boxcar or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided, that
one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to
5-2
purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article
shall be deemed a peddler.
(e) Transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor - are
defined as any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether
a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares and merchandise within such city, and who, in furtherance
of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor
vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses,
apartments, shops or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at
public auction. Such definition shall not be construed to include any person who,
while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits
samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The
person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this
article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection
with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.
(f) Street salesman - shall mean any person engaged in any manner in
selling merchandise of any kind from a vehicle or stand temporarily located on the
streets or sidewalks of this city, or in the city right of way.
(Code 1991)
5-102. LICENSE REQUIRED. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any of the activities defined in the preceding sections of this article, within the
corporate limits of the city without then having an unrevoked and unexpired license
therefor in his or her possession and issued by the city clerk.
(b) The governing body may waive the license requirements of this section
for any person, firm or corporation exempt from the payment of a license fee under
section 5-207(d). (Code 1991)
5-103. SAME; APPLICATION REQUIRED. Before the city clerk may issue any
license required by this article, he or she shall require a sworn application in
writing prepared in duplicate on a form to be supplied by the city clerk which shall
give the following information:
(a) Name and description of applicant;
(b) Permanent home address and full local address of applicant;
(c) Identification of applicant including drivers license number, date of
birth, expiration date of license and description of applicant;
(d) Identification of vehicle used by applicant including license therefor
used by applicant in conducting his or her business;
(e) A brief description of the nature of the business to be carried on or the
goods to be sold and the length of time such applicant has been engaged in the
business;
(f) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing such relationship, including the authority by the employer
authorizing the applicant to represent the employer in conducting business;
(g) The length of time which business is proposed to be carried on;
5-3
(h) The place where services are to be performed or where the goods or
property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof are manufactured
or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application
is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;
(i) A state or government issued photo id;
(j) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has within two years
prior to the date of the application been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor
(other than minor traffic violations) or violation of any municipal law regulating
peddlers, solicitors or canvassers and giving the nature of the offenses, the
punishment assessed therefor, if any, and the city and state where conviction
occurred.
(k) The applicant's Kansas Sales Tax number;
(l) Emergency contact information.
(m) Each representative is required to carry a copy of the license.
(Code 1991; Code 2010)
5-104. SAME; INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE; NON-COUNTY RESIDENT.
(a) Upon receipt of the above application from an applicant, the city clerk
shall refer the same to the Director of Public Safety who shall cause an
investigation of the fact stated therein to be made within five days.
(b) If as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the facts stated therein to be untrue,
the chief of police shall endorse on such application his or her findings and
endorse his or her disapproval of the application and the reasons for the same and
shall return the application to the city clerk who then shall notify the applicant that
his or her application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.
(c) If however, the investigation of such application discloses that the
character and business responsibility and the facts stated in the application are
satisfactory and true, the Director of Public Safety shall endorse his or her findings
and approval on the application and return the same to the city clerk who shall,
upon payment of the license and investigation fees prescribed, issue a license to
the applicant to engage in the business described in the application. Such license
shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name
and address of the licensee, the date of issuance and length of time the license
shall be operative, and the nature of the business involved. The city clerk shall
keep a permanent record of all such licenses issued and submit a copy of such
license to the Director of Public Safety. The licensee shall carry the license
certificate at all times. (Code 1991)
5-105. LICENSE FEE; TIME LIMITS; EXEMPTIONS. (a) Except as provided in
subsection (c), the fee for the license required pursuant to section 5-202 shall be
established by the from time to time, by Resolution of the Governing Body of the
City of Augusta, Kansas.
(b) Any such license granted upon application as required hereinabove
shall be limited to and effective only on the days set out in the license. Solicitation
or sales by any peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall be conducted only between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(c) Persons and firms not having a permanently established place of
business in the city, but having a permanently established house-to-house or
5-4
wholesale business shall receive a license as required by section 5-202 upon the
payment of $100.00 for any year, and may make solicitations or sales only
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., or upon invitation at any hour.
(d) No license fee shall be required of:
(1) Any person selling products of the farm or orchard actually
produced by the seller within the State of Kansas;
(2) Any businesses, trades or occupations which are part of fairs or
celebrations sponsored by the city or any other governmental subdivision, or
the state, or when part of all of the expenses of the fairs or celebrations are
paid for by the city, any other governmental subdivision, or the state; and
(3) Any not-for-profit organizations within Butler County.
(K.S.A. 12-1617; Code 1991; Code 2010)
5-106. RENEWAL. All licenses issued shall be subject to renewal upon a showing
of compliance with sections 5-202:203 of this article within a one year period prior
to the renewal date. The city clerk need not require an additional application under
section 5-203 or an additional investigation and investigation fee under sections 5-
205:206 unless complaints have been received of violations of the conditions
under which any license has heretofore been issued. The city clerk shall not
renew or extend any license where there is satisfactory evidence of any grounds
for the suspension or revocation of any prior license, and the applicant shall be
required to apply for a license as in the case of an original license. (Code 1991;
Code 2010)
5-107. DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; NOTICE. (a) The
city clerk or Director of Public Safety may deny any application or may revoke or
suspend for a period of not to exceed 30 days any license issued under this article,
for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course
of carrying on the business.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conducting a business as defined in section 5-201 in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the city. Notice
of the denial, revocation or suspension of a license shall be given in writing to
the applicant or mailed to his or her last known address and the city clerk
shall set forth the grounds of such denial, revocation or suspension.
(5) Conviction of the crime of theft, larceny, fraud, embezzlement or
any felony within two years prior to the application date.
(Code 1991)
5-108. APPEAL TO GOVERNING BODY. (a) Any person aggrieved by the action
of the Director of Public Safety or city clerk in the denial of an application or
revocation or suspension of a license as provided in this article, shall have the
right of appeal to the governing body.
(b) Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk within 14 days
after notice of revocation, suspension or denial of the license has been given to or
5-5
mailed to such applicant's last known address and setting forth the grounds for
appeal.
(c) The governing body shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same
manner as provided herein for notice of denial, revocation or suspension.
(d) The decision and order of the governing body on such appeal shall be
final and conclusive.
(Code 1991)
5-109. REGULATIONS. (a) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make false or
fraudulent statements concerning the quality of nature of his or her goods, wares
and merchandise for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same.
(b) Licensees are required to exhibit their license at the request of any
person to whom they attempt to sell their goods, wares and merchandise or take
orders for future delivery of the same.
(Code 1991)
5-110. USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. Except when authorized in writing by
the city clerk, no peddler, solicitor or canvasser or any other person shall have
exclusive right to any location in the public streets or city right of way for the
purpose of selling or soliciting sales, nor shall any person be permitted a stationary
location in the public streets, nor shall any person be permitted to operate in the
sidewalks and streets within the fire limits of the city or any congested area where
his or her operations might impede or inconvenience the public or city right-of-way.
(Code 1991; Code 2010)
5-111. DISTURBING THE PEACE. No licensee nor any person in his or her behalf,
shall use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or sound-amplifying
system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or
upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted
or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention
to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. Without
prior approval from the city manager. (Code 1991)
5-6
ARTICLE 2. PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
5-201. DEFINITIONS. As used in this article:
(a) Pawnbroker - means any person who loans money on deposit or
pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, other than intangible personal
property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property on the condition of
selling the same back again at a stipulated price.
Pawnbroker - does not include any person operating under the supervision
of the state banking commissioner, credit union administrator or the consumer
credit commissioner of this state.
(b) Person - means any individual, firm, company, partnership,
corporation or association.
(c) Precious Metal - means gold, silver or platinum group metals or any
used articles or other used personal property containing such metals, but shall not
include un-circulated coins purchased for their numismatic value rather than their
metal content or ingots or other industrial residue or by-products composed of
such metals purchased from manufacturing firms.
(d) Precious Metal Dealer - means any person who engages in the
business of purchasing precious metal for the purpose of reselling such metal in
any form.
(Ord. 1452, Sec. 1)
5-202. LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE. (a) No person shall engage or continue in
business as a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer within the city, without first
obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk.
(b) Application for a license shall be in writing and shall state the full name
and place of residence of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the
application shall contain the name and place of residence of each member thereof,
or, if a corporation or association, of each officer, shareholder or member thereof.
The application shall include the address of the places where the business is to be
conducted, the hours and days of the week during which the applicant proposes to
engage in the business of pawnbroking or dealing in precious metals at each such
place, and such other information as may be necessary to determine the
applicant's qualifications for a license in accordance with the provisions of this
article. Each applicant also shall submit with the application:
(1) A statement that the applicant is the holder of a valid registration
certificate issued by the director or revenue pursuant to K.S.A. 79-3608 for
each place of business for which application for a license is made;
(2) A detailed inventory and description of all goods, wares,
merchandise, precious metals or other property held in pledge or for sale at
the time of the application at each place of business dated therein, indicating
whether the same was received in pledge, purchased as secondhand
merchandise or precious metal purchased for resale.
(c) The license application shall be in a form approved by the attorney
general. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established from time to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of
Augusta, Kansas. All such fees received by the city clerk shall be deposited in the
city general fund. Any license or renewal thereof shall be subject to the
qualifications set out in K.S.A. 16-708. (Ord. 1452, Sec. 2)
5-7
5-203. DISPLAY OF LICENSE. The document or other instrument evidencing the
license of a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall state the address at which
the business is to be conducted and shall state fully the name of the licensee. If
the licensee is a partnership, the license shall state the names of the members
thereof, and, if a corporation, the date and place of its incorporation, and the
names of all shareholders thereof. Such license shall be kept conspicuously
posted in the place of business of the licensee and shall not be transferable or
assignable. Not more than one place of business shall be maintained under the
same license, but more than one license may be issued to the same licensee upon
compliance with all the provisions of this act governing the issuance of an initial
license. (Ord. 1452, Sec. 3)
5-204. EXAMINATION OF BOOKS. Each licensee shall keep and use in the
licensee's business such books, accounts and records as will enable the city to
determine whether such licensee is complying with the provisions of this article.
Such city may examine or cause to be examined the books, accounts, records and
files used by any licensee or by any other person engaged in the business of
pawnbroking or dealing in precious metals, irrespective of whether such person,
acts or claims to act as principal, agent or broker, or under or without authority of
this article. The duly designated representatives of the city shall have and be
given free access to all such books, accounts, papers, records, files, safes and
vaults. (Ord. 1452, Sec. 4)
5-205. REPORT OF PROPERTY. (a) On or before Tuesday of each week, every
pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall report the description of all property
received in pledge or purchased as a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer during
the preceding calendar week, in whatever quantity received. Such report shall
include all property purchase as secondhand merchandise at wholesale,
secondhand merchandise taken in for sale or possessed on consignment for sale
and secondhand merchandise taken in trade. No such report need be made
concerning property or merchandise acquired from another pawnbroker or
precious metal dealer licensed in this state in a transaction involving the purchase
or other acquisition from the other pawnbroker or precious metal dealer of the
other pawnbroker's or dealer's stock in trade, or a substantial part thereof in bulk,
where the other pawnbroker has made the reports required by this section with
respect to such property or merchandise.
(b) Such report shall be submitted to the director of public safety of the
city.
(c) All reports made pursuant to this section shall comply with and be
submitted in accordance with the terms of any applicable city ordinances requiring
such reporting.
(d) Every precious metal dealer shall retain in the dealer's possession for
a period of 10 days all precious metal purchased as a precious metal dealer, and
such metal shall remain in the condition in which it was purchased. The 10-day
period shall commence on the date that the director of public safety receives the
report of its acquisition in compliance with this section. If the director of public
safety has probable cause to believe that any precious metal reported by a dealer
has been stolen, he or she may give written notice to the dealer to retain such
5-8
metal for an additional period of 15 days. Upon such notice, the dealer shall retain
such metal in an unaltered condition for the additional 15 day period unless the
director of public safety notifies the dealer in writing that the waiting period is
terminated at an earlier time.
(e) Reports made pursuant to this section shall be available for inspection
only by law enforcement officers and county and district attorney’s and their
employees, for law enforcement purposes.
(K.S.A. 16-715; Ord. 1452, Sec. 5)
5-206. RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS. (a) At the time of making a loan, a
pawnbroker shall enter in a book kept for that purpose:
(1) The date, duration, amount and charges of every loan made by
the pawnbroker;
(2) A full and accurate description of the property pledged;
(3) The name, age, residence and driver's license or other personal
identification number of the pledgor.
(b) At the time of purchasing precious metal, a precious metal dealer shall
enter in a book kept for that purpose:
(1) The date of the purchase;
(2) A full and accurate description of each item purchased, including
any identifying letter, numbers or marks on the items; and
(3) The name, age, residence and driver's license or other personal
identification number of the seller.
(c) The record required by this section shall be maintained by the
pawnbroker or precious metal dealer at the pawnbroker's or dealer's place of
business for not less than one year following the date of the transaction.
(Ord. 1452, Sec. 6)
5-207. PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS. (a) No pawnbroker shall receive in pledge,
or as security for any loan, transfer, service, undertaking or advantage, anything of
value from any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) No precious metal dealer shall purchase any precious metal from any
person under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. 1452, Sec. 7)
5-208. REQUIREMENTS IN PRECIOUS METALS TRANSACTIONS. (a) A
precious metal dealer shall require of every person from whom the dealer
purchases precious metal for resale:
(1) Proof of identification; and
(2) A signed statement saying that the seller is the legal owner of the
precious metal or is an agent of the legal owner who is authorized to sell
such metal and stating when, where and in what manner such metal was
acquired by the seller.
(b) When converted or stolen property has been pawned or sold to a
precious metal dealer and the pawnbroker or dealer refuses to redeliver such
property to the rightful owner upon demand and presentation of a bill of sale or
other proper evidence of ownership by the owner, and legal action by the rightful
owner to recover the property becomes necessary, the court may assess the
pawnbroker or dealer for reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the rightful owner;
5-9
if the court finds that the pawnbroker or dealer wrongfully withheld the converted or
stolen property.
(Ord. 1452, Sec. 8)
5-10
ARTICLE 3. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS AND HOTELS
5-301. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used
herein shall have the following meanings unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
(a) “Adult entertainment establishment” - means any commercial
establishment which is an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult hotel,
or adult motion picture arcade as defined herein.
(b) “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” - means an establishment
which as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes, or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe “specified”
sexual activities or “specified anatomical areas”; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with “specified sexual activities.” A commercial
establishment may have other principal, business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and still be
categorized as “adult bookstore” or “adult video store” so long as one of its
principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials which depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” (as defined below).
(c) “Adult motion picture theater” - means an enclosed building designed
for five or more patrons used for presenting any material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined below) for observation of
patrons therein. The term does not include an adult hotel as defined below.
(d) “Adult motion picture arcade” - means any place at which slug or coin
operated, electronically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture
machines, projector or other image producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any time, and which presents
material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined
below) for observation by patrons therein. The terms does not include an adult
hotel as defined below.
(e) “Adult hotel” - means a hotel or motel wherein a substantial or
significant portion of the material presented over image-producing devices within
individual rooms, that are occupied by guests, are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” (as defined below).
(f) “Employee” - means any and all persons, including independent
contractors who work in, at, or render any services directly related to the operation
of an adult entertainment establishment but shall not include independent
contractors indirectly related to such operation such as janitorial services,
construction, maintenance, pest control, and trash removal.
(g) “Specified anatomical areas” - means the following:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
5-11
(A) Human genitals, pubic region;
(B) Anal cleft or cleavage of the buttocks; and female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
(2) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(h) “Specific sexual activities” - means the following:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
(3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts with the intent to arouse or gratify the sexual
desires of the entertainer, employer, or customer.
(i) “Person” - means any person, partnership or corporation or joint
venture.
(j) “Operator” - means any person operating, conducting or maintaining
an adult entertainment establishment.
(k) “Morals charge” - includes those charges involving prostitution,
pimping or promoting prostitution, indecent exposure, illegal use, possession or
sale of narcotic or non-narcotic drugs, sodomy, lewd and lascivious behavior,
sexual battery, indecent liberties with a child, incest, bigamy and crimes against
nature.
(I) “Diversion” or “diversion agreement” - means any formal referral of a
defendant in a criminal case to a supervised performance program which upon
successful completion results in the dismissal of the charges or complaint which is
authorized pursuant to the laws of any city, state, or of the United States.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-302. LICENSE REQUIRED. (a) Except as provided in subsection (e) below, from
and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no adult
entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained in the city without
first obtaining a license to operate issued by the city.
(b) A license may be issued only for one adult entertainment
establishment located at a fixed certain place. Any person which desires to
operate more than one adult entertainment establishment must have a license for
each.
(c) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any other
person.
(d) It is unlawful for any employee or operator to knowingly work in or
about, or to knowingly perform any service directly related to the operating of any
unlicensed adult entertainment establishment.
(e) All existing adult entertainment establishments at the time of the
passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter must submit application for a
license within sixty days of the date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes
effective. If an application for such license is not made within a sixty-day period,
then such existing adult entertainment establishment shall cease operation.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the city’s right to refuse to grant a
license to an existing adult entertainment establishment that upon application is
not eligible for a license under this chapter.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-12
5-303. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. (a) Any person desiring to secure a license
shall make application in duplicate to the city clerk’s office. The application shall be
verified and accompanied by the license fee. Both copies of the application shall
be filed with the city clerk’s office.
(b) The application for a license shall be on a form provided by the city
clerk’s office. A partnership application and the application of any officer or director
of a corporation and any stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock
of a corporate application shall furnish the following information under oath:
(1) Name and address, including all aliases;
(2) The name of the owner of the premises upon which the adult
entertainment establishment is to be located;
(3) The address of the adult entertainment establishment to be
operated by the applicant;
(4) A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter and is complying with them.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-304. LICENSE FEES. For any adult entertainment establishment the annual
license fee shall be established from time to time, by Resolution of the Governing
Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-305. LICENSE; ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS. To receive a license to operate
an adult entertainment establishment, applicants must meet the following
standards:
(a) If the applicant is an individual (1) the applicant must be at least
eighteen years of age; (2) the applicant shall not have been convicted of, or
pleaded nolo contendere to, or participated in a diversion agreement after having
been charged with a felony or any morals charge as defined herein in any
jurisdiction within the last five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(b) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, corporation or any other
type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
(1) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or any other type of organization shall be at least eighteen years of
age. Financial interest in a corporation includes any officer or director of the
corporation and any stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock
of a corporation.
(2) No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture, corporation or other type of organization shall have been convicted
of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, or participated in a diversion program after
having been charged with a felony or any morals charge within the immediate
five years preceding the date of the application.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-306. EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION BY CITY COUNCIL. If an application for a
license is in proper form and accompanied by the license fee as provided for in
Section 5-504 the city council shall, after review and recommendation by the city
manager, examine the application. If the applicant is fully qualified pursuant to the
guidelines set forth in this chapter, the city council shall issue a license to the
5-13
applicant within thirty days of the filing of the application, if the city council fails to
act on the application within thirty days after it is filed, it shall be deemed granted.
If the city council denies the application within thirty days of the filing of the
application, the application is deemed finally denied and the same application may
not be made within one year unless there are changed circumstances. If the
council denies the application, the applicant may appeal the denial pursuant to the
provisions of K.S.A. 60-2101(d) and amendments thereto within thirty days of the
denial. If an application is denied by the city council over thirty days after it is filed,
the denial shall be of no effect except that this provision is not intended to limit the
ability of the city council to revoke the license for any of the reasons in Section 5-
514 of this article. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-307. DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED. The license shall be displayed in a
conspicuous public place within premises licensed as an adult entertainment
establishment. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-308. RENEWAL OF LICENSES. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless
revoked sooner, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following
year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application for renewal
to the city clerk’s office. The application for renewal shall be filed in duplicate and
dated by the city clerk. An application for renewal license filed after the expiration
date of the license shall not be accepted if the premises the renewal license is
being sought for does not comply with the distance requirements set forth in
Section 5-513. A renewal application shall in all other respects be treated as an
application for an initial license. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-309. GENERAL REGULATIONS. Every operator or employee of an adult
entertainment establishment shall comply with the following regulations and the
failure to comply with the regulations shall be unlawful:
(a) No person under the age of eighteen shall be employed in or within
200 feet of an adult entertainment establishment.
(b) No person under the age of eighteen shall be permitted to enter or
remain in an adult entertainment establishment.
(c) No persons shall be knowingly employed in or within 200 feet of an
adult entertainment establishment who within one year prior to employment was
released from probation from a conviction for a crime of, or participated in a
diversion agreement after being charged with a morals charge or a felony.
(d) Every adult entertainment establishment and every person employed
by the establishment in the conduct of his or her business shall admit to any and
every part of the premises designated in the license at any time any law
enforcement officer or official of the city authorized by the Director of Public Safety
for inspection of the premises to assure compliance with the regulations of the city.
Except that this provision does not apply to rooms occupied by patrons of an adult
hotel during period of such occupancy.
(e) Every adult entertainment establishment must maintain for inspection a
list of all employees providing services directly related to the operation of the
establishment including their date of birth, race, sex, and social security number.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-14
5-310. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. No alcohol, liquor or cereal malt beverage shall
be sold or consumed on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment
except this provision shall not apply to rooms rented and occupied by patrons in an
adult hotel. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-311. PROHIBITED CONDUCT. (a) Private Rooms and Closed Booths
Prohibited.
(1) Every adult motion picture arcade shall be physically arranged in
such a manner that the interior portion of all viewing areas are visible from a
common area of the premises and shall not be obscured by any curtains,
drapes, doors or other enclosure except under the following conditions:
(i) The booth is designed for a single occupant;
(ii) The booth has a door or curtains which cannot be locked;
which may extend downward not closer than fifteen inches from the
floor, and which has an open space at the top so that the top of the
door or curtain does not extend upward more than six feet from the
floor;
(iii) Conspicuous signs state, “only one occupant per booth”;
(iv) There are no openings between booths; and
(v) It can readily be determined from outside the booth that
there is no more than one occupant inside the booth.
(2) No licensee, manager, employee or agent shall permit or allow
two or more occupants to occupy any booth which has been designated as a
booth designed for a single occupant.
(3) No person shall enter into or remain in a booth which has been
designated with a sign stating “only one occupant per booth” while another
occupant is in the booth.
(b) Other Prohibited Conduct. The following conduct by any person
licensed under this code including managers or employees thereof or any person
under the direction and control of such a licensee occurring on the premises
involved is deemed contrary to the public welfare and is prohibited:
(1) Exposing or permitting any person to remain on the premises
who exposes to view any portion of the female breasts below the top of the
areola or any portion of the male/female pubic hair, anus, buttocks or
genitals;
(2) Permitting any employee on the premises to touch, caress or
fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals of any other employee or
of any patron;
(3) Encouraging or permitting any patron on the premises to touch,
caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals of any
employee;
(4) Performing or permitting any person to perform on the premises
acts of or acts which simulate:
(i) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy or any other sexual
act which is prohibited by law, or
(ii) Touching, caressing or fondling the breasts, buttocks, anus or
genitals of the actor or another;
5-15
(5) Using or permitting any person to use on the premises, any
artificial device or inanimate object to depict any of the acts prohibited by
subsection (4) of this section;
(6) Showing or permitting any person to show on the premises any
motion picture, film, photograph, video tape, or other electronic or mechanical
visual reproduction depicting:
(i) Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy or any sexual act which is prohibited by law,
(ii) The touching, caressing or fondling of the buttocks, anus,
genitals or female breasts,
(iii) Scenes in which a person displays the buttocks, anus,
genitals or female breasts;
(7) As used in this section, the term “premises” means the premises
licensed by the city as an adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore
or adult video store and other such areas, under the control of the adult
entertainment establishment, adult bookstore or adult video store licensee or
his or her employee or employees, that are in such close proximity to the
premises licensed as a adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore or
adult video store that activities and conduct of persons within such other
areas may be viewed by persons within the premises licensed as a adult
entertainment establishment, adult bookstore or adult video store by the city.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-312. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS REQUIRED. No license shall
be granted for an adult entertainment establishment unless the licensee fully
complies with the health regulations, building codes, zoning ordinances, fire
prevention and safety regulations of the city. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-313. DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS. (a) No license shall be granted for an adult
entertainment establishment or adult hotel which is located within one thousand
feet of a church, public or parochial school, public park, public library, residential
zoning district, erotic dance studio or any other adult entertainment establishment
or adult hotel.
(b) Provided, however, that adult entertainment establishment or adult
hotel licenses may be issued for all establishments engaged in the business of
adult entertainment establishments or adult hotels as of the date of enactment of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, that are located within one thousand feet of
a church, public park, public or parochial school, residential zoning district, erotic
dance studio or other adult entertainment establishment or adult hotel, so long as
the premises are used or held for use as an adult entertainment establishment or
adult hotel. This distance is to be measured from the nearest property line of the
residential zoning district, church, public or parochial school, public park or other
adult entertainment establishment or adult hotel to the nearest property line of the
premises on which the adult entertainment establishment or adult hotel is located
or of any parking lot designated to be used by the patrons of such an
establishment. Provided, however, that:
(1) Such license, once issued, shall not be renewed to any person or
premises not identified in the original license; further, that should such a
licensed establishment cease to be used for such purpose for a period of
5-16
ninety days or more, then and in that event, no new adult entertainment
establishment or adult hotel license shall be issued for the establishment
except as specifically provided by this chapter.
(2) Should a licensed establishment cease to be used for such
purpose for a period of ninety days or more, then and in that event the
existing license shall be deemed to expire at twelve a.m., noon, on the 91st
calendar day of non-use. In no event shall this provision be construed to
extend the term of a license issued under this section. Should a license
expire pursuant to this provision, the licensee may make application of the
license collector for a refund of the portion of license fee attributed to the
remaining period of the license. All such applications must be filed at least
thirty days prior to the end of the original term of the license. No refunds shall
be made for a period of time less than thirty days.
Periods of time during which such establishments are being remodeled or
repaired because of normal wear and tear, desire to improve the quality of
the premises, or damage caused by fire or natural disaster such as floods or
windstorms, shall not be included in computing the above ninety-day period,
provided, that any remodeling or repair must be commenced within ninety
days after closure of any structure and completed within a reasonable time
thereafter. The chief of police of the Augusta safety department shall be
notified in writing within thirty days of closing of such establishment for
remodeling or repair, such notice to state the date of commencement and
estimated or actual completion of remodeling or repair. Any establishment
shall not be relicensed and shall cease to be used as an adult entertainment
establishment or adult hotel if repair is not commenced within ninety days
after such closure, if such repairs are not completed within a reasonable time
thereafter and/or if the chief of police is not notified within the thirty-day time
period.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-314. SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE. (a) The Director of Public
Safety after actual service of ten days* written notice to the person holding a
license for an adult entertainment establishment or adult hotel pursuant to this title,
shall have the authority to suspend such license for a period not to exceed thirty
days, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances or
statutes regulating conduct in adult entertainment establishments or adult hotels;
provided, however that the licensee may appeal such order of suspension to the
city council within seven days from the date of such order.
(b) The city council after actual service of ten days* written notice to the
person holding a license for an adult entertainment establishment, pursuant to this
title, may cause to be suspended for a period of not more than thirty days or may
permanently revoke such license for the following reasons:
(1) If the licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving
false information in the application therefor;
(2) If the licensee, manager, operator, or employee has violated any
of the provisions of this chapter;
(3) If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under
this chapter;
(4) The nonpayment of any license fees payable hereunder;
5-17
(5) For knowingly employing a person who has been, within one year
prior to the date of employment, or who during the period of employment is
adjudged guilty of or participated in a diversion agreement after being
charged with a felony or a morals charge, or within one year prior to
employment has been released from probation from a felony or a morals
charge.
Provided, that if any of the grounds for revocation herein enumerated are
violated by an employee, a manager, or agent, then in absence of proof of
knowledge by the licensee, there shall be no revocation, except as herein
provided, but there may be a suspension of not more than thirty days; it being
further provided that in the event any licensee is subjected to more than two
such suspensions in any twelve-month period, his or her license may be
revoked on the third such violation.
Upon appeal taken from an order of suspension or revocation the court may
stay the order of suspension or revocation upon a showing by the appellant
and a finding by the court that a substantial likelihood exists that the movant
will eventually prevail on the merits and that the movant will suffer irreparable
injury unless the stay is granted. If there is no stay by the court then the order
of suspension or revocation shall not be suspended during the pendency of
any such appeal. In case of the revocation of a license of any licensee, no
new license shall be issued to such person or to any person acting for or on
his or her behalf, for a period of six months after the revocation becomes
effective.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-315. PENALTY. Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-316. INJUNCTIONS. Section 5-513 of this article is adopted as part of the zoning
laws and regulations of the city of Augusta, Kansas. as though said section was
fully set forth in the Zoning Regulations of this city. The city attorney may bring an
action in the District Court of the Thirteenth Judicial District or any other
appropriate court having jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of said section of this
code. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-317. INVALIDITY OF PART. Should any court declare any section, clause or
provision of the article to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect only such
section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional and shall not affect any
other section, clause or provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
5-18
ARTICLE 4. ESCORT SERVICES
5-401. DEFINITIONS. The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section:
(a) “Consideration” - is money or money’s worth.
(b) “Crimes involving moral turpitude” - includes charges of prostitution,
patronizing a prostitute, promoting prostitution, indecent exposure, lewd and
lascivious behavior, sodomy, promoting sodomy for hire, patronizing a person
offering sodomy for hire, sexual battery, loitering for the purposes of solicitation,
indecent liberties with a child, incest, adultery, bigamy, promoting obscenity,
promoting obscenity to minors, displaying material harmful to minors, and
possession, sale or distribution of any illegal drug.
(c) “Employee” - means any and all persons including independent
contractors who work in, at, or render any services to, the patrons of an escort
service, or who render any services directly related to the operation of an escort
service.
(d) “Escort” - is any person who is held out to the public as available for
hire and who, for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission or
salary, consorts with or accompanies, or who offers for monetary consideration, to
consort with or accompany another or others to or about social affairs, places of
entertainment or amusement within any place of public resort or within any private
quarters.
(e) “Escort service” - is any person, as defined herein, which for a fee,
commission, profit, reward, payment or other monetary consideration furnishes,
refers, or offers to furnish or refer escorts, provides or offers to introduce patrons
to escorts, or arranges for escorts to accompany patrons to or about social affairs,
places of entertainment or amusement, about any place of public resort or within
any private quarters.
(f) “Escort service runner” - is any person, not an escort, who for a salary,
fee, hire, reward or profit, as the agent for either an escort service or a patron,
contacts or meets with escort patrons or escort services at any location other than
the established open office, as defined hereunder, whether that person is
employed by the escort service or any business, or is self-employed.
(g) “Licensee” - is a person who is the holder of a valid license under this
chapter. A licensee includes an agent, servant, employee or other person while
acting on behalf of that licensee whenever such licensee is or would be prohibited
from doing or performing an act or acts under this title.
(h) “Offer to provide acts of sexual conduct” - is to offer, propose or solicit
to provide sexual conduct to a patron. Such definitions include all conversations,
advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to
conclude that such acts were to be provided.
(i) “Open office” - is an office at the licensed escort service address from
which escort business is transacted. To qualify as an open office it is required that:
(1) Business hours be established and posted, that the office be
open to the public and patrons or prospective patrons during such business
hours, and that the office be accessible to business invitees, license officials
and law enforcement officers through a security system during all other hours
that escorts are working;
5-19
(2) The office be managed by the owner or management employee
of the owner having authority to bind the service to escort and patron
contracts, and adjust patron and consumer complaints;
(3) All telephone lines and numbers listed to the escort service or
advertised as escort service numbers terminate at the open office and at no
other location;
(4) An index of all employees and escorts be kept in the open office,
along with copies of the licenses of those employed to work as escorts or
escort service runners, and said index shall be open to inspection at the
request of any law enforcement officer who is on official duty;
(5) All business records be kept in the open office, including records
of escort calls and referrals, stating the name and driver’s license number (or
other form of picture identification) of the patron, as well as the state of
issuance of the driver’s license (or other picture identification). Such records
shall also include the date and time of referral, name of the escort who
accompanied the patron, whether the referral resulted in a contract, and the
total fee received from the patron, if any. The business records described in
this section shall be subject to inspection at the request of any law
enforcement officer who is making said request for inspection pursuant to
said officer’s lawful duties as a law enforcement officer. The refusal of a
licensee to allow such an inspection shall not be a criminal violation of the
ordinance codified in this chapter nor shall it be considered grounds for
suspending, revoking or otherwise taking punitive measures or action against
the licensee or the escort service’s license. However, in the event of such a
refusal, such an inspection may be conducted upon the issuance of a valid
search warrant, issued under the authority of K.S.A. 22-2501, and
amendments thereto;
(6) All of the business records required to be kept and maintained by
an escort service licensed under the ordinance codified in this chapter shall
be retained by the escort service for a minimum period of one year, and shall
be subject to verification on a quarterly basis by the Director of Public safety
or his/her duly authorized representative upon request. This quarterly
examination of the records shall be permitted solely for the purpose of
verifying that such records are being kept, and shall not be for the purpose of
gathering information. Refusal by the licensee to allow examination of such
records for the sole purpose of verifying that the licensee is in compliance
with the record keeping requirements of the ordinance codified in this chapter
shall not be deemed to be a criminal violation, however, if the refusal is
unreasonable it may result in revocation or suspension of the escort service*s
license.
(j) “Operator” - is any person operating, maintaining or conducting the
business of an escort service.
(k) “Patron” - is a customer or any person who contracts with an escort
service for the purpose of hiring an escort, or for monetary consideration contracts
with, or hires an escort.
(I) “Person” - is any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, joint venture or association of any kind.
(m) “Service-oriented escort” - is an escort who:
(1) Operates from an open office;
5-20
(2) Does not employ or use an escort service runner;
(3) Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided, or work
for an escort service which so advertises; and
(4) Does not offer, solicit, agree to provide or provide sexual
conduct.
(n) “Service-oriented escort service” - is an escort service which:
(1) Maintains an open office at an established place of business;
(2) Does not use an escort service runner;
(3) Does not advertise, order, solicit, agree to provide or provide
sexual conduct to a patron; and
(4) Employs or provides only escorts who are licensed pursuant to
this chapter.
(o) “Sexual conduct” - means the engaging in or the commission of an act
of sexual intercourse, oral-genital contact, anal copulation, or the touching of the
sexual organs, pubic region, buttocks or female breast of a person for the purpose
of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person.
(p) “Sexual gratification” - is sexual conduct as defined in subsection (o)
above.
(q) “Sexual stimulation” - is to excite or arouse the prurient interest of
another, or to offer or solicit acts of sexual conduct as defined in subsection (o)
above.
(r) “Sexually oriented acts” - are sexual conduct as defined in subsection
(o) above.
(s) “Sexually oriented escort” - is an escort who:
(1) Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor, an
escort service runner;
(2) Works for, as an agent, employee or independent contractor, or
is referred to a patron by a sexually oriented escort service;
(3) Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or as an agent,
employee or independent contractor, works for or is referred to a patron by
an escort service which so advertises;
(4) Solicits, offers, agrees to provide or does provide acts of sexual
conduct to an escort patron;
(5) Accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct
for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort service.
(t) “Sexually oriented escort service” - is an escort service which:
(1) Engages in advertising to make the prospective patron believe
that acts of sexual conduct or sexual stimulation will be provided;
(2) Uses as escorts persons known to have violated the laws
regarding felonies or crimes of moral turpitude as defined herein;
(3) Does not maintain an open office;
(4) Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor, or
uses an escort service runner;
(5) Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided or that escorts
which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred to introduced to
a patron; or
(6) Solicits, offers or agrees to provide or does provide acts of sexual
conduct to a patron; or
5-21
(7) Employs, contracts with, provides or refers escorts who do not
possess escort licenses as required pursuant to this chapter;
(8) Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or
(9) Employs, contracts with, refers, or provides to a patron a sexually
oriented escort.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-402. LICENSE REQUIRED. It is unlawful within the city limits for any person,
whether as principal, officer, agent, servant or employee to conduct, manage,
operate, maintain or perform services as an escort service without having first
obtained a license to do so as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code
2010)
5-403. SEXUALLY ORIENTED ESCORT SERVICES UNLAWFUL. It is unlawful
within the city limits for any person, whether as principal, officer, agent, servant or
employee to conduct, manage, operate, maintain or perform services as a sexually
oriented escort service regardless of license. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-404. LICENSE EXCLUSIVE TO PERSON AND PREMISES ISSUED. (a) The
license required pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for one premises or one
person. The address of the premises for which the license is requested and the
name of the person who will be the licensee shall be clearly stated in all
applications and renewal requests.
(b) Licenses issued hereunder may not be transferred from one premises
to another or from one person to another, and shall be renewable only if the
renewal license is to be issued to the same person. Within thirty days after the sale
or transfer of any interest in an escort service, any license heretofore issued shall
be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or
operate the escort service.
(c) No escort service shall be operated under any name or conducted
under any designation not specified in the license for that business.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-405. LICENSE FEES. For every escort service there shall be an annual license
fee established from time to time, by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City
of Augusta, Kansas. This fee shall accompany all initial license applications and all
renewal requests, and a license shall not be issued until the fee is paid in full.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-406. LICENSE RENEWAL. The term of a license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter is one year. Any escort service license which has not
been suspended or revoked may be renewed for a period of one year on written
application to the city clerk*s office. Such application shall be under oath on a form
provided by the city clerk, and shall contain all the information required by Section
5-609, and any amendments thereto.
Application for a license renewal must be made not later than thirty days prior to
the date of expiration of the license. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-22
5-407. APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES. The
provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all businesses participating in the
activities described in this chapter, regardless of when established. All existing
escort services at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter
must submit an application for a license within sixty days of the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-408. DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED. The license issued pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place
within the premises licensed as an escort service. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-409. APPLICATION FOR ESCORT SERVICE LICENSE. (a) Any person desiring
to obtain a license to operate an escort service shall make written application in
duplicate to the city clerk’s office. The application shall be verified and
accompanied by the license fee. Both copies of the application shall be filed with
the city clerk’s office.
(b) The application shall be on a form provided by the city. All applicants
shall provide the following information under oath:
(1) The full true name and any other aliases used by the applicant;
(2) The present address and telephone number of the residence and
business of the applicant;
(3) The proposed address and name or names of the escort service
for which a license is sought, and the hours that the escort service will be
open to the public;
(4) The name of the owner of the premises upon which the escort
service is to be located;
(5) Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
(6) All prior criminal convictions excepting minor traffic offenses, and
the date and locations of such convictions;
(7) Two photographs of the applicant two inches by two inches in
size, taken within thirty days immediately preceding the date of application.
One photograph will be sent to the director of public safety and one
photograph shall be affixed to the license;
(8) Fingerprints of the applicant;
(9) Information as to whether such individual or business has ever
been refused any similar license or permit, or has had any similar license or
permit issued to such individual or business in Augusta or elsewhere revoked
or suspended, and the reason or reasons therefor; and
(10) A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter and is complying and will comply with them.
(c) If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be
set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of Incorporation or Charter, together with
the state and date of incorporation, the names, residential addresses, and dates of
birth of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding
more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. The corporation applicant
shall designate one of its officers to act as its responsible managing officer. Such
designated person shall complete and sign all application forms and provide all
information required in subsection (b) of this section, but only one application fee
shall be charged.
5-23
(d) If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the
names, residential addresses, and dates of birth of each of the partners, including
limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its
certificate of limited partnership. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the
provisions of subsection (c) of this section pertaining to corporations shall apply.
The partnership or limited partnership applicant shall designate one of its partners
to act as its responsible managing partner. Such designated person shall complete
and sign all application forms and provide all information required in subsection (b)
of this section, but only one application fee shall be charged.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-410. LICENSE; ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS. To receive a license to operate
an escort service, applicants must meet the following standards:
(a) If the applicant is an individual:
(1) The required fees must have been paid;
(2) The application must conform in all respects to the provisions of
this chapter;
(3) The applicant must not have knowingly made a false or
misleading statement of a material fact in the application;
(4) The applicant must be at least eighteen years of age;
(5) The applicant must not, within five years immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application, have been convicted of or pleaded
nolo contendere in any jurisdiction to a felony, or any crime involving moral
turpitude as defined in this chapter. The term “conviction” shall include being
placed on diversion;
(6) The applicant must not have had a similar type of license in any
jurisdiction previously suspended or revoked for good cause within five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
(7) The operation of the business as proposed, if permitted, must
comply with all applicable building, fire, health and zoning laws;
(b) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, corporation or any other
type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
(1) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or any other type or organization shall be at least eighteen years of
age. Financial interest in a corporation includes any officer or director of the
corporation and any stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock
of a corporation.
(2) No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture, corporation or other type of organization shall, in any jurisdiction,
have been convicted of, pled nob contendere to, or participated in a diversion
program, after having been charged with a felony or any crime involving
moral turpitude within the immediate five years preceding the date of the
application.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-411. EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION BY CITY COUNCIL. If an application for
a license is in proper form and accompanied by the license fee as provided for in
Section 5-605, the city council shall, after review and recommendation by the city
manager, examine the application. If the applicant is fully qualified pursuant to the
5-24
guidelines set forth in this chapter, the city council shall issue a license to the
applicant within thirty days from the date of the filing of the application. If the city
council fails to act on the application within thirty days after it is filed, it shall be
deemed granted. If the city council denies the application within thirty days of the
filing of the application, the application is deemed finally denied and the same
application may not be made within one year unless there are changed
circumstances. If the council denies the application, the applicant may appeal the
denial pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 60-2101(d), and amendments thereto,
within thirty days of the denial. If an application is denied by the city council over
thirty days after it is filed, the denial shall be of no effect except that this provision
is not intended to limit the ability of the city council to revoke the license for any of
the reasons in Section 5-612 of this code. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-412. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF ESCORT SERVICE LICENSE. (a)
Any license issued for the operation of an escort service pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended or permanently revoked upon the following grounds:
(1) The licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false
information in the application therefor, or has otherwise made a material
misrepresentation of fact in the application;
(2) The licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under this
chapter;
(3) The licensee, any employee, agent, manager, operator or any
other person connected or associated with the license as a partner, director,
officer, or stockholder has offered or agreed to or rendered the service of a
sexually oriented escort;
(4) The licensee, employee, agent, manager, operator or any other
person connected or associated with the license as a partner, director, officer
or stockholder has otherwise violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
(5) The nonpayment of any license fees payable hereunder;
(6) The licensee has been convicted, subsequent to the issuance of
any license of a crime which is either a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude as defined herein;
(7) For employing a person who has been, within three years prior
the date of employment, or who during the period of employment is adjudged
guilty of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, as defined herein, or
within three years prior to employment has been released from probation
from a conviction of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude as defined
herein. It is further provided that the term “adjudged guilty” shall include being
placed on diversion. It shall be an absolute defense to an alleged violation of
this section that the escort employed by the escort service was a licensed
escort under the ordinance codified in this chapter;
(8) The licensee is a corporation and is not or is no longer qualified
to transact business in the state of Kansas.(b) To revoke a license, the
director of public safety, upon five days* written notice to the licensee, shall
have the authority to suspend such license for a period not to exceed thirty
days. The cause for such revocation shall be set forth in the notice, and the
licensee may appeal such an order of suspension in writing to the city council
within seven days from the date of such order.
5-25
(c) The city council, upon five days written notice to the licensee,
permanently revoke or cause to be suspended such license for any of the reasons
enumerated in subsection (a) above. Provided, that if any of the grounds for
revocation herein enumerated are violated by an employee, manager, operator or
agent, then in the absence of proof of knowledge by the licensee, there shall be no
revocation, but there may be a suspension of not more than thirty days; it being
further provided that in the event any licensee is subjected to more than two such
suspensions in any twelve-month period, his or her license may be revoked on the
third such violation.
(d) An appeal taken from an order of suspension or revocation shall not
suspend the order of revocation or suspension during the pendency of such
appeal. In case of the revocation of any license, no new license shall be issued to
such licensee or to any person acting for or on his or her behalf for a period of
three years.
(e) For the purposes of subsections (b) and (c) above, written notice shall
be deemed sufficient upon the mailing of the notice to the most recent address on
the application of the licensee on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-413. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS REQUIRED. No license shall
be granted for an escort service until the health code, building code, zoning
ordinances, fire prevention and safety regulations of the city are fully complied
with, and it is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to maintain or conduct an
escort service without being in compliance, at all times, with all health code,
building code, zoning ordinance, fire prevention and safety regulations of the city.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-414. ESCORT SERVICE DUTIES. (a) The escort service shall provide to each
patron a written contract and receipt of payment for services. The contract shall
clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services
shall be performed, the total amount of money such services shall cost the patron,
and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed.
(b) The escort service shall maintain an open office at the licensed
location. The address of that office shall be included in all patron contracts and
published advertisements. Private rooms or booths where the patron may meet
with the escort shall not be provided at the open office or at any other location by
the escort service.
(c) The escort service, in terms of licensing consequences, is responsible
and liable for the acts of all its employees and subcontractors including, but not
limited to, telephone receptionists and escorts who are referred by that service
while the escort is with the patron.
(d) The escort service shall commence business from an open office
within thirty days after issuance of the license. In the event an escort service
licensee shall not commence business in an open office within thirty days after
issuance of a license, or shall discontinue business or close the open office for a
period of thirty days after issuance of a license, or shall discontinue business or
close the open office for a period of thirty days, such license shall terminate and be
revoked automatically without action by the director fo public safety or city council.
5-26
(e) Every owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, or
anyone in control of an escort service shall maintain a daily register, approved as
to form by the department of public safety, containing the following information:
(1) The identification of all employees employed by such
establishment, together with a copy of the escort license for those employees
working as escorts;
(2) The hours of employment of each employee for each day; and
(3) The names of all patrons, including their true full names, driver’s
license number and state of issuance (or some other form of picture
identification), hours of employment of the escort service, name of the escort
or other employees providing services to this particular patron, the location
where escort services were rendered, and the fee charged for such services.
The daily register described in this section shall be subject to inspection at
the request of any law enforcement officer who is making said request for
inspection pursuant to said officer*s lawful duties as a law enforcement
officer who is making said request for inspection pursuant to said officer*s
lawful duties as a law enforcement officer. The refusal of a licensee to allow
such an inspection shall not be a criminal violation of the ordinance codified
in this chapter nor shall it be considered grounds for suspending, revoking or
otherwise taking punitive measures or action against the licensee or the
escort service*s license. However, in the event of such a refusal, an
inspection may be conducted upon the issuance of a valid search warrant,
issued under the authority of K.S.A. 22-2501, and amendments thereto. The
daily register described in this section shall be kept and maintained at the
open office or licensed premises for a period of one year.
(f) Any changes in information required to be submitted by this chapter
must be given to the city clerk*s office in writing within ten days of any such
change.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-415. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES. (a) It is unlawful for a licensee to provide escort
services as described in this chapter to individuals under eighteen years of age
unless written authorization by a parent or legal guardian is issued to the escort
when acting as such.
(b) It is unlawful within the city limits for an escort service to advertise or
hold out to the public the availability of an escort or escort service without
obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter. Whether the actual
business of the escorts or the escort service is performed, the escort service
license number must be prominently displayed in such advertisements. (Ord.
1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-416. ESCORT/ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER; LICENSE REQUIRED. (a) It is
unlawful for any person within the city limits to:
(1) Work perform services, or act as an escort or escort service
runner as defined in this article without a license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article;
(2) Work, perform services, or act as an escort or escort service
runner unless employed by a licensed escort service;
5-27
(3) Work, perform services, or act as a sexually oriented escort, or
work as an escort service runner for a sexually oriented escort service,
regardless of license.
(b) Such person, when providing services or working as an escort or
escort service runner, shall carry the license required by subsection (a)(1) of this
section upon their person and display the license upon request of any law
enforcement official. Failure to display such license upon demand is a violation of
this article punishable as set forth in Section 5-621 of this Article.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-417. ESCORT/ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER; LICENSE APPLICATION,
RENEWAL.
(a) Any person desiring an escort or escort service runner*s license shall
make written application in duplicate to the city clerk*s office on a form provided by
the city. The application shall be verified and accompanied by the license fee. Both
copies of the application shall be filed with the city clerk*s office and shall provide
the following information under oath:
(1) The full true name and any other aliases used by applicant;
(2) The present residential address and telephone number of
applicant;
(3) Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
(4) Two photographs, two inches by two inches in size, taken within
the last thirty days immediately preceding the date of application. One
photograph shall be sent to the chief of police and one photograph shall be
affixed to the license;
(5) All criminal convictions, except for minor traffic offenses, and the
dates and places of such convictions;
(6) Fingerprints of the applicant.
(b) All persons working or providing services as escorts or escort service
runners at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter must
submit an application for an escort or escort service runner*s license within thirty
days of the date the same becomes effective.
(c) Every escort or escort service runner*s license issued pursuant to this
chapter will expire one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed
before working or performing services as an escort or escort service runner in the
following year. Application for renewal must be made to the city clerk no later than
thirty days prior to the date of expiration for the escort or escort service runner*s
license, and must be accompanied by the license fee provided in subsection (c) of
this section.
(d) A license to act as an escort or escort service runner does not
authorize the operation of an escort service. Any person obtaining a license to act
as an escort or escort service runner who desires to operate an escort service
must separately apply for a permit therefor. A person who applies for a permit to
operate an escort service and who desires to act as an escort or escort service
runner within said business, who pays the fee required by Section 5-605 of this
chapter, shall not be required to pay the fee required in this section.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-28
5-418. ESCORT/ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER; LICENSE FEES. There shall be an
annual fee established from time to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of
the City of Augusta, Kansas for an escort or escort service runner’s license and
such fee shall accompany each application submitted. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code
2010)
5-419. ESCORT/ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER; LICENSE ELIGIBILITY. (a) A copy
of each application for an escort or escort service runner’s license shall be
forwarded to the director of public safety for investigation of the applicant, It shall
be the duty of the director of public safety to investigate such applicant to
determine whether he or she is qualified under the provisions of this chapter. The
director of public safety shall report to the city clerk not later than ten working days
after receipt of the application. The city clerk shall issue or deny the license to
work or perform services as an escort or escort service runner based upon the
results of the police investigation. Any applicant who has been denied the
issuance of an escort or escort service runner*s license shall have a right of
appeal to the city council, and then pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 60-
2101(d), and any amendments thereto.
(b) No license to work or perform services as an escort or an escort
service runner shall be issued to:
(1) Any person who has not attained eighteen years of age;
(2) Any person who, within three years immediately preceding the
date of making application, has been convicted or released from probation or
parole for conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, as defined in this
chapter, and the term “conviction,” as used herein, includes being placed on
diversion;
(3) Any person who has knowingly made a false or misleading
statement of a material fact or omission of a material fact in their application
for an escort or escort service runner’s license.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-420. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF AN ESCORT/ESCORT SERVICE
RUNNER’S LICENSE. (a) The director of public safety, upon five days written
notice to the person holding an escort or escort service runner’s license, shall have
the authority to suspend such license for a period not to exceed thirty days, for any
of the following reasons:
(1) False information or data was given, or material facts were
omitted from the person’s application;
(2) The fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid;
(3) The licensee becomes ineligible to obtain a license;
(4) The licensee is adjudged to have violated the regulations of any
of the provisions of this chapter;
(5) Subsequent to obtaining an escort or escort service runner*s
license, the licensee has been convicted in any jurisdiction of a crime
involving moral turpitude, as defined in this chapter, and providing that the
term “convicted” shall also include being placed on diversion.
(b) The licensee may appeal such order of suspension to the city council
within seven days from the date of such order.
5-29
(c) The city council, upon five days* written notice to the person holding an
escort or escort service runner*s license may permanently revoke or cause to be
suspended for a period of not more than thirty days such license for any of the
reasons enumerated in subsection (a) of this section.
(d) Any appeal taken from an order of revocation or suspension shall not
suspend the order during the pendency of any such appeal. In the case of the
revocation of an escort or escort service runner*s license, no new license shall be
issued to such person for a period of three years after the revocation becomes
effective.
(e) For the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, written
notice shall be deemed sufficient upon the mailing of the notice to the most recent
address on the application of the licensee on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. 1718, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
5-421. INVALIDITY OF PART. Should any court declare any section, clause or
provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect only such
section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional and shall not affect any
other remaining section, clause or provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1718, Sec. 2;
Code 2010)
6-1
CHAPTER VI. ELECTIONS
Article 1. City Elections
Article 2. Wards
____________________
ARTICLE 1. CITY ELECTIONS
6-101. CONDUCT OF ELECTION. The election of city officials shall be conducted in
all respects as provided by the laws of Kansas governing the holding of city
elections. (K.S.A. 25-2101 et seq.; Code 1991)
6-102. HOURS OF VOTING. At all city elections the polls shall be open at 7:00 a.m.
and close at 7:00 p.m., unless different hours are set and publicly announced by
the county election officer. (K.S.A. 25-2111, 26-206; Code 1991)
6-2
ARTICLE 2. WARDS
6-201. FIRST WARD; ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a ward in the
City of Augusta, Kansas, to be hereinafter known as “The First Ward”, comprised
and bounded as follows: within the corporate limits of the City of Augusta, Kansas,
lying South of the following line:
Commencing at the intersection of the West city limits line of the City of
Augusta, Kansas, with the center of West Kelly Avenue in said city; thence
proceeding East down the centerline of West Kelly Avenue to the intersection of
the centerline of Money Avenue; thence proceeding South down the centerline of
Money Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of the intersection of West
Harrington Street; thence proceeding East down the centerline of West Harrington
Street to the centerline of the intersection of State Street; thence proceeding South
down the centerline of State Street to the intersection of the centerline of Columbia
Street; thence proceeding East along the centerline of Columbia Street to the
intersection of the centerline of Ohio Street; thence proceeding South down the
centerline of Ohio Street to the intersection of the centerline of Broadway Avenue;
thence proceeding East along the centerline of Broadway Avenue to the Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Railroad North right-of-way line; thence proceeding North along
the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way line to the intersection
of the North line of the Augusta Industrial Park; thence East along the North line of
the Augusta Industrial Park to the intersection of the centerline of Custer Lane;
thence South along the centerline of Custer Lane to the North line of the South
Half (5 1/2) of the Southeast Quarter (5E/4) of Section 23 Township 27 South
Range 4 East; thence East along said North line of the South Half (5 1/2) of the
Southeast Quarter (SE/4) to the intersection of the East city limits line of the City of
Augusta, Kansas.
(Ord. 1895, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
6-202. SECOND WARD; ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a ward in the
City of Augusta, Kansas, to be hereinafter known as “The Second Ward”, and
bounded and comprised as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of the centerline West Kelly Avenue and
Money Avenue in the City of Augusta, Kansas; thence proceeding East down the
centerline of West Kelly Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of Dearborn
Street and West Kelly Avenue; thence proceeding East along East Kelly Avenue to
the centerline of the intersection of Custer Lane; thence proceeding North along
the centerline of Custer Lane to the intersection of East Belmont Street; thence
proceeding East along the centerline of East Belmont Street to the East city limits
of the City of Augusta, Kansas; thence proceeding South along the East city limits
of the City of Augusta, Kansas to the North line of the South Half (S 1/2) of the
Southeast Quarter (SE/4) of Section 23 Township 27 South Range 4 East; thence
West along said North line of the South Half (S 1/2) of the Southeast Quarter
(SE/4) to the intersection of the centerline of Custer Lane; thence North along the
centerline of Custer Lane to the North line of the Augusta Industrial Park; thence
proceeding West along the North line of Augusta Industrial Park to the Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Railroad North right-of-way line; thence proceeding South
along the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way line to the
intersection of the centerline of Broadway Avenue to the centerline of the
6-3
intersection of Ohio Street; thence proceeding North along the centerline of Ohio
Street to the centerline of the intersection of Columbia Street; thence proceeding
West along the centerline of Columbia to the intersection of the centerline of State
Street; thence proceeding North along the centerline of State Street to the
centerline of the intersection of West Harrington Street; thence proceeding West
along the centerline of the intersection of West Harrington Street to the centerline
of the intersection of Money Avenue; thence proceeding North along the centerline
of Money Avenue to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 1895, Sec. 3; Code 2010)
6-203. THIRD WARD; ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a Ward in the
City of Augusta, Kansas, to be hereinafter known as the “Third Ward”, and
bounded and comprised as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of the centerline West Kelly Avenue and
Money Avenue in the City of Augusta, Kansas; thence proceeding East down the
centerline of West Kelly Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of West Kelly
Avenue and Dearborn Street; thence proceeding East down the centerline of East
Kelly Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of East Kelly Avenue and Ohio
Street; thence proceeding North along the centerline of Ohio Street to the North
city limits line of the City of Augusta, Kansas; thence proceeding in a
Southwesterly direction along the city limit line of the City of Augusta, Kansas, to
the point of beginning.
(Ord. 1895, Sec. 4; Code 2010)
6-204. FOURTH WARD; ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a Ward, in
the City of Augusta, Kansas, to be hereinafter known as “The Fourth Ward”,
comprised and bounded as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of East Belmont Avenue and Custer Lane,
thence proceeding South along the centerline of Custer Lane to the intersection of
the centerline of East Kelly Avenue; thence proceeding West along centerline of
East Kelly Avenue to the centerline of Ohio Street; thence proceeding North along
the centerline of Ohio Street to the North city limits of the City of Augusta, Kansas;
thence proceeding East along the North city limits line to the East city limits line of
the City of Augusta, Kansas; thence proceeding South along the East city limits
line of the City of Augusta, Kansas, to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 1895, Sec. 5; Code 2010)
7-1
CHAPTER VII. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Article 1. Department of Public Safety
Article 2. Fire Prevention
Article 3. Fireworks
Article 4. Firemen's Relief Association
Article 5. Property in Safety Department Custody
Article 6. Department of Public Safety Fees
____________________
ARTICLE 1. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
7-101. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY. (a) The law enforcement department
shall consist of a director of public safety and such number of regular law
enforcement officers as shall be appointed as provided by K.S.A. 14-201.
(b) The department of public safety is created for the protection and safety
of persons and property. (Code 2010)
7-102. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY; POWERS AND DUTIES; SUPERVISION
OF DEPARTMENT. (a) The director of public safety shall be in charge of and
shall supervise the administration of the department of safety, subject to approval
of the city manager, and he or she shall serve as the city marshal-chief of police,
fire marshal, and chief of the fire department.
(b) The director of public safety of the department of public safety shall be
under the supervision of the city manager and shall have immediate
superintendency and control over and be responsible for the care and condition of
the fire apparatus and equipment. It shall be the director of safety's duty to see
that all such apparatus and equipment is ready at all times for immediate use. It
shall also be the director of safety's duty to submit a written report as to the
condition of all fire apparatus and equipment to the governing body at their first
meeting in October of each year.
(c) The director of safety, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall
prepare rules and regulations relating to the conduct of the department of safety
and of the officers of the department, including but not limited to the training and
instruction of the officers of the department in approved, up-to-date techniques of
promoting public safety and of providing fire and police protection. He or she may
require such officers to attend practice or training sessions or courses as he or
she may deem advisable and necessary to adequately carry out the functions of
the department of safety.
(Code 1975, 15-102, 15-201; Code 1991)
7-103. LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL; GENERAL DUTIES. (a) It shall be
the general duty of the Director of Public Safety and all sworn law enforcement
personnel to the best of their ability to preserve good order, peace and quiet
throughout the city as provided by law or ordinance.
The Director of Public Safety and all sworn law enforcement personnel shall
at all times have power to make arrest under proper process or without process
on view of any offense against the laws of the State of Kansas or laws of the city
7-2
and to keep all persons so arrested, unless admitted to bail, in the city jail, county
jail or other proper place to prevent their escape until their trial can be had before
the proper officer.
All persons arrested for violation of any law of the state and who shall not be
charged with an offense under any law of the city shall be released to the custody
of the sheriff of the county and such arrest shall be reported to the county
attorney.
(b) All officers of the department of safety, either commission or volunteer,
shall be appointed by the city manager and they shall have the powers, duties,
immunities and authority of police officers and firefighters and such other duties
as may be determined by the city manager. They shall have power to arrest all
offenders against the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city, by day or by
night, with proper process, and to arrest without process where any such offense
shall be committed or attempted to be committed in their presence, and to bring
such offenders to trial.
(Code 2010)
7-104. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Director of Public Safety shall have
power to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
and efficient conduct of the department. (Code 2010)
7-105. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY; POWERS. (a) The director of public
safety shall be responsible for the discipline of the members and is hereby given
authority to suspend or expel any member for refusal to obey orders or for
misconduct or failure to do his or her duty.
(b) The director of public safety shall also have the right to summon any
and all persons present to aid in extinguishing a fire or to aid in removing personal
property from any building on fire or in danger thereof and in guarding the same.
(c) At fires the director of public safety shall have full power, control and
command of all persons present and shall direct the use of the fire apparatus and
equipment, and command the firefighters in the discharge of their duties. He or
she shall take such measures as he or she shall deem proper and necessary in
the preservation and protection of property and extinguishing of fires.
(Code 1975, 15-202; Code 1991)
7-106. SAME; RECORDS. The director of public safety of the public safety
department shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires. Such
information shall include the time and location, construction of building, owner,
occupancy, how extinguished, value of building and contents, loss on building and
contents, insurance on building and contents, members responding to the alarm,
and any other information deemed advisable. (Code 1975, 15-203; Code 1991)
7-107. PRIVATE USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT. It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to take away or use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose or for any person willfully and without proper authority to remove, take
away, keep or conceal any tool, appliance, equipment or other article used in any
way by the safety department. (Code 1975, 15-206; Code 1991, 7-109)
7-3
7-108. OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANT. It shall be unlawful for any person to
place or cause to be placed upon or about any fire hydrant any rubbish, building
material, fence or other obstruction of any character, or in any manner obstruct,
hinder, or delay the safety department in the performance of its duties in case of
fire. Nor shall any person fasten to any fire hydrant any guy rope or brace, nor
stand any vehicle within 15 feet of any such hydrant. (Code 1975, 15-205; Code
1991, 7-112)
7-109. VOLUNTEER SAFETY OFFICERS; COMPENSATION. All sums for
services of the voluntary members of the safety department, as determined by the
governing body, shall be paid by the city directly to the voluntary safety
department association of the city. (Code 1975, 15-107; Code 1991, 7-115)
7-4
ARTICLE 2. FIRE PREVENTION
7-201. FIRE PREVENTION CODE INCORPORATED. There is hereby adopted by
the governing body of the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations,
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that
certain code and standards known as the Uniform Fire Code, edition of 2003,
including all the Appendix chapters, and the Uniform Fire Code Standards, and
the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 2003
and amendments hereafter, Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 2003 land
amendments hereafter, published by the Western Fire Chiefs Association and the
International Conference of Building Officials, being particularly the 2003 editions
thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as hereinafter
deleted, modified or amended by section 7-203 of this article three copies which
Code and Standards have been and are now filed in the office of the clerk of the
City of Augusta, Kansas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall
take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Code 2010)
7-202. SAME; ENFORCEMENT. The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by
the director of safety of the safety department. (Code 1991)
7-203. SAME; AMENDMENTS. (a) Wherever the word municipality is used in the
code hereby adopted, it shall be held to mean the City of Augusta.
(b) Article 13, Fireworks, of the Fire Prevention Code is hereby deleted in
its entirety.
(c) Wherever in the Fire Prevention Code the term chief of the fire
department appears, it shall, for the purpose of this article, mean the director of
public safety of the city.
(d) Wherever in the fire prevention code the term fire department appears,
it shall, for the purpose of this article, mean the public safety department of the
city.
(Code 1975, 8-102; Code 1991)
7-204. OPEN BURNING; GENERAL. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct
or permit within the city any open burning of any materials wherein contaminates
resulting from such combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air provided
that such open burning prohibition shall not apply to:
(a) Open fires for cooking or ceremonial purposes in facilities constructed
specifically for such purpose on public or private premises used for recreational
purposes, or facilities approved by the Director of Public Safety; provided that any
such fire so started shall be extinguished and made safe before the person
starting or maintaining the fire shall leave the place where the fire was started.
Open pit fires are prohibited unless authorized by the Director of Public Safety;
(b) The burning of combustible materials in indoor fireplaces;
(c) The burning of combustible materials in outdoor fireplaces;
(d) Permanent sites which are licensed by the Kansas Department of
Health and Environment for open burning.
7-5
(e) The burning of combustible material for fire training by a public fire
department and/or private fire brigade only after notification to the Director of
Public Safety;
(f) An approved closed chamber device as defined in 7-208;
(g) The removal of hazardous materials, which were accidentally
discharged, but only when the Kansas Department of Health and Environment
has issued the proper permit and has approved the burning operation.
(Ord. 1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-205. OPEN BURNING; COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS. Open burning of
combustible materials as may be authorized by issuance of an open burning
permit when conditions and restrictions stated thereon as determined by the
Director of Public Safety, but only after an inspection of the burn site has been
conducted by the Director of Safety or his/her designee. The following provisions
shall apply to all outdoor burning, when a permit is issued by the Director of
Public Safety:
(a) The person responsible for the burning shall be at least 18 years of
age. An adult, at least 18 years of age, shall supervise the burning from the time
of ignition until the fire is extinguished;
(b) The person(s) conducting such burning shall not be under the influence
of any alcohol or narcotics;
(c) Provisions that are approved by the Director of Public Safety to control
the fire shall be present at the burn site while the fire is burning;
(d) The wind shall not be over 15 miles per hour and the wind shall be in a
direction to not carry smoke or other products of combustion over a populated
area;
(e) If complaints are received, the responsible party shall immediately
extinguish the fire;
(f) Other requirements as established by the Director of Public Safety
based upon the location of the proposed burn site.
(Ord. 1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-206. PERMITS; REQUIRED. Permits to conduct open burning of combustible
materials shall be issued only when the person requesting the outdoor burning
permit has demonstrated to the Director of Public Safety the reduction or disposal
of such material would otherwise be impractical or not feasible and where such
open burning would not be in conflict with state regulations. Such permit shall only
be issued when the smoke or other by-products of combustion will not travel
across or near any populated area of the City of Augusta all outdoor burning fires
shall be extinguished before sun down on the day the permit was issued. (Ord.
1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-207. LIABILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS. It shall be prima facie evidence that
the person who owns or controls property on which open burning occurs has
caused or permitted the open fire. (Ord. 1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-208. CLOSED CHAMBER DEVICE. Any enclosed chamber device or structure
used for the destruction or volume reduction of garbage, rubbish, or other liquid or
solid waste materials by combustion pursuant to disposal or salvaging operations
7-6
may be used, provided that the Director of Public Safety has approved each
device for such use. (Ord. 1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-209. DISPOSAL OF HOT ASHES. No person shall deposit hot ashes, hot
cinders, smoldering coal or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition into any
combustible receptacle; or place the same within 10 feet of any combustible
material, except in metal or other non-combustible, covered receptacles. Such
receptacles, unless resting upon a combustible floor or on the ground outside the
building, shall be placed on non-combustible stands and in every case shall be
kept at least two feet away from any combustible wall, partition, or exterior
window opening. (Ord. 1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-210. PERMITS; ISSUANCE OF. Permits to conduct open burning of combustible
materials shall be issued by the Director of Public Safety and shall be issued only
for the date that the burning is to be conducted. Each permit shall state all
conditions and restrictions, which may be placed by the Director of Safety. No
permit shall be issued for open burning prior to the date such burning is
authorized. Prior to any burn permit being issued, the Augusta Department of
Public Safety shall inspect the proposed burn site. Each permit shall contain the
following information:
(a) Location;
(b) Name of individual who is authorized;
(c) Date that the burning is authorized;
(d) Time period that the burning is authorized;
(e) Special restrictions and conditions, which may apply;
(f) Name of official who issues permits.
(Ord. 1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-211. PERMITS: REVOKED BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY. The Director
of Public Safety shall have the right at any time with just cause, to revoke any
burn permits when conditions change which made such burning unsafe. (Ord.
1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-212. PENALTY. Any person who shall be convicted of violation of Sections 7-204
through 7-211 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or a
sentence of not more than 30 days. (Ord. 1901, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-7
ARTICLE 3. FIREWORKS
7-301. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used
herein shall have the following meanings unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
(a) “Fireworks” - shall mean and include any combustible and deflagrating
composition, article, or device suitable for use of the public for producing a visible
or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or by detonation and previously
approved by the chemical laboratory of the United States Department of
Transportation, by the Kansas State Fire Marshal*s Office and by the Augusta
Department of Safety. The following devices are not classified as common
fireworks by the U.S. Department of Transportation but are generically known as
novelties, tricks and noisemakers, including but not limited to, the following items;
snakes or glow worms, tubs or spheres that upon ignition produce white or
colored smoke as the primary effect, wire sparklers not containing magnesium
and not exceeding one hundred grains of composition material per sparkler, and
the following noise maker devices that produce a small report, including what is
commonly known as a party popper, booby trap, snapper, trick match, cigarette
load, and auto burglar alarm not exceeding .25 grains of explosive material. This
term shall not include any auto flares, paper caps not in excess of an average of
.25 grains of explosive per cap, toy pistols, cannons and guns or other devices for
the use of such caps.
(b) “Prohibited fireworks” - shall mean and include any combustible or
deflagration device other than Interstate Commerce Commission Class “C”
fireworks not approved for sale within the State of Kansas by the Kansas State
Fire Marshal or by the Department of Public Safety. The following shall be
unlawful fireworks within the City of Augusta; firecrackers greater than one and
one-half inch in length, torpedoes, sky rockets, and bottle rockets as defined by
the State Fire Marshal, and any other fireworks deemed to pose an unusual risk
or hazard to the health and welfare of the City of Augusta, but only after
conducting actual field test of such items.
(Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-302. DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation or partnership to discharge fireworks within the limits of the city
except as permitted by this article. The discharge of lawful fireworks will be
permitted on January 1 between 12:00 midnight and 12:15 a.m. and on July 3
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and on July 4 between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. The discharge of fireworks will be allowed on
private property but there shall be no discharge of fireworks on city property
unless a permit is granted by city for such discharge. In addition, it shall be
unlawful to commit any of the following acts within the City of Augusta:
(a) The discharge of fireworks within 1,000 feet of any hospital, sanitarium
or infirmary;
(b) The discharge of fireworks into, under or from any motor vehicle,
whether moving or standing still;
(c) The discharge of fireworks within 200 feet of any facility where
fireworks are sold or stored;
(d) The discharge of fireworks within 300 feet of a service station;
7-8
(e) The discharge of fireworks on any public roadway, street or right of
way;
(f) The discharge of fireworks in any manner which may pose an
unreasonable risk of fire, property damage or personal injury;
(g) The discharge of fireworks on private property not owned or under the
legal control of the person discharging the fireworks unless the person is a social
invitee and has permission of the owner to discharge the fireworks;
(h) The discharge of fireworks toward any residence, commercial building
or other structure whether intended or not.
(Ord. 1965, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-303. PUBLIC DISPLAY. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or
partnership to provide a public fireworks display within the limits of the city without
first obtaining a permit to do so. An application for a public display permit can be
obtained from the City Clerk and should be filed at least thirty (30) days in
advance of the date of the proposed display. The application shall clearly state
the name of the applicant, the location, date and time of display, the nature of the
fireworks used in the display, the name of the person, firm or corporation who will
be in charge of the detonation of the fireworks, and the anticipated need for
police, fire or other municipal services. The permit may be denied if it is
determined that the nature of the fireworks or other relevant, factors create an.
undue, risk of harm or damage to persons or property. (Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code
2010)
7-304. MANUFACTURE, STORAGE AND SALE OF FIREWORKS. (a) Except as
otherwise provided in this Article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation or partnership to manufacture or assemble fireworks within the city. It
shall also be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or partnership to store,
possess or offer for sale fireworks within the limits of the city.
(b) Except as otherwise provided, no entity may store fireworks within the
city without the express written approval of city. Any requests for storage must be
submitted in writing and investigated by the Department of Public Safety. The
results of the investigation by the Department of Public Safety shall be submitted
to the City Manager for his determination as to whether the request will be
granted.
(c) The sale and storage of approved fireworks within the city as
authorized under this Article shall be conducted and transacted only by licensed
persons and entities under such regulations and at such times and places as
provided in this Article.
(d) The sale of approved fireworks will be permitted on the dates of June
27 through July 4 of each year between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. by
licensed persons or entities. Any persons, partnership, corporation or other entity
may apply to the City Clerk for a license to self fireworks by filing an application
stating the name of the applicant, the proposed locations of sale and attaching to
the application written approval for the use of the proposed site and a certificate
of insurance as required herein. Attached to the application shall be site plan
which shall consist of a drawing of the proposed location. Indicated on this
drawing shall be the property lines, and the proposed location of the sales site.
The distance between the property lines and the safes site shall be indicated. A
7-9
minimum of 25ft set back shall be maintained from the side property lines. Unless
said property falls within restrictions of locations of buildings specified under
General Requirements for Sale, Storage and Testing of Fireworks, Section 1,
Requirements for the Sale of Fireworks and where two adjacent properties exist,
both of which are properly zoned the minimum set back from said property line
shall be 75 feet. If upon inspection, the sales site is found to be different from
indicated on the site plan, the permit shall not be issued. All permits will be issued
in order received by the City of Augusta. The permit application and all required
documents will be returned to the City Clerk. Once received, the City Clerk shall
submit the application to the Director of Public Safety. The Director of Public
Safety or his/her designee will review the applications and the site plan for
compliance with this ordinance. The Director of Safety will submit a report to the
City Clerk with the recommendation to either approve or deny the application.
Before the actual sale of fireworks can commence, the Director of Public Safety or
his/her designee shall conduct an inspection of the sales site. This inspection
shall be conducted after all stock is in place and the site is ready for business.
Such license shall be issued to a specific person or entity at a specific site and
such license shall not be transferable. The fee for such license shall be
established from time to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of
Augusta, Kansas and must be submitted with the application by cashier’s check
or money order. Such license shall be available at the authorized site for
inspection at all times the sale of fireworks is being conducted.
(e) In addition to the license fee, any licensee will be required to make a
security deposit in the sum of Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) at
the time of the granting of the license to sell fireworks. The security deposit must
be in the form of a cashier’s check or money order. The security deposit will be
held by City until such time as the site used for the sale of fireworks can be
inspected to determine if the tent or other temporary structure and other material
and debris have been properly removed from the site. Should the licensee fail to
clean the site on or before July 10 or if any other act on the part of the licensee
causes expense to the City, then a deduction from the security deposit equaling
the expenditures of the City may be made by City and the balance, if any,
returned to licensee.
(f) The City Manager may from time-to-time, promulgate with approval of
the City Council certain regulations for operation and maintenance of the sites for
sale of fireworks. Such regulations shall be distributed with each license to sell
fireworks. These regulations shall be enforceable against all persons, employees
and agents of the licensee of each site for the sale of fireworks. Failure to follow
such regulations shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(g) Any fireworks that remain unused after the sale of fireworks shall be
immediately disposed of in a safe manner for the type of fireworks involved.
(Ord. 1804, Sec. 1; Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-305. SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS. The Department of Public Safety is authorized
to seize, take and remove any fireworks stored within the city without permit at the
expense of the person in possession of such fireworks. Any seized fireworks shall
be disposed of in a procedure provided by the State Fire Marshal. (Ord. 1773,
Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-10
7-306. INSURANCE. (a) Any person, firm, corporation or partnership applying for
a permit for a public display of fireworks must provide evidence or a certificate of
insurance in an amount not less than $500,000.00 currently in force to the City
Clerk along with the application for the permit. Failure to provide the certificate to
the City Clerk may result in a permit being denied. Any permits issued by the city
under this article will be subject to immediate revocation at any time it is
determined that insurance coverage is not in force as required above.
(b) All licensees for retail sales of approved fireworks shall furnish a copy
of or certificate of insurance in the amount of not less than $500,000.00 for the
payment of all damages which may result to persons or property caused by any
act or omission of licensee or its employees or agents regarding the retail sale of
fireworks in the city. Failure to provide the certificate of insurance upon request
by the City Clerk or City Manager may result in a license being terminated.
(Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-307. TERMINATION. (a) Whenever the city has issued a public display permit or
license to sell fireworks at retail under the provisions of this article and it is
determined by the Department of Public Safety that the permitted function is in
violation of this article or is operating in an unsafe manner, the Department of
Public Safety shall immediately report the violation to the City Manager who shall
determine whether to terminate the operations or permanently cancel the permit
or license involved.
(b) If a permit or license shall be terminated by the City Manager under
this section, the permittee or licensee shall have a right to appeal the decision to
terminate to the City Council for review. The City Council shall consider the
request for review at the next City Council meeting, whether regularly scheduled
or specially called. The City Council shall then decide by majority vote whether to
continue or terminate the permit or license in question. Upon review, the license
shall remain terminated or suspended until considered by the City Council.
(Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-308. EMERGENCY. At any time special circumstances exist including but not
limited to a state wide ban on burning and/or fireworks detonation or any other
circumstances which indicate the detonation of fireworks will create a public
hazard, the time, place and manner of detonation of fireworks may be altered or
suspended by the City Manager. (Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-309. EXCEPTIONS. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of fireworks by
railroads or other public transportation companies or agencies for signal or
illumination purposes. The sale or use of blank pistol cartridges for any
commercial, theater or entertainment, for signal or ceremonial purposes at athletic
or sporting contests or the use of fireworks or similar devices by military, law
enforcement or fire service agencies shall not constitute a violation of this article.
(Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-310. TESTING. The Department of Public Safety shall set up testing procedures
for use in determining whether certain fireworks allowed to be discharged within
the City of Augusta comply with requirements of this article and regulations
approved by the City Council. The results of such testing will be made known to
7-11
the City Manager who will in turn take appropriate action under the terms of this
article. (Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-311. PENALTIES. Any person, firm, corporation or partnership who violates the
provisions of this article may be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 nor more
than $1,000.00 for each occurrence. (Ord. 1773, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
7-12
ARTICLE 4. FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
7-401. FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION; RECOGNITION. The nonprofit
corporation known as "Firemen's Relief Association of Augusta, Kansas,"
organized and existing pursuant to K.S.A. 40-1702, et seq., as amended, is
hereby recognized and acknowledged by the governing body of the city to be a
validly organized and existing corporation under the laws of the State of Kansas.
(Code 1975, 15-401; Code 1991, 7-501)
7-402. PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS; MEMBERSHIP IN FIREMEN'S RELIEF
ASSOCIATION. All officers of the department of public safety, either
commissioned or volunteer, shall be members of the Augusta Firemen's Relief
Association. (Code 1975, 15-106; Code 1991, 7-114; Code 2010)
7-13
ARTICLE 5. PROPERTY IN SAFETY DEPARTMENT CUSTODY
7-501. DESIGNATION OF PROPERTY. This article relates to and embraces all
lost, stolen, strayed, abandoned, unclaimed or confiscated property which of itself
is not contraband or the possession of which is not unlawful, which is now or
which may hereafter come into the possession of the authorized officers of the
city; provided however, that the property mentioned herein shall not include motor
vehicles which shall be sold otherwise by the laws of the State of Kansas, and
any property held as legal evidence or that shall be illegal or any property which
shall be illegal to possess. (Ord. 1334, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 7-601)
7-502. CUSTODY. All personal property of the character described in section 7-
501 shall be delivered to the custody of the director of safety who shall retain
possession of such property for a period of not less than 90 days, except as
elsewhere herein provided, unless the owner or person entitled to the possession
of such property shall sooner claim such property and establish his or her
ownership and right to possession thereof. (Ord. 1334, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 7-
602)
7-503. NOTICE OF INTENT TO SELL; REQUIREMENTS AS TO SALE. If the
owner or person entitled to the possession of property as described in this article,
shall fail to claim such property within 90 days, then at such time or at any time
thereafter, the director of safety may cause a notice to be published in the official
city paper, setting forth a detailed description of such property and stating that
unless the same be claimed within 10 days, such property will be sold at public
auction to the highest bidder therefore for cash, and stating the time and place of
such sale; provided, that if such property be livestock, the value of which is less
than the cost of keeping the same for the periods described in this section such
property shall be advertised immediately and sold after a three days' notice given
as herein provided. If the property shall be perishable, then the same shall be
sold without the procedure aforesaid in any feasible manner. (Ord. 1334, Sec. 3;
Code 1991, 7-603)
7-504. FAILURE OF OWNER TO CLAIM BEFORE SALE; SALE TO HIGHEST
BIDDER, ETC. If the owner or person entitled to the possession of property
advertised under the preceding section shall fail to claim the same at any time
before the date of such sale, then it shall be sold to the highest bidder therefor
cash, and the purchaser thereof shall take a good and perfect title thereto. (Ord.
1334, Sec. 4; Code 1991, 7-604)
7-505. COSTS TO BE PAID BY OWNER IF PROPERTY CLAIMED AFTER
PUBLICATION. If the owner of person entitled to the possession of property
contemplated by this article shall claim the same after the publication of the same
as provided in section 7-503, he or she shall pay the actual cost of publication,
together with the actual cost of keeping such property during its custody. (Ord.
1334, Sec. 5; Code 1991, 7-605)
7-506. DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE. Any funds received from the sale
of any property as provided in this article, less the cost of publication and keeping
7-14
the same for sale and the costs of such sale, shall be deposited with the city
treasurer and shall be kept in a separate fund, during which time the former
owner of the property may claim the fund received from the sale of such property,
less the deductions provided in this article. If such fund be not claimed within the
period of six months such sum shall be paid to the general fund of the city. (Ord.
1334, Sec. 6; Code 1991, 7-606)
7-507. DISCRETIONARY SALE. If the director of public safety shall ascertain that
the property as provided in this article shall not be of sufficient value to justify a
sale as provided herein, he or she shall hold such property until a sale shall be
justified. If the property shall be of little or no value then the same may be
destroyed as refuse with a record being kept as to such disposal. Provided that
property shall not be given to any person unless the same shall have been
approved by the governing body of the city. (Ord. 1334, Sec. 7; Code 1991, 7-
607)
7-508. REGULATIONS. The Department of Public Safety is required to establish
regulations detailing the collection, storage, and inventory of property which may
come under its control by any manner. (Code 2010)
7-509. DISPOSITION. Any property which has been acquired or turned over to the
Department of Public Safety and has been classified in accordance with
procedures existing in the Department of Public Safety as unclaimed or for which
the proper owner cannot be ascertained shall be kept for a minimum of 90 days.
After a period of 90 days, such property, except as provided in section 7-503,
shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder and the proceeds after
expenses shall be paid to the city general fund. (Code 2010)
7-510. SAME; EXEMPT PROPERTY. The following classes of property shall be
considered exceptions to section 7-502 and shall be dealt with in the following
manner:
(a) Cash money shall be turned over to the city general fund unless it shall
be determined to have collector's value, in which case it shall be auctioned
according to the provisions in section 7-502.
(b) Firearms which are available for disposition may be dealt with in the
following manner:
(1) If compatible with law enforcement usage, they may be turned
over to the department of public safety inventory.
(2) They may be sold to a firearms dealer who maintains the
appropriate federal firearms license.
(3) They may be destroyed.
(4) In no case shall firearms be sold at public auction.
(c) Other weapons such as knives, etc., which are deemed to have a
legitimate value may be sold at auction, however, homemade weapons or
weapons of a contraband nature shall be destroyed.
(d) Any items determined to be contraband such as explosives, narcotics,
etc., shall be destroyed.
7-15
(e) Items of a pharmaceutical nature, which, while not contraband when
properly dispensed, or which are of an over-the-counter-variety, shall be
destroyed.
(f) Foodstuffs, if sealed and undamaged may be turned over to any
appropriate social service agency or destroyed, but shall not be auctioned.
(g) Alcohol products such as beer, wine, whiskey, etc., shall be destroyed.
(h) Items with a value in excess of $500 may be sold after advertising said
item in a general circulation newspaper on at least two occasions. Such sales
shall be by closed bid.
(Code 2010)
7-511. CLAIMING PROPERTY. The Department of Public Safety shall be required
to make reasonable attempts to locate the owner of any property in storage.
However, the responsibility for claiming and identifying any such property shall
rest solely with the owner. (Code 2010)
7-512. PROOF OF OWNERSHIP. Claimants to any property in the Department of
Public Safety’s storage shall be required to present reasonable proof of
ownership and no property shall be released unless such reasonable proof is
presented. (Code 2010)
7-513. AUCTION. At such time as it has been determined that an auction is
necessary to dispose of unclaimed property, an inventory listing all property to be
disposed of shall be prepared and kept on file in the department of public safety.
Notice of an auction shall be published at least twice in a general circulation
newspaper prior to the date of the auction. The notice shall specify the date, time
and place of the auction and shall also notify prospective buyers or potential
claimants that a list of items to be auctioned is available at the department of
public safety and any claims on property must be made prior to the start of the
auction. (Code 2010)
7-16
ARTICLE 6. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY FEES
7-601. FEE FOR RESPONSES TO PARTY. Definitions. As used in this article, the
following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates that a different meaning is intended:
Host: The person who owns or is in possession of the property where the
party, gathering or event takes place, or the person in charge of the premises, or
the person who organized the event. If the host is a minor, then the parents or
guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the fee incurred for
police services.
Party, Gathering or Event: An event involving a group of persons who have
assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity.
Services Fee: The cost to the city of any special security assignment,
including, but not limited to, salaries of safety officers while responding to or
remaining at the party, gathering or event, the pro rata cost of equipment, the cost
of repairing city equipment and property, the cost of any medical treatment of
injured police officers, and the cost of reasonable attorney fees.
Special Security Assignment: The assignment of public safety officers,
services and equipment during a second or subsequent response to the party,
gathering or event after the delivery of a written notice to the host that a fee may
be imposed for costs incurred by the city for any subsequent safety response.
(Code 1991, 7-701)
7-602. INITIAL RESPONSES TO PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS. When
any safety officer responds to any party, gathering or event, and that public safety
officer determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or
general welfare, the safety officer shall issue a written notice to the host or hosts
that a subsequent response to that same location or address within 24 hours of
the first response shall be deemed a special security assignment rendered to
provide security and order on behalf of the party, gathering or event and that the
host may be liable for a safety services fee as defined in this article. (Code 1991,
7-702)
7-603. SUBSEQUENT RESPONSES TO PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS;
LIABILITY. If, after a written notice is issued pursuant to section 7-602, a
subsequent safety response or responses is necessary to the same location or
address within 24 hours of the first response, such response or responses shall
be deemed a special security assignment. Persons previously warned shall be
jointly and severally liable for a safety services fee as defined in this article.
The amount of the fee shall be a debt owned to the city by the person or
person warned, and if he or she is a minor, his or her parents or guardians shall
be jointly and severally liable for the debt. (Code 1991, 7-703)
7-604. COST; COLLECTION. The director of public safety shall notify the city
treasurer in writing of the performance of a special security assignment, of the
name and address of the responsible person or persons, the date and time of the
incident, the services performed, the costs and such other information as may be
required. The city treasurer shall thereafter cause appropriate billings to be
made. (Code 1991, 7-704)
8-1
CHAPTER VIII. HEALTH AND WELFARE
Article 1. Junked Motor Vehicles on Private Property
Article 2. Weeds
Article 3. Fair Housing
Article 4. Insurance Proceeds Fund
Article 5. Release of Hazardous Materials
___________________
ARTICLE 1. JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
8-101. FINDINGS OF GOVERNING BODY. The governing body finds that junked,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned vehicles affect the health, safety
and general welfare of citizens of the city because they:
(a) Serve as a breeding ground for flies, mosquitoes, rats and other insects
and rodents;
(b) Are a danger to persons, particularly children, because of broken glass,
sharp metal protrusions, insecure mounting on blocks, jacks or other supports;
(c) Are a ready source of fire and explosion;
(d) Encourage pilfering and theft;
(e) Constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are located;
(f) Constitute a fire hazard because they frequently block access for fire
equipment to adjacent buildings and structures.
(Code 1991)
8-102. DEFINITIONS. As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
(a) Inoperable - means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or
partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the function or
purpose for which it was originally constructed;
(b) Vehicle - means, without limitation, any automobile, truck, tractor or
motorcycle which as originally built contained an engine, regardless of whether it
contains an engine at any other time.
(Code 1991)
8-103. NUISANCES UNLAWFUL; DEFINED; EXCEPTIONS. It shall be unlawful
for any person to maintain or permit any motor vehicle nuisance within the city.
(a) A motor vehicle nuisance is any motor vehicle which is not currently
registered or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149 inclusive, as amended; or
parked in violation of city ordinance; or incapable of moving under its own power;
or in a junked, wrecked or inoperable condition. Any one of the following
conditions shall raise the presumption that a vehicle is junked, wrecked or
inoperable;
(1) Absence of a current registration plate upon the vehicle;
(2) Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, or
other supports;
8-2
(3) Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the
lawful operation of the vehicle upon street or highway.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) Any motor vehicle which is enclosed in a garage or other
building;
(2) To the parking or storage of a vehicle inoperable for a period of
30 consecutive days or less; or
(3) To any person conducting a business enterprise in compliance
with existing zoning regulations or who places such vehicles behind
screening of sufficient size, strength and density to screen such vehicles
from the view of the public and to prohibit ready access to stored vehicles by
children. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
authorize the maintenance of a public nuisance.
(Code 1991)
8-104. PUBLIC OFFICER. The city manager shall designate a public officer to be
charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. (Code 1991)
8-105. COMPLAINTS; INQUIRY AND INSPECTION. The public officer shall make
inquiry and inspection of premises upon receiving a complaint or complaints in
writing signed by two or more persons stating that a nuisance exists and
describing the same and where located or is informed that a nuisance may exist by
the board of health, director of public safety or the fire chief. The public officer
may make such inquiry and inspection when he or she observes conditions which
appear to constitute a nuisance. Upon making any inquiry and inspection the
public officer shall make a written report of findings. (Code 1991)
8-106. RIGHT OF ENTRY. The public officer has the right of access and entry
upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inquiry and
inspection to determine if a nuisance exists, to the extent allowable by law. (Code
1991)
8-107. ORDER OF VIOLATION. (a) The governing body shall serve upon the
owner, any agent of the owner of the property or any other person, corporation,
partnership or association found by the public officer to be in violation of section 8-
303 an order stating the violation. The order shall be served on the owner or
agent of such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by
mailing the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the owner.
(b) If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to
accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent
pursuant to this section during the preceding twenty-four month period, the
governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders
to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by
such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting
notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone
communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a
8-3
nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone
communication or first class mail. (K.S.A. 12-1617e; Code 2010)
8-108. SAME; CONTENTS. The order shall state the condition(s) which is (are) in
violation of section 8-303. The notice shall also inform the person, corporation,
partnership or association that
(a) He, she or they shall have 10 days from receipt of the order to abate the
condition(s) in violation of section 8-303; or
(b) He, she or they have 10 days from receipt of the order to request a
hearing before the governing body or its designated representative of the matter
as provided by section 8-312;
(c) Failure to abate the condition(s) or to request a hearing within the time
allowed may result in prosecution as provided by section 8-309 and/or abatement
of the condition(s) by the city as provided by section 8-310.
(Code 1991)
8-109. FAILURE TO COMPLY; PENALTY. Should the person fail to comply with
the notice to abate the nuisance or request a hearing, the public officer may file a
complaint in the municipal court of the city against such person and upon
conviction of any violation of provisions of section 8-303, be fined in an amount not
to exceed $100.00 or be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days or be both fined and
imprisoned. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues after
notice has been served shall constitute an additional or separate offense. (Code
1991)
8-110. ABATEMENT. In addition to, or as an alternative to prosecution as provided
in section 8-309, the public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in
the following manner. If a person to whom an order has been sent pursuant to
section 8-307 has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation or
requested a hearing before the governing body within the time period specified in
section 8-308, the public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for
adoption authorizing the public officer or other agents of the city to abate the
conditions causing the violation at the end of 10 days after passage of the
resolution.
The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the city shall
be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located
as provided in section 8-313. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the
person in violation in one of the following ways:
(a) Personal service upon the person in violation;
(b) Service by certified mail, return receipt requested; or
(c) In the event the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to
that effect shall be made by the public officer and filed with the city clerk, and the
serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once each week for
two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the
resolution on the premises where such condition exists.
(d) If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to
accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent
pursuant to this section during the preceding twenty-four month period, the
8-4
governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders
to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by
such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting
notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone
communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a
nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone
communication or first class mail. (Code 2010)
8-111. DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE; RECOVERY OF VEHICLE. (a) Disposition of
any motor vehicle removed and abated from private property pursuant to this
article shall be as provided by K.S.A. Supp. 8-1102, as amended.
(b) Any person attempting to recover a motor vehicle impounded as
provided in this article, shall show proof of valid registration and ownership of the
motor vehicle before the motor vehicle shall be released. In addition, the person
desiring the release of the motor vehicle shall pay all reasonable costs associated
with the impoundment of the motor vehicle, including transportation and storage
fees, prior to the release of the motor vehicle.
(Code 2010)
8-112. HEARING. If a hearing is requested within the 10 day period as provided in
section 8-308, such request shall be made in writing to the governing body.
Failure to make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the
person's right to contest the findings of the public officer. The hearing shall be
held by the governing body or its designated representative as soon as possible
after the filing of the request therefore, and the person shall be advised by the city
of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance thereof. At any
such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the person and the
city may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and
proper by the governing body or its designated representative. The hearing need
not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Upon conclusion of
the hearing, the findings of the governing body or its designated representative
shall be prepared in resolution form, adopted by the governing body, and the
resolution shall be served upon the person in the matter provided in section 8-310.
(Code 1991)
8-113. COSTS ASSESSED. If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to
section 8-310, the city shall give notice to the owner or his or her agent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal
incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due within 30
days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the cost of
providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The notice shall
also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not paid within the 30-day
period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be collected in the manner
provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as
special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel of land on which the
nuisance was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes,
shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the
same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be
collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are
8-5
collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special
assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments
thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest has been paid in full.
(Code 2010)
8-6
ARTICLE 2. WEEDS
8-201. WEEDS TO BE REMOVED. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent,
lessee, tenant, or other person occupying or having charge or control of any
premises to permit weeds to remain upon said premises or any area between the
property lines of said premises and the center line of any adjacent street or alley,
including but not specifically limited to sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements,
rights-of-way and all other areas, public or private. All weeds as hereinafter
defined are hereby declared a nuisance and are subject to abatement as
hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 1751, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-202. DEFINITIONS. (a) Calendar Year - as used herein, means that period of
time beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the same year.
(b) Weeds - as used herein, means any of the following:
(1) Brush and woody vines shall be classified as weeds;
(2) Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large
growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved
property;
(3) Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy
nature;
(4) Weeds which are located in an area which harbors rats, insects,
animals, reptiles, or any other creature which either may or does constitute a
menace to health, public safety or welfare;
(5) Weeds and indigenous grasses on or about residential property
which, because of its height, has a blighting influence on the neighborhood.
Any such weeds and indigenous grasses shall be presumed to be blighthg if
they exceed 12 inches in height.
(Ord. 1751, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-203. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. (a) The City Manager shall
designate a public officer to be charged with the administration and enforcement of
this article. The officer or an authorized assistant shall notify in writing the owner,
occupant or agent in charge of any premises in the city up on which weeds exist in
violation of this article, by mail or by personal service, one per calendar year. Such
notice shall include the following:
(1) That the owner, occupant or agent in charge of property is in
violation of the city weed control law.
(2) That the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property is
ordered to cut the weeds within 10 days of the receipt of notice.
(3) That the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property may
request a hearing before the Governing Body or it*s designated
representative within five days of the receipt of notice.
(4) That if the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property
does not cut the weeds, the city or it*s authorized agent will cut the weeds
and assess the cost of the cutting, including a reasonable administrative fee,
against the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property.
8-7
(5) That the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property will
be given an opportunity to pay the assessment, and if it is not paid, it will be
added to the property tax as a special assessment.
(6) That no further notice shall be given prior to removal of weeds
during the current calendar year.
(7) That the public officer should be contacted if there are any
questions regarding the order.
(b) If there is a change in the record owner of title to property subsequent to
the giving of notice pursuant to this subsection, the city may not recover any costs
or levy an assessment for costs incurred by the cutting or destruction of weeds on
such property unless the new record owner of title to such property is provided
notice as required by this section.
(Ord. 1751, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-204. ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS. (a) Upon the expiration of 10
days after receipt of the notice required by Section 8-203, and in the event that the
owner, occupant or agent in charge of the premises shall neglect or fail to comply
with the requirements of Section 8-201, the public officer or an authorized
assistant shall cause to be cut, destroyed and/or removed all such weeds and
abate the nuisance created thereby at any time during the current calendar year.
(b) The public officer or an authorized assistant shall give notice to the
owner, occupant or agent in charge of the premises by restricted mail of the costs
of abatement of the nuisance. The notice shall state that payment of the costs is
due and payable within 30 days following receipt of the notice.
(c) If the cost of removal or abatement remain unpaid after 30 days
following receipt of notice, a record of the costs of cutting and destruction and/or
removal shall be certified to the City Clerk who shall cause such costs to be
assessed against the particular lot or piece of land on which such weeds were so
removed, and against such lots or pieces of land in front of or abutting on such
street or alley on which such weeds were so removed. The City Clerk shall certify
the assessment to the County Clerk at the time other special assessments are
certified for spreading on the tax rolls of the county.
(Ord. 1751, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-205. RIGHT OF ENTRY. The public officer, and the public officer*s authorized
assistants, employees, contracting agents or other representatives are hereby
expressly authorized to enter up on private property at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of cutting, destroying and/or removing such weeds in a manner not
inconsistent with this article, to the extent allowable by law. (Ord. 1751, Sec. 1;
Code 2010)
8-206. UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with or to attempt to prevent the public officer or the public officer*s
authorized representative from entering upon any such lot or piece of ground or
from proceeding with such cuffing and destruction. Such interference shall
constitute an ordinance violation. (Ord. 1751, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-8
8-207. NOXIOUS WEEDS. (a) Nothing in this article shall affect or impair the
rights of the city under the provisions of K.S.A. 2-1302, et. seq, relating to the
control and eradication of certain noxious weeds.
(b) For the purpose of this section, the term noxious weeds shall mean
kudzu (Pueraria lobata), field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), Russian
kuapweed (Centaurea picns), hoary cress (Lepidium draba), Canada thistle
(Cirsiuin arvense), quackgrass (Agropyron rep ens), leafy spurge (Euphorbia
esula), burragweed (Franseria tomentosa and discolor), pignut (hoiffinannseggia
densifiora), musk (nodding), thistle (Carduus nutans L.), and Johnson grass
(Sorghum halepense).
(Ord. 1751, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-9
ARTICLE 3. FAIR HOUSING
8-301. POLICY. The governing body of the city hereby declares it to be the public
policy of the city to eliminate discrimination and safeguard the right of any person
to sell, purchase, lease, rent, finance or obtain funding of real property without
regard to race, color, sex, religion, national origin or ancestry and hereby adopts
all state and federal laws pertaining to fair housing within the city limits of Augusta,
KS. (Ord. 1463, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-10
ARTICLE 4. INSURANCE PROCEEDS FUND
8-401. SCOPE AND APPLICATION. The city is hereby authorized to utilize the
procedures established by K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., whereby no insurance
company shall pay a claim of a named insured for loss or damage to any building
or other structure located within the city, arising out of any fire, explosion, or
windstorm, where the amount recoverable for the loss or damage to the building or
other structure under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the
policy covering such building or other insured structure, unless there is compliance
with the procedures set out in this article. (Code 1991, 7-401; Code 2010)
8-402. LIEN CREATED. The governing body of the city hereby creates a lien in
favor of the city on the proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered
claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure located
within the city, caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or windstorm, where
the amount recoverable for all the loss or damage to the building or other structure
under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the policy(s)
covering such building or other insured structure. The lien arises upon any unpaid
tax, special ad valorem levy, or any other charge imposed upon real property by or
on behalf of the city which is an encumbrance on real property, whether or not
evidenced by written instrument, or such tax, levy, assessment, expense or other
charge that has remained undischarged for at least one year prior to the filing of a
proof of loss. (Code 1991, 7-402; Code 2010)
8-403. SAME; ENCUMBRANCES. Prior to final settlement on any claim covered
by section 8-402, the insurer or insurers shall contact the county treasurer, Butler
County, Kansas, to determine whether any such encumbrances are presently in
existence. If the same are found to exist, the insurer or insurers shall execute and
transmit in an amount equal to that owing under the encumbrances a draft payable
to the county treasurer, Butler County, Kansas. (Code 1991, 7-403)
8-404. SAME; PRO RATA BASIS. Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata
basis by all insurance companies insuring the building or other structure. (Code
1991, 7-404)
8-405. PROCEDURE. (a) When final settlement on a covered claim has been
agreed to or arrived at between the named insured or insureds and the company
or companies, and the final settlement exceeds 75 percent of the face value of the
policy covering any building or other insured structure, and when all amounts due
the holder of a first real estate mortgage against the building or other structure,
pursuant to the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto, shall have been
paid, the insurance company or companies shall execute a draft payable to the city
treasurer in an amount equal to the sum of 15 percent of the covered claim
payment, unless the chief building inspector of the city has issued a certificate to
the insurance company or companies that the insured has removed the damaged
building or other structure, as well as all associated debris, or repaired, rebuilt, or
otherwise made the premises safe and secure.
8-11
(b) Such transfer of funds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies
insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the city shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
(c) Upon the transfer of the funds as required by subsection (a) of this
section, the insurance company shall provide the city with the name and address
of the named insured or insureds, the total insurance coverage applicable to said
building or other structure, and the amount of the final settlement agreed to or
arrived at between the insurance company or companies and the insured or
insureds, whereupon the city inspector shall contact the named insured or
insureds by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying them that said
insurance proceeds have been received by the city and apprise them of the
procedures to be followed under this article.
(Code 1991, 7-405)
8-406. FUND CREATED; DEPOSIT OF MONEYS. The city treasurer is hereby
authorized and shall create a fund to be known as the "Insurance Proceeds Fund."
All moneys received by the city treasurer as provided for by this article shall be
placed in said fund and deposited in an interest-bearing account. (Code 1991, 7-
406)
8-407. CITY INSPECTOR; INVESTIGATION, REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE.
(a) Upon receipt of moneys as provided for by this article, the city treasurer
shall immediately notify the city inspector of said receipt, and transmit all
documentation received from the insurance company or companies to the city
inspector.
(b) Within 20 days of the receipt of said moneys, the city inspector shall
determine, after prior investigation, whether the city shall instigate proceedings
under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended.
(c) Prior to the expiration of the 20 days established by subsection (b) of
this section, the city inspector shall notify the city treasurer whether he or she
intends to initiate proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended.
(d) If the city inspector has determined that proceedings under K.S.A. 12-
1750 et seq., as amended shall be initiated, he or she will do so immediately but
no later than 30 days after receipt of the moneys by the city treasurer.
(e) Upon notification to the city treasurer by the city inspector that no
proceedings shall be initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, the city
treasurer shall return all such moneys received, plus accrued interest, to the
insured or insureds as identified in the communication from the insurance
company or companies. Such return shall be accomplished within 30 days of the
receipt of the moneys from the insurance company or companies.
(Code 1991, 7-407; Code 2010)
8-408. REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE; EXCESS MONEYS. If the city inspector has
proceeded under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, all
moneys in excess of that which is ultimately necessary to comply with the
provisions for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, if any,
shall be paid to the insured. (Code 1991, 7-408)
8-12
8-409. SAME; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS. If the city inspector, with regard to a
building or other structure damaged by fire, explosion, or windstorm, determines
that it is necessary to act under K.S.A. 12-1756, any proceeds received by the city
treasurer under the authority of section 8-805(a) relating to that building or other
structure shall be used to reimburse the city for any expenses incurred by the city
in proceeding under K.S.A. 12-1756. Upon reimbursement from the insurance
proceeds, the city inspector shall immediately effect the release of the lien
resulting therefrom. Should the expenses incurred by the city exceed the
insurance proceeds paid over to the city treasurer under section 8-805(a), the chief
building inspector shall publish a new lien as authorized by K.S.A. 12-1756, in an
amount equal to such excess expenses incurred. (Code 1991, 7-409)
8-410. EFFECT UPON INSURANCE POLICIES. This article shall not make the
city a party to any insurance contract, nor is the insurer liable to any party for any
amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy.
(Code 1991, 7-410)
8-411. INSURERS; LIABILITY. Insurers complying with this article or attempting in
good faith to comply with this article shall be immune from civil and criminal liability
and such action shall not be deemed in violation of K.S.A. 40-2404 and any
amendments thereto, including withholding payment of any insurance proceeds
pursuant to this article, or releasing or disclosing any information pursuant to this
article. (Code 1991, 7-411)
8-13
ARTICLE 5. RELEASE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
8-501. DEFINITIONS. (a) Emergency action - shall mean all exigent activities
conducted in order to prevent or mitigate harm to the public health and safety and
the environment from a release or threatened release of any material into or upon
land, water or air.
(b) Person - shall include any individual, corporation, association,
partnership, firm, trustee, legal representative, or any combination thereof.
(c) Recoverable expenses - shall include those expenses of the City of
Augusta that are reasonable, necessary and allocable to an emergency action.
Recoverable expenses shall not include normal budgeted expenditures that are
incurred in the course of providing what are traditionally city services and
responsibilities, such as routine firefighting protection. Expenses allowable for
recovery may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Disposable materials and supplies consumed and expended
specifically for the purpose of the emergency action.
(2) Compensation of employees for the time and efforts devoted
specifically to the emergency action.
(3) Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the
emergency action (e.g., protective equipment or clothing, scientific and
technical equipment).
(4) Replacement costs for equipment owned by the City that is
contaminated beyond reuse or repair, if the equipment was a total loss and
the loss occurred during the emergency action (e.g., self-contained
breathing apparatus irretrievably contaminated during the response).
(5) Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the
response.
(6) Special technical services specifically required for the response
(e.g., costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts or
specialists not otherwise provided for by the City.
(7) Other special services specifically required for the emergency
action.
(8) Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the
emergency action.
(9) Any costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of the released
material.
(10) Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment
procured for a specific evacuation of persons or property.
(11) Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities.
(12) Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the
emergency action, including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this
article.
(d) Release - shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into or
upon land, water or air, of any material which the city determines may be harmful
to the public health and welfare or to the environment.
8-14
(e) Threatened release - shall mean any imminent or impending event
potentially causing but not resulting in a release, but causing the City to undertake
an emergency action.
(Ord. 1709, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-502. STRICT LIABILITY. Any person causing or responsible for a release or
threatened release resulting in an emergency action shall be strictly liable to the
City for the recoverable expenses resulting from the emergency action. There shall
be a rebuttable presumption that any person owning or controlling property
causing a release or threatened release is responsible for such release or
threatened release. (Ord. 1709, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
8-503. RECOVERY OF EXPENSES. (a) Itemization of Recoverable Expenses.
City personnel and departments involved in an emergency action shall keep an
itemized record of recoverable expenses resulting from an emergency action.
Promptly after completion of an emergency action, the appropriate city department
shall certify those expenses to the city manager.
(b) Submission of Claim. The city shall submit a written itemized claim for
the total expenses incurred by the City for the emergency action to the responsible
person and a written notice that unless the amounts are paid in full within 30 days
after the date of the mailing of the claim and notice, the City will file a civil action
seeking recovery for the stated amount.
(c) Lien on Property. The City may cause a lien in the amount of the
recoverable expenses to be placed on any real property located within the city
owned by the person causing or responsible for the emergency action.
(d) Civil Suit. The City may bring a civil action for recovery of the
recoverable expenses against any and all persons causing or responsible for the
emergency action.
(Ord. 1709, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
9-1
CHAPTER IX. MUNICIPAL COURT
Article 1. General Provisions
____________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-101. MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a
municipal court for the City of Augusta, Kansas. The municipal court shall have
jurisdiction to hear and determine cases involving violations of the ordinances of
the city. (Code 1975, 11-101; Code 1991)
9-102. SAME; PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE. The Kansas code of procedure for
municipal courts, as set forth in K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq. and all acts amendatory or
supplemental thereto shall govern the practice and procedure in all cases in the
municipal court. (Code 1975, 11-102; Code 1991)
9-103. TIME AND PLACE OF SESSIONS. Municipal court shall be held at a
location within the city limits on such days and at such hours as the municipal
judge designates. (Code 1975, 11-103; Code 1991)
9-104. MUNICIPAL JUDGE; APPOINTMENT. The municipal court shall be presided
over by a municipal judge. The city manager shall appoint the judge of the
municipal court. (Code 1991)
9-105. SAME; ABSENCE; VACANCY; PRO TEM. In the event the municipal judge
is temporarily unable to preside due to absence, illness or disqualification, the
municipal judge shall designate an attorney or other qualified person to act as
judge pro tempore. In the event the municipal judge fails to appoint a judge pro
tempore, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as the municipal
judge is selected. The judge pro tempore shall receive compensation as shall be
approved by the city manager, payable in the same manner as the compensation
of the regular municipal judge.
In the event a vacancy shall occur in the office of municipal judge, a
successor shall be appointed in the same manner as the municipal judge was
appointed.
(K.S.A. 12-4107; Code 1991; Code 2010)
9-106. SAME; POWERS AND DUTIES. The municipal judge shall have such
powers and duties as set forth in the Kansas code of procedure for municipal
courts (K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq.) and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto.
(Code 1991)
9-107. COURT CLERK. There is hereby established the office of the clerk of the
municipal court of the City of Augusta, Kansas. The duties of the office shall be
9-2
those prescribed by the Code for Municipal Courts set forth in Chapter 12, Article
41 of the Kansas Statutes, and shall include the following duties:
(a) The clerk of the municipal court shall issue all process of the court,
administer oaths, file and preserve all papers, docket cases and set same for trial
and shall perform such further acts as may be necessary to carry out the duties
and responsibilities of the court. The clerk shall receive, account for and pay to
the city treasurer monthly all fines and bonds paid into the court. The clerk shall
make reports to the state judicial administrator and furnish the information when
requested by him, her or a departmental justice on such forms furnished by the
judicial administrator, and approved by the supreme court.
(b) The clerk of the municipal court shall within 10 days after selection and
before entering upon the duties of office, execute to the city such bond as the
governing body may require, which shall be approved by the governing body, and
file in the office of the city clerk, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties required of him or her by law, and for the faithful application and payment of
all moneys that may come into his or her hands in the execution of the duties of
the office. The city shall pay the cost of such bond.
(K.S.A. Supp. 12-4108; Code 1991)
9-108. PAYMENT OF FINE. Where a municipal court judgment against any person
results in a fine and/or court costs only, the same shall be satisfied by paying the
amount of such fine and/or court costs to the municipal court immediately on the
rendition of judgment, or at such time as the municipal judge shall determine.
(Code 1991)
9-109. SAME; FAILURE TO PAY SEPARATE VIOLATION. It shall be unlawful for
any person to willfully fail to pay any lawfully imposed fine for a violation of any law
of the city within the time authorized by the court and without lawful excuse having
been presented to the court on or before the date the fine is due. Such conduct
constitutes a violation of this article, regardless of the full payment of the fine after
such time. (Code 1991)
9-110. FAILURE TO APPEAR. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person charged with
violation of any law of the city to fail to appear before the municipal court when so
scheduled to appear, unless lawful excuse for absence is presented to the court
on or before the time and date scheduled for appearance.
(b) For the purpose of subsection (a), failure to appear shall include willfully
incurring a forfeiture of an appearance bond and failure to surrender oneself within
30 days following the date of such forfeiture by one who is charged with a violation
of the laws of the city and has been released on bond for appearance before the
municipal court for trial or other proceeding prior to conviction, or willfully incurring
a forfeiture of an appearance bond and failing to surrender oneself within 30 days
after his or her conviction of a violation of the laws of the city has become final by
one who has been released on an appearance bond by any court of this state.
(c) Any person who is released upon his or her own recognizance, without
surety, or who fails to appear in response to a summons, notice to appear, or
traffic citation duly served upon him or her personally shall be deemed a person
released on bond for appearance within the meaning of subsection (b) of this
section.
9-3
(d) Failure to appear, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by
incarceration for up to 30 days and/or a fine of up to $250.00. (Code 1991)
9-111. COURT COSTS; WITNESS AND MILEAGE FEES. (a) The judge of the
municipal court of the city shall assess as costs of the case the sum of $30.00 for
each case that results in a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt by the Court; except
that any parking violation or adult seat belt violation, which is an uncontested, or is
not required for a court appearance by the Judge in the Municipal Court, shall not
be assessed court costs. These costs are to be used to defray the expenses
incurred in the operation of the Municipal Court and all other fees or costs
mandated by the State of Kansas or any agency thereof.
(b) All witnesses compelled to appear in the municipal court of the city by
subpoena or by order of the court, shall be entitled to a witness fee of $10.00 per
day or any part thereof and mileage at the rate used by the State of Kansas for
every mile driven over 10 miles. All such fees shall be paid by the party calling the
witness except that if the defendant is found not guilty, all such fees and mileage
shall be paid by the city.
(Ord. 1839, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
10-1
CHAPTER X. (RESERVED)
____________________
11-1
CHAPTER XI. PUBLIC OFFENSES
Article 1. Uniform Offense Code
Article 2. Local Regulations
Article 3. Mob Action
Article 4. Controlled Substances
_________________________
ARTICLE 1. UNIFORM OFFENSE CODE
11-101. INCORPORATING UNIFORM PUBLIC OFFENSE CODE. There is hereby
incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating public offenses within the
corporate limits of the City of Augusta, Kansas, the code known as the "Uniform
Public Offense Code," Edition of 2008, prepared and published in book form by the
League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas, save and except such articles,
sections, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed.
No fewer than three copies of said Uniform Public Offense Code shall be marked
or stamped "Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1970," with all sections or
portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any
such omission or change and to which shall be attached a copy of this section, and
filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all
reasonable hours. (Ord. 1970; Code 2008)
11-102. SAME; AMENDMENT. The following sections of the Uniform Public Offense
Code are hereby deleted in their entirety: 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 6.19, 6.20, 11.8, and 11.9.
(Code 1991, 10-103, Ord. 1970; Code 2010)
11-103. SAME; AMENDMENT. Section 6.8 of the 2008 Uniform Public offense Code
is hereby amended to read as follows: 6.8 LITTERING.
(a) Littering is intentionally or recklessly depositing or causing to be deposited
any object or substance into, upon or about:
(1) Any public street, highway, alley, road, right-of-way, park or other
public place, or any lake, stream, watercourse, or other body of water, except
by direction of some public officer or employee authorized by law to direct or
permit such acts; or
(2) Any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant of
such property.
(b) Littering is an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by confinement for a
term which shall be fixed by the court which shall not exceed six months, or a fine
of nor more then five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both such confinement and fine.
(c) In addition to the fines in subsection (b), a person convicted of littering
may be required to pick up litter for a time prescribed by and a place within the
jurisdiction of the court. (Ord. 1971; Code 2010)
11-2
ARTICLE 2. LOCAL REGULATIONS
11-201. FAILURE TO RETURN LIBRARY MATERIAL. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail to return any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript,
article, art print, photograph record, film or any other property borrowed from the
Augusta Public Library and owned by or consigned to the Augusta Public Library
after written notice to return the same within 30 days has been given to such
person, provided such notice shall be given after the expiration of the time which
by the rules of the library board the book or other library material may be kept.
(Ord. 1508, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 10-201)
11-202. SAME; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS. It shall be unlawful for any person to do
any one or more of the following acts:
(a) Give a fictitious name or address at the Augusta Public Library in order
to obtain possession or use of any book or other property of the Augusta Public
Library;
(b) To use a library card of another person without permission of such
owner to secure possession of any book or other property of the Augusta Public
Library;
(c) To conceal his or her identity or place of employment or residence in
any manner whatsoever in order to secure possession of any book, library card or
any other property of the Augusta Public Library.
(Ord. 1508, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 10-202)
11-203. SAME; NOTICE. The notice required in section 11-201 shall be given by the
librarian of the Augusta Public Library and shall be substantially as follows:
(a) The notice shall be in writing;
(b) Specifically state the violations alleged to exist or to have been
committed;
(c) Specify that the person to whom the notice is issued shall have 30 days
within which to correct the violations specified;
(d) Be addressed to and served upon the holder of the library card at the
most recent address as it appears from such person's application for a library card.
Such notice shall be deemed properly served upon such holder or owner of a
library card if a copy thereof is served upon him or her personally, or if a copy
thereof is sent by certified mail to the most recent address listed on his or her
application for a library card.
(Ord. 1508, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 10-203)
11-204. SAME; PRESUMPTION. In any prosecution charging a violation of section
11-201, proof that a particular individual was the registered holder of a particular
library card which was used to secure any book or any other library property, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the record owner or holder of
such library card was the person who utilized the same to secure a particular book
or any other property of the Augusta Public Library at the point where and at the
time when such violation is alleged to have occurred. The foregoing stated
presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed by section 11-203
above has been followed. (Ord. 1508, Sec. 4; Code 1991, 10-204)
11-3
11-205. SAME; PENALTY. Any violation of the provisions of sections 11-201:204
shall constitute a code violation and any person violating any of these provisions
shall upon conviction thereof be fined in a sum not less than $25.00 nor in excess
of $250.00. Each book, newspaper, magazine or other material borrowed from the
Augusta Public Library shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of sections
10-201:204 whether or not such material was checked out on the same day as any
other material borrowed from the library. (Ord. 1508, Sec. 5; Code 1991, 10-205)
11-206. CURFEW; HOURS DECLARED. It shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of 16 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public
places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots,
or other unsupervised places and including the driving of cars or being passengers
thereof, except as hereinafter provided, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. of the following day, except on Fridays and Saturdays when the hours shall
be 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. of the following day, from the 1st day of September
of each year to and including the 31st day of May of each year and between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the following day from the 1st day of
June to the 31st day of August inclusive, of each year. (Code 1975, 13-603; Code
1991, 10-206)
11-207. SAME; CURFEW; EXCEPTION. The provisions of sections 11-206:208 shall
not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor or where the minor is on an
emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or
other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is
going to, attending or returning from any school function, place of amusement or
other activity generally open to the public wherein minors are permitted to attend,
from the place by the shortest and most direct route to the place of residence of
the minor and when any school function, place of amusement or other activity, as
aforesaid, shall be located outside of the limits of the city the minor shall take the
most direct route from the point of entry of the city limits to the place of residence
of the minor. Sections 11-206:208 of this article shall not apply to any person,
regardless of age, who shall be a married person. (Code 1975, 13-604; Code
1991, 10-207)
11-208. RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT, OR PERSON HAVING CUSTODY. It shall
be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of a person under the age of 16 years to permit such minor to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except on Fridays and
Saturdays when the hours shall be 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. of the following
day; from the 1st day of September of each year to and including the 31st day of
May of each year and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day from the 1st day of June to the 31st day of August, inclusive, of each
year; provided, that the provisions of the exception noted in section 11-207 above,
shall apply. (Code 1975, 13-605; Code 1991, 10-208)
11-4
11-209. LOITERING IN STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES. Loitering in
streets and other public places is the loitering on the public streets, school
buildings or school grounds or any other public place or place accessible to the
public without being engaged in some business demanding the person's presence
upon such street, school building, school grounds or at such public place or place
accessible to the public or habitually lurking in a public place or a place accessible
to the public without being engaged in some legal business.
Loitering in streets and other public places is a Class C violation.
(Code 1975, 13-1012; Code 1991, 10-209)
11-210. LOUDSPEAKERS, SOUND AMPLIFIERS; PERMITS. It shall be unlawful for
any person to play, use or operate on the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the
city any instrument known as a loudspeaker or sound amplifier, without first
procuring a permit therefor from the city manager. Such permit shall be granted or
refused at the discretion of the city manager.
Violation of this section is a Class C violation.
(Code 1975, 13-1013; Code 1991, 10-210)
11-211. WINDOW PEEPING. It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon the
property owned or occupied by another in this city for the purpose of looking or
peeping into any window, door, skylight or other opening in a house, room or
building, or to loiter in a public street, alley, parking lot or other public place for the
purpose of wrongfully observing the actions of occupants of any such house, room
or building.
Violation of this section is a Class C violation.
(Code 1975, 13-1014; Code 1991, 10-211)
11-212. LOUD SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS PROHIBITED. (a) No person
operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or
driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system
from within the vehicles so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or
more feet from the vehicle.
(b) Sound amplification system - means any radio, tape player, compact
disc player, loud speaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of
sound.
(c) Plainly audible - means any sound produced by a sound amplification
system from within the vehicle, which clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet
or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon
direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass
reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked
or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway.
(d) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system, and that any of the following apply;
(1) The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
(2) The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
11-5
(3) The vehicle was owned and Operated by the City of Augusta, or
a gas, electric communications or refuse company;
(4) The system was used for the purpose of giving instructions,
directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons or
assemblages of persons in compliance with ordinances of the City of
Augusta;
(5) The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as
parades, fireworks, sports events, musical productions and other activities
which have the approval of the department of the City authorized to grant
such approval.
(Ord. 1636, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
11-213. SAME; PENALTY. Any person, individual, partnership, corporation or
association who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance is guilty of an
ordinance violation, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500.00 or by imprisonment of not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day any violation hereof is found to exist or continues to exist
shall be a separate offense and punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 1636, Sec. 2;
Code 2010)
11-214. URINATING/DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED. No person shall urinate
or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, public building,
public property, private parking lot or in any place open to the public or exposed to
the public view. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation utilizing
appropriate fixtures in any restroom or other facility designed for the sanitary
disposal of human waste. (Code 2010)
11-215. SAME; PENALTY. Any person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall
be fined in a sum not to exceed $500.00 or may be confined for a period of time
not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Code 2010)
11-6
ARTICLE 3. MOB ACTION
11-301. EMERGENCY; MOB ACTION. Whenever the city manager or director of
public safety or their designee determines that an emergency exists as a result of
mob action or other civil disobedience causing danger of injury to or damages to
persons or property, he or she shall have the power to impose by proclamation or
any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of
the city.
(a) To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the city thereby requiring
all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from
the public streets, alleys, parks or public places; provided, that physicians, nurses
and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel
maintaining essential public services, firefighters and city authorized or requested
law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew.
(b) To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within
the city for the period of emergency, such business to include, but not be limited
to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline or firearms.
(c) To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
(d) To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the city to assist in preserving and keeping the
peace within the city.
(Code 1975, 15-501; Code 1991, 10-301)
11-302. PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY. The proclamation of emergency
provided herein shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination to the
public by appropriate news media. (Code 1975, 15-502; Code 1991, 10-302)
11-303. TERMINATION. Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the
provisions of this article shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance thereof, or
upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists,
whichever occurs first; provided that such emergency may be extended for such
additional periods of time as determined necessary by resolution of the governing
body. (Code 1975, 15-503; Code 1991, 10-303)
11-304. PENALTY. Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with the
orders of duly authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the
responsibility of enforcing the proclamation of emergency authorized herein shall
be deemed guilty of a code violation, and upon conviction therefor, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not
to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Code 1975, 15-504;
Code 1991, 10-304)
11-7
ARTICLE 4. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
11-401. UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OR USE OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES OR
DRUGS. Except as authorized by the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, K.S.A.
65-4101 et. seq. and amendments thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess or have under such person*s control:
(a) Any depressant designated in subsection (e) of K.S.A. 65-4105,
subsection (e) of K.S.A. 65-4107, subsection (b) or (c) of K.S.A. 65-4109 or
subsection (b) of K.S.A. 65-4111, and amendments thereto;
(b) Any stimulant designated in subsection (f) of K.S.A. 65-4105, subsection
(d)(2), (d)(4) or (d)(2) of K.S.A. 65-4107 or subsection (e) of K.S.A. 65-4109, and
amendments thereto;
(c) Any hallucinogenic drug designated in subsection (d) of K.S.A. 65-4105
and amendments thereto or designated in subsection (g) of K.S.A. 65-41 07 and
amendments thereto;
(d) Any substance designated in subsection (g) of K.S.A. 65-4105, and
amendments thereto, and designated in subsection (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of K.SA.
65-4111 and amendments thereto; or
(e) Any anabolic steroids as defined in subsection (f) of K.S.A. 65-4109 and
amendments thereto.
(Ord. 1917, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
11-402. UNLAWFUL USE OR POSSESSION OF SIMULATED CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. No person shall use or possess
with the intent to use:
(a) Any simulated controlled substance as defined in K.S.A. 65-4150(e);
(b) Any drug paraphernalia as defined in K.S.A. 65-4150(c) to use, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act of this
state, K.S.A. 65-4101 et. seq.; or
(c) Any drug paraphernalia as defined in K.S.A. 65-4150(c) for the planting,
propagation, growing or harvesting of less than five marijuana plants.
(Ord. 1917, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
11-403. PENALTIES. (a) Any party found guilty of violating the provisions of this
article shall be punished by a fine not less than $100.00 nor more than $1000.00
and imprisoned not to exceed 180 days. Upon a second conviction of violating the
provisions of this article with the exception of a violation of section 11-401 where
the substance is marijuana, the fine shall be not less than $200.00 nor more than
$1,000.00 and a sentence of imprisonment of at least five (5) days but not to
exceed 180 days with no probation to be granted until five (5) days have been
served.
(b) In addition to the sentence provided for above, the costs associated with
any chemical tests of a controlled substance together with the costs associated
with the introduction of evidence concerning such testing shall be assessed as
court costs and shall be recoverable from the defendant if convicted.
(Ord. 1917, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
12-1
Chapter 12 CHAPTER XII. PUBLIC PROPERTY
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Santa Fe Lake and Park
Article 3. Lake Augusta-Garvin Park
Article 4. City Swimming Pool
Article 5. Elmwood Cemetery
____________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-101. CITY OF AUGUSTA PARK SYSTEM. As provided and allowed by K.S.A. 12-
1301 et seq., the city may from time to time designate certain areas of the city to
be a part of the city park system. The use of all lands which are within the park
system shall be regulated and controlled by these ordinances and such rules and
regulations as may be adopted. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-101)
12-102. PARK BOARD; AUTHORITY. There shall be appointed by the governing
body a park board which shall have the responsibility and authority to regulate the
use of the land and property which are a part of the city park system. The park
board shall have the authority to adopt certain rules and regulations which set forth
standards of conduct and activities which are permitted or prohibited within the
park system. All such rules and regulations shall be on file with the city clerk. (Ord.
1575; Code 1991, 11-102)
12-103. FIRE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS. The building or starting of fires is
prohibited in the park system except in places designated as picnic areas and then
only in fireplaces, grills or other utensils specifically designed to hold and contain
fires or as may be further permitted by the park board. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-
103)
12-104. DRIVING REGULATIONS. It shall be unlawful for vehicles to be driven or
parked except in the designated roadways and parking areas of the city park
system. The city manager shall cause to be posted speed limits and other driving
regulations which apply to the park system. All other driving shall be governed by
the traffic code of the city. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-106)
12-105. HOURS AVAILABLE. The city manager shall cause to be posted in each
area of the park system the hours that the public shall be allowed access to the
specific area of the park system. If no hours are posted the specific area shall be
available to the public at all times. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-107)
12-106. FISHING LICENSES REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS. All persons fishing by any
means in Lake Augusta, Santa Fe Lake or any other water within the park system
of the city shall be required to obtain a city fishing license as provided by the rules
and regulations pertaining thereto. The licenses may be obtained from the city
12-2
clerk or any other person authorized by the city to issue licenses and such license
shall entitle the holder to fish in all waters within the park system. Any resident
age 65 or older or under the age of 16 years shall not be required to obtain a
license to fish in the park system. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-108)
12-107. SAFETY EQUIPMENT. Any person boating on a lake under control of the
City of Augusta shall provide a life preserver of a jacket type only, coast guard
approved, and all such persons shall wear the same while in any boat while under
sail or under power. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-306)
12-108. PENALTY. Any citations issued pursuant to the provisions as detailed in this
chapter shall be handled in accordance with the general penalty provisions as
established in section 1-116 of this code. (Code 2010)
12-3
ARTICLE 2. SANTA FE LAKE AND PARK
12-201. SANTA FE LAKE AND PARK PROPERTY. The area known as Santa Fe
Lake and Park containing 418 acres and consisting of Sections 11, 12 and 13,
Township 27, Range 3 East, Butler County, Kansas and is part of the city park
system. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-201)
12-202. PERMITS; INDIVIDUAL AND GROUPS. All persons using Santa Fe Lake
facilities for the purpose of fishing, swimming, boating, skiing. picnicking, camping
or recreation will obtain a recreation permit from an authorized representative of
the City. The recreation permit shall allow an individual or family to utilize the
facilities. Upon purchase of recreation permits a decal will be furnished to use as
identification to enter the park area. Additional decals for extra family vehicles or
lost decals can be purchased. Sightseeing or inspection of the premises does not
require a permit.
Organized group activities may utilize the lake using a group daily permit,
however organized groups that are for commercial activity and charge entry fees
must receive approval from the City Manager. (Ord. 1620, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
12-203. BOAT PERMITS. Permits will be issued only to boats that display the state
registration number as required by the Kansas Department of Wildlife and Parks.
Santa Fe Lake users shall comply with boat safety requirements as promulgated
by state agencies and as applies to state lakes. (Ord. 1620, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
12-204. SPEED LIMIT FOR BOATS. A speed limit of five mph will be in effect for all
boats operating in the dock and swimming area at all hours and at all parts of the
lake after sunset. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-204)
12-205. REVOCATION OF BOATING LICENSE AND PARK PRIVILEGES. The city
manager and park caretaker shall have the right to revoke all privileges for any
person, group or organization for violation of ordinances, rules or regulations of the
city. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-205)
12-206. SPECIAL EVENTS. Special events will be allowed and are encouraged. All
special events must be approved by the city manager in writing. (Ord. 1575; Code
1991, 11-206)
12-207. SWIMMING REGULATIONS. Swimming shall only be permitted in Santa Fe
Lake in such areas as are specifically posted. The park board shall have the right
to make rules and regulations relating to swimming including but not limited to the
right to fix times and locations that swimming may be permitted and under what
conditions and other regulations swimming is allowed. Those regulations shall be
on file with the city clerk and the caretaker of Santa Fe Lake and park. (Ord. 1575;
Code 1991, 11-207; Code 2010)
12-4
ARTICLE 3. LAKE AUGUSTA-GARVIN PARK
12-301. LAKE AUGUSTA-GARVIN PARK. The area known as Garvin Park-Lake
Augusta and all surrounding lands owned by the city are hereby declared to be a
part of the park system of the city. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-301)
12-302. FISHING PERMITTED; RIGHTS RESERVED BY CITY. Fishing shall be
permitted during the seasons established by the laws of the State of Kansas and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Kansas Department of Wildlife and
Parks, which laws, rules and regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference herein, insofar as such laws, rules and regulations are not in conflict with
this article or any amendment thereof; provided, that the city, and more specifically
the governing body thereof, recognizes and declares that Lake Augusta is of prime
importance to the municipal water supply system of the city and hereby reserves
the right to amend, repeal and withdraw all fishing privileges and rights to Lake
Augusta without notice and without the necessity of refunding any sum paid by any
person under the licensing provisions hereof. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-302;
Code 2010)
12-303. ILLEGAL FISHING AND BAITING PROHIBITED. Fishing with seine, trammel
net or any other type of net device, trotline, bank line, hand fishing or "noodling" or
any other type of fishing other than with a pole and line shall be illegal. It shall be
unlawful for any person to throw any surplus minnows or other bait, trash, dead
fish, garbage or excretion into the lake or upon the lake property and the baiting of
fishing holes is specifically prohibited. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-303)
12-304. HOURS FISHING PERMITTED. Lake Augusta shall be opened for fishing at
all reasonable times, except that the park board, in its discretion, may from time to
time during the year establish closing hours when the lake or any portion thereof
shall be closed for fishing by posting notice at the entrance to Lake Augusta of
such closing hours, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fish in the lake during
such posted closing hours. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-304)
12-305. BOATS; PERMITTED, RESTRICTIONS. All boats of any type or nature shall
be permitted on Lake Augusta-Garvin Park except that sailboats shall not exceed
16 feet in length and powered boats of any type shall not have on board a motor or
means of propulsion greater than 10 horsepower. All rubber rafts, houseboats or
other boats with toilet facilities shall be prohibited. Such boating privileges shall be
confined to the citizens of the City of Augusta and Augusta township. (Ord. 1575;
Ord. 1597, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 11-305)
12-306. MINORS IN BOATS ON LAKE AUGUSTA-GARVIN PARK; RESTRICTIONS.
No minor under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to occupy any boat on the
lake unless accompanied by an adult person 18 years of age or older. (Ord. 1791,
Sec. 1; Code 2010)
12-307. BOAT DOCKS PROHIBITED. Nothing herein shall be construed as
permitting the construction or installation of any temporary or permanent docking
facilities on Lake Augusta, and any person launching a boat from a boat trailer
12-5
shall immediately upon the launching of the same remove the boat trailer beyond
the waterline of the lake. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-307)
12-308. BOATS LEFT UNACCOMPANIED PROHIBITED. Any person removing a
boat from the lake shall not leave the same on the lake or park property unless the
same is accompanied by an adult person. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-308)
12-309. HOURS OF BOATING. Boating shall be permitted at all times except when
the park board, in its discretion, has posted closing hours for fishing on all or any
portion of the lake or when the park board shall deem boating to be dangerous for
any reason whatsoever; provided, that sailboats shall be permitted only between
the hours of dawn and dusk. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-309)
12-310. BOATING LICENSES. It shall be unlawful for any person to boat upon Lake
Augusta without first having obtained a license in the manner hereinafter
prescribed from the city. Prior to the issuance of such license the person issuing
such shall receive an application containing information as may be required from
time to time. The annual fees for licensing a boat shall be established by
resolution of the governing body. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-310; Code 2010)
12-311. SPEED LIMIT FOR BOATS. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any power boat at any time in a speed in excess of five miles per hour. (Ord. 1575;
Code 1991, 11-311)
12-312. BOATING; LIMITED AREA OF OPERATION. No boat shall be operated at
any time any closer than 150 feet from the dam and spillway. (Ord. 1575; Code
1991, 11-312)
12-313. BOATS; LAUNCHING LIMITATIONS. No boat shall be launched from any
point, in any case, closer than 300 feet from any residence and, in the event that
the park board shall designate a launch point no boat shall launched at any place
other than at such point or points. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-313)
12-314. PROHIBITION OF BOATING PRIVILEGES; NON-ASSIGNABILITY OF
LICENSES. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting licenses issued
hereunder to be assigned to any person or to any boat other than the persons or
boats licensed and nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the city from
prohibiting, limiting or curtailing any and all boating operations without being
obligated to furnish any refund on any license fee; provided, that such prohibitions,
limitations or curtailment is made for the purpose of protecting the public's health,
safety or welfare. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-314)
12-315. WADING AND SWIMMING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION. It shall be unlawful
for any person to swim, wade or hunt or discharge firearms or to engage in
camping on or about Lake Augusta-Garvin Park; provided, that any person over 16
years of age may wade in the lake for the sole and only purpose of recovering
fishing equipment lost or snagged in the lake. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-315)
12-6
12-316. REVOCATION OF LICENSES. Any public safety officer, caretaker or any
other person authorized by the city to enforce this article shall have the power to
revoke any license issued hereunder or to exclude or reject any person from the
premises when such person or holder of license in the sound discretion of the
safety officer, caretaker or other authorized person is found to be violating any
section of this article and such person or holder of license shall not be entitled to
re-enter the park except with the consent of a majority of the governing body. (Ord.
1575; Code 1991, 11-316)
12-317 BEING ON THE LAKES WHEN FROZEN OR THROWING OBJECTS UPON
THE LAKES WHEN FROZEN PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person to
be upon the surface of Lake Augusta-Garvin Park or Santa Fe Lake, when the
surface is frozen, partially or completely, or appears to be frozen, whether on foot
or using a devise to move across the surface of the lake. Further, it shall be
unlawful to throw, cast upon or propel any object upon the surface of the lake
when the surface is frozen or appears to be frozen. (Ord. 1996; Code 2010)
12-7
ARTICLE 4. CITY SWIMMING POOL
12-401. CITY SWIMMING POOL. The area commonly referred to as the city
swimming pool and all surrounding land is hereby declared to be a part of the park
system of the city. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-401)
12-402. CITY SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS. The park board shall adopt and
amend annually the rules and regulations for the operation of the city swimming
pool. Such rules and regulations shall be reduced to writing and no less than three
copies shall be on file with the city clerk for inspection by the public at all
reasonable hours. A copy of such rules and regulations shall also be kept by the
manager of the city swimming pool. (Ord. 1575; Code 1991, 11-402)
12-8
ARTICLE 5. ELMWOOD CEMETERY
12-501. NAME OF CEMETERY. The cemetery heretofore acquired by the city and
named "Elmwood Cemetery" shall be hereinafter referred to this article as the
cemetery. (Code 1975, 6-101; Code 1991, 11-501)
12-502. CITY MANAGER'S DUTIES; APPOINT SEXTON. The city manager may
appoint a sexton and have duties as follows:
(a) The city manager shall cause the cemetery rules and regulations as
fixed by the governing body to be observed and fully complied with by his or her
subordinates and owners of cemetery lots.
(b) The city manager may appoint a suitable and competent person to act
as sexton of the cemetery, and to have immediate care of cemetery grounds and
lots. The city manager may also employ such other persons as may be necessary
for the proper care, maintenance and operation of the cemetery.
(Code 1975, 6-102; Code 1991, 11-502)
12-503. SEXTON; DUTIES. The sexton shall have the custody and care of all
personal property of the city in or about the cemetery. He or she shall cause all
persons within the cemetery to observe the rules and regulations pertaining to
conduct therein and the care and adornment of cemetery lots. He or she and/or
any assistant(s) shall make such reports of any burials as may be required. (Code
1975, 6-103; Code 1991, 11-503)
12-504. CITY CLERK'S DUTIES. The city clerk shall have the custody and keeping of
the original and official cemetery records of lots, conveyances, owners and
interments in the cemetery and shall keep an official plat of the cemetery in his or
her office. He or she shall collect and account for cemetery funds from the sale of
lots or received from other sources and shall issue all cemetery deeds and permits
as authorized by law or ordinance. (Code 1975, 6-104; Code 1991, 11-504)
12-505. PLAT. The plat of Elmwood Cemetery shall be kept on file in the office of the
city clerk and the same is hereby accepted an approved. The sale price of all
unsold lots or parts thereof as the same shall be fixed by the governing body shall
be plainly marked on the plat and the same shall at all times during office hours be
subject to inspection by the public upon request therefore. (Code 1975, 6-201;
Code 1991, 11-505)
12-506. RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED. The rules and regulations
hereinafter set forth are hereby adopted and established as the rules regulating,
governing and protecting Elmwood Cemetery (including both the old and the new
sections), and the grounds thereof, and the owners of the lots therein, visitors
thereof, and regulating the enclosing, adorning and erecting of monuments and
tombstones on cemetery lots, and the improvements on the grounds of the
cemetery. (Code 1975, 6-202; Code 1991, 11-506)
12-507. LOTS HELD SUBJECT TO RULES. All lots in Elmwood Cemetery or
additions thereto shall be held subject to the rules and regulations of the governing
body herein set forth, or such as may hereafter, from time to time, be adopted by
12-9
the governing body for the government and regulation of the cemetery, and
grounds thereof, and such lots shall not be used for any purpose other than as the
burial place of the human dead. (Code 1975, 6-203; Code 1991, 11-507)
12-508. TRANSFER OF LOTS. Proprietors holding deeds for lots in Elmwood
Cemetery shall not allow interments on their lots for a remuneration or pecuniary
consideration, nor shall any transfer of any lot or interest therein be valid without
executing a written conveyance thereof on forms supplied by the city clerk who
shall enter the same on records of his or her office. (Code 1975, 6-105; Code
1991, 11-508)
12-509. BURIAL PERMITS. No interment or burial shall be made in Elmwood
Cemetery or any other cemetery grounds of the city without a burial permit
therefore, issued by the local registrar of vital statistics as provided by law. The
sexton shall not inter or permit the interment of any dead body unless it be
accompanied by a permit as required by law. He or she shall make the return of
such permit to the local registrar and shall keep a cemetery record of all interments
as required by law. (Code 1975, 6-206; Code 1991, 11-509)
12-510. BURIAL. When a lot is held jointly, a permit for interment may be granted to
either owner of his or her heirs. One full burial, two cremations, or one full burial
and one cremation may be made in each grave space. (Code 1975, 6-208; Code
1991, 11-510; Code 2010)
12-511. SUPERVISION BY SEXTON. All workmen employed by lot owners in the
construction of structures, erection of monuments and in performance of all other
work, shall be subject to the control of the sexton, and on refusal of such person or
persons to be thus controlled, or comply with the rules, he, she or they so refusing
or failing so to do shall not be permitted by the sexton to work within the grounds
of the cemetery. (Code 1975, 6-209; Code 1991, 11-511)
12-512. TREES, SHRUBS, FENCES. No lot or parcel of ground in the cemetery shall
be defined by any fence, railing, coping, embankment or ditch. No trees,
shrubbery or plants shall be planted or permitted to grow upon any lots in the
cemetery, and no structure, rock work or other architectural object shall be
permitted on any lot or parcel of ground in the cemetery, except as authorized and
approved by the city manager. In case of violation of this rule, the sexton under
the direction of the city manager shall have the right to enter upon the lot or ground
and remove or cause to be removed the violation. (Code 1975, 6-210; Code 1991,
11-512)
12-513. MONUMENTS. No monuments or other structures shall be placed upon any
lot until a design of the same, with specifications, has been submitted to and
accepted by the sexton, and the location thereof on the lot approved by him or her.
Only one monument will be permitted on a platted lot, where full lots only are sold,
or half lots, where lots are divided, placed at the head of the graves in line with the
monuments on other neighboring lots. (Code 1975, 6-211; Code 1991, 11-513)
12-10
12-514. MONUMENTS AND MARKERS. Stones marking individual graves on lots
where there is a large monument, must be made of marble, granite or some other
permanent material approved by the sexton, and shall have the outer surface set
in line with the markers on other graves and only one marker shall be permitted on
any grave. (Code 1975, 6-212; Code 1991, 11-514)
12-515. WOODEN MARKERS PROHIBITED. Wooden markers of every description
are prohibited. (Code 1975, 6-213; Code 1991, 11-515)
12-516. MOUNDS. Mounds over graves shall not exceed four inches in height when
thoroughly settled. (Code 1975, 6-214; Code 1991, 11-516)
12-517. FOUNDATIONS. All foundations of monuments, headstones, etc., placed in
the cemetery shall be constructed in a substantial manner approved by the city
under the direction and supervision of the sexton. (Code 1975, 6-215; Code 1991,
11-517)
12-518. ADVERTISING PROHIBITED. No advertisement in any form will be
permitted in the cemetery. (Code 1975, 6-216; Code 1991, 11-518)
12-519. PROCESSIONS. On entering, and while within the cemetery, funeral
processions will be entirely under the control and direction of the sexton or his or
her assistant(s). It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle within the cemetery
except upon the streets or roadways therein. (Code 1975, 6-217; Code 1991, 11-
519)
12-520. BURIAL ON SUNDAY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS. The city clerk shall
issue no permit for a burial or interment in Elmwood Cemetery or in the
mausoleum to be held on the first day of the week commonly termed Sunday,
except in cases of extreme hardship, and then only with the approval of the city
manager. (Code 1975, 6-218; Code 1991, 11-520)
12-521. DEFACING IMPROVEMENTS. Any person or persons digging, removing or
carrying away any earth, sod, flower, shrub or ornament of any kind whatsoever
from the cemetery or any cemetery over which the city has jurisdiction, without the
consent of the sexton or any person who shall intentionally, carelessly, wantonly or
maliciously deface, injure or destroy any monument, urn, ornament, tree,
shrubbery or flower in any cemetery over which the city shall have jurisdiction shall
be deemed guilty of a code violation. (Code 1975, 6-220; Code 1991, 11-521)
12-522. VEHICLES; SPEED LIMITS; FIREARMS; FIREWORKS; PROHIBITED. All
persons are hereby forbidden to ride or drive in the cemetery grounds or avenues
thereof, faster than 15 miles per hour, and no picnic or party with refreshments, or
persons with firearms or fireworks shall be permitted to enter the cemetery or the
grounds thereof except that firing squads will be permitted in the cemetery on
ceremonial functions. (Code 1975, 6-221; Code 1991, 11-522)
12-523. BURIAL. The city manager is hereby authorized to contract for the opening of
graves within the cemetery. All graves will be opened in accordance with
12-11
specifications set by law and as directed by the sexton. Payment for the opening
of any grave shall be paid to the city clerk prior to the grave being opened and the
fee shall be credited to the general operating fund of the city and be used for the
payment of the grave opening contract. (Code 1975, 6-222; Code 1991, 11-523)
12-524. MAINTENANCE; REGULAR CARE. General maintenance of all lots in the
municipal cemeteries, at no cost to the lot owners, shall be known as regular care
and shall include the maintenance of a reasonable stand of grass, raking and
cleaning, filling settled graves and reasonable attention to any planting thereon
which are in accordance with the rules and regulations governing the cemetery.
(Code 1975, 6-223; Code 1991, 11-524)
12-525. MAINTENANCE; SPECIAL LOT CARE. When a lot holder deems the regular
care of a lot in the municipal cemeteries is not sufficient to gratify his or her
wishes, he or she may order such improvements and care as he or she desires, so
long as it conforms with the rules and regulations governing municipal cemeteries.
Such care and improvements shall be known as special lot care and arrangements
therefor shall be made by agreement with the sexton. Special fees paid therefor
shall be paid to the city clerk and credited to the general operating fund of the city.
(Code 1975, 6-225; Code 1991, 11-525)
12-526. TIMES AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC. All areas under the ownership or
control of the city used as a cemetery shall be opened to the general public for the
hours of the day from dawn until dusk and no person shall be upon any of the
premises included within such areas during the prohibited periods except in the
lawful exercise of duties to be discharged on behalf of the city. (Code 1975, 6-226;
Code 1991, 11-526)
12-527. PROHIBITED USES. During the permitted hours as set forth in section 12-
526 of this article, the cemetery properties shall be used only for the purposes of
burial and matters in direct relation thereto and such areas shall not be used for
any other purpose, including but not limited to recreational activities or any other
group functions except gatherings for the purposes of memorials and other
activities to pay respect to the dead. (Code 1975, 6-227; Code 1991, 11-527)
12-528. MAUSOLEUMS; RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED. The rules and
regulations as hereinafter set forth are hereby adopted for the management,
regulation and control of mausoleums in Elmwood Cemetery. (Code 1975, 6-301;
Code 1991, 11-528)
12-529. SAME; TRANSFER OF CRYPTS. The crypts in the mausoleum shall only be
transferred and conveyed in the same manner as cemetery lots are transferred
and conveyed. (Code 1975, 6-302; Code 1991, 11-529)
12-530. SAME; RECORD. The city clerk shall provide a record book in which shall be
kept in a proper, accurate and definite form the names of all crypt owners,
description of crypts, and upon which shall be entered from time to time any
transfer or conveyance of such crypts, which shall include a description of the
crypt or crypts, the names of the owner or owners, the date on which any
12-12
certificate is surrendered for cancellation and the date, number of the new
certificate issued, together with the name of the prior owner, the name of the new
owner, and a description of the crypt or crypts so conveyed, together with the
address of the new owner thereof. All certificates surrendered shall be stamped or
marked canceled by the city clerk and preserved in the files of his or her office.
(Code 1975, 6-303; Code 1991, 11-530)
12-531. SAME; EMBALMING. All bodies must be properly embalmed before
interment in any crypt. (Code 1975, 6-304; Code 1991, 11-531)
12-532. SAME; RIGHT TO INTER. Interment of any bodes is hereby prohibited
except upon the written order form the owner or owners of the crypt or his, her or
their proper representatives duly authorized in writing. (Code 1975, 6-305; Code
1991, 11-532)
12-533. SAME; CERTIFICATE OF DEATH. Proper certificates of death and burial
permits must accompany all bodies before the interment takes place. (Code 1975,
6-306; Code 1991, 11-533)
12-534. SAME; OPENING AND CLOSING OF CRYPTS. All crypts will be opened
and closed only by the sexton of the cemetery or authorized representatives.
(Code 1975, 6-307; Code 1991, 11-534)
12-535. SAME; NUMBER OF BODIES. Not more than one body may be interred or
deposited in any crypt except in the case of a mother and one or more infants born
at the time of her death, which may be placed in the same casket; or where bodies
are disinterred, and in that event not more than three may be placed in the same
crypt. Before any such interment as in this regulation provided, the name or names
of the bodies must be furnished in writing to the city clerk. (Code 1975, 6-308;
Code 1991, 11-535)
12-536. SAME; FLOWERS. Flowers, wreaths or other designs will be removed by the
sexton immediately following the funeral to prevent staining the marble and to
keep the mausoleums in a sanitary condition. The family or relatives of the
deceased may remove or arrange for the removal of the flowers immediately after
the funeral if they so desire. (Code 1975, 6-309; Code 1991, 11-536)
12-537. SAME; VASES. All vases left in the mausoleums will be at the risk of the
owner and may be removed in the discretion of the sexton. No person shall be
permitted to place in or about the crypt or crypts any cans or any unsightly
receptacles or anything unsightly before any crypt in the mausoleums. (Code
1976, 6-310; Code 1991, 11-537)
12-538. SAME; CHAIRS. Neither chairs nor settees shall be permitted or allowed in
the corridors except during funeral services. (Code 1975, 6-311; Code 1991, 11-
538)
12-539. SAME; TIMES AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC. All areas under the ownership
or control of the city which are used as mausoleum shall be opened to the general
12-13
public for the hours of the day from dawn until dusk and no person shall be upon
any of the premises included within such areas during the prohibited periods
except in the lawful exercise of duties to be discharged on behalf of the city. (Code
1975, 6-313; Code 1991, 11-539)
12-540. SAME; PROHIBITED USES. During the permitted hours, as set forth in
section 12-539 of this article, the mausoleum properties shall be used only for the
purposes of burial and matters in direct relation thereto and such areas shall not
be used for any other purpose, including but not limited to recreational activities or
any other group functions except gatherings for the purposes of memorials and
other activities to pay respect to the dead. (Code 1975, 6-314; Code 1991, 11-
540)
12-541. PRICE OF GRAVE SPACES. Grave spaces for burial located in the Augusta
Cemetery and all additions and extensions thereto shall be sold for such prices as
may, from time to time, be established by Resolution of the Governing Body of the
City of Augusta, Kansas. Grave spaces may be sold individually or in such
numbers as are available collectively. (Ord. 1827, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
12-542. DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS. All funds derived from the sale of grave
spaces in the City Cemetery of the City of Augusta, Kansas which exceed the sum
of $100.00 shall be placed in the Endowment Fund for the City Cemetery. The
remaining sum shall be placed in the general operating fund of the City for use in
the maintenance and upkeep of the City Cemetery and its additions and
extensions. (Ord. 1827, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
12-543. FEES FOR OPENING AND CLOSING GRAVES. The charges and fees for
opening and closing a grave site, shall be established, from time to time, by
Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas. (Ord. 1827, Sec.
3; Code 2010)
12-544. REQUIREMENTS FOR VAULTS OR CASKETS. No burial shall be
performed in the City Cemetery of the City of Augusta, Kansas with a wooden
vault or casket enclosure or any enclosure of any material which is likely to
deteriorate or cause the grave to collapse. (Ord. 1827, Sec. 4; Code 2010)
12-545. FLOWERS AND ADORNMENTS. Fresh cut flowers may be placed on or
adjacent to graves at any time. Artificial flowers, not in a permanent floral
container, may be placed on or adjacent to graves only during the period from
November 1 to the following March 1 and for a period of three (3) days prior to any
Memorial Day and including ten (10) days following such Memorial Day. March 1
to November 1 is mowing season and any grave left unattended for a period of
thirty (30) days will be maintained to cemetery specifications. At other times
artificial flowers may be placed on and adjacent to graves if placed in an approved
permanent floral display container. No glass object of any nature shall be placed
on graves at any time. The sexton shall be authorized to cause removal and
disposal of items not previously permitted or in conformity herewith and is further
authorized to cause the removal and disposal of any wilted cut flowers and any
artificial flowers which have become broken, faded or otherwise dilapidated in
12-14
order to prevent the littering of the cemetery grounds. (Ord. 1827, Sec. 5; Code
2010)
12-546. STONES, MARKERS, FLORAL DISPLAY FIXTURES AND CONTAINERS.
Owners of lots and grave sites may at their own expense, erect grave markers,
stones, monuments and permanent floral display fixtures, containers or urns
provided such are set in a foundation or footing of concrete in a good workmanlike
manner, so as to assure permanence of location and position. Monuments
commonly known as Above Ground Vaults are strictly prohibited from being placed
in the cemetery. Further such owner, heirs and assigns, shall maintain the same in
good repair at their own expense. Further the same shall not be offensive in nature
or such that would detract from the dignity of a place of burial or as would
constitute a hazard to cemetery personnel or the public. In the event such items
fall into disrepair or become damaged beyond repair the sexton shall be
authorized to cause their removal. Such removal shall be the responsibility of the
owner within ten (10) days after notification by the sexton. If, however, the sexton
is unable to locate the owner or the owner fails to respond to such notice the
sexton may proceed with such removal. (Ord. 1827, Sec. 6; Code 2010)
12-547. CHARGES FOR SEALING CRYPT. The charges and fees for sealing a crypt
shall be established, from time to time, by Resolution of the Governing Body of the
City of Augusta, Kansas. (Ord. 1827, Sec. 7; Code 2010)
12-548. MONUMENT PERMIT. Monument Permits shall be issued by the City Clerk
for the setting, placing or installing of any monument, headstone or other approved
marker. The charges and fees for issuing a Monument License and the penalty for
violating this section shall be established, from time to time, by Resolution of the
Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas. (Ord. 1827, Sec. 8; Code 2010)
12-549. ACTS PROHIBITED. No headstones, monuments or other markers of any
type or nature shall be set, placed or installed upon any grave in the cemetery of
the city without having first obtained a permit. (Ord. 1307, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 11-
558)
12-550. LICENSES. Licenses shall be issued by the city clerk of the setting, placing
or installing of any monument, headstone or other marker by a fee established
from time to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta,
Kansas. (Ord. 1307, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 11-559; Code 2010)
12-551. CONDITION PRECEDENT TO ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE. Any person
applying for a license, as herein provided, shall indicate the type of material to be
used and method of installation, placing or setting of such monument, headstone
or other marker which shall be in writing and delivered to the city clerk. Such
license shall not be issued unless the method set forth in the application shall
comply with the rules and regulations of the city to be promulgated, from time to
time, by the city manager. If the method to be used shall be acceptable, then such
license shall be issued forthwith. (Ord. 1307, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 11-560)
12-15
12-552. INSPECTING AND COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICATION. During the
installation, setting or placing of such monument, headstone or other marker the
same shall be subject to inspection by the sexton of the city and the sexton shall
have the right to require compliance with the method outlined in the application.
(Ord. 1307, Sec. 4; Code 1991, 11-561)
12-553. REMOVAL OF HEADSTONE, MONUMENT OR OTHER MARKER. In the
event that the headstone, monument or other marker shall to be placed, set or
installed as approved upon the issuance of a license, then the city shall notify the
person procuring the license to have the same reinstalled, reset or replaced and if
the same shall not be so accomplished within a period of 30 days then the city
shall have the right to remove such marker, headstone or monument and dispose
of it without liability unto the licensee. (Ord. 1307, Sec. 5; Code 1991, 11-562)
12-554. ENDOWMENT FUND; CREATION. There shall be established a cemetery
endowment fund for the purpose of caring for the Elmwood Cemetery which shall
be held by the city clerk. (Ord. 1398, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 11-563)
12-555. SAME; CONTRIBUTIONS. The source of funds for the cemetery endowment
fund shall be voluntary contributions from any person, proceeds from the sale of
grave spaces and burial permits and the city clerk shall be authorized to receive
such monies and place the same in the fund to be administered by law. (Ord.
1398, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 11-564)
12-556. SAME; INVESTMENT. All monies coming into the endowment fund shall be
invested as provided in K.S.A. 12-1410 as the same may be amended from time to
time hereafter. The investments to be made, within the limits aforesaid, shall be
determined by a committee composed of the mayor, city manager and city clerk.
(Ord. 1398, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 11-565)
12-557. SAME; BOND OF CITY CLERK. The city clerk shall include in his or her
bond for faithful performance double the amount of the endowment fund on hand
when he or she shall take his or her official oath of office and such bond may be
combined with any other bond given by the city clerk or may be a bond for the
purpose of the endowment fund singly. (Ord. 1398, Sec. 5; Code 1991, 11-566)
13-1
Chapter 13 CHAPTER XIII. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Article 1. Sidewalks
Article 2. Pavement, Curbs and Street Regulations
Article 3. Street Use Regulations
Article 4. Special Regulations; Certain Streets
Article 5. Snow and Ice
____________________
ARTICLE 1. SIDEWALKS
13-101. PERMIT REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct or repair
any sidewalk within the city until a permit is issued for such work by the city
inspector. (Code 1991; Code 2010)
13-102. SIDEWALK GRADE. Hereafter all sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in
the city shall be constructed on the established grade. When the governing body
shall order a sidewalk constructed as hereafter provided, the city shall pay the cost
of bringing the street to grade for the sidewalk. Where no grade has been
established, the owner of abutting property may construct a sidewalk on the
natural grade. If the grade has been established, the city inspector shall furnish
the property owner with the official grade by reference to a stated distance above
or below the street grade. (K.S.A. 12-1801, 12-1807; Code 1975, 17-102; Code
1991)
13-103. SAME; SPECIFICATIONS. Hereafter all sidewalks shall be of single- course
construction and shall be constructed and laid in accordance with standard plans
and specifications hereby adopted by reference and filed in the office of the city
clerk as provided by K.S.A. 12-1802. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk except as provided by
this article. (Code 1975, 17-101; Code 1991)
13-104. SAME; PETITION. When a petition signed by no fewer than 10 citizens
owning real estate in the city requesting construction of a sidewalk is filed with the
city clerk, the governing body may in its discretion, by a resolution, order such
sidewalk constructed as herein provided. (K.S.A. 12-1803; Code 1975, 17-104;
Code 1991)
13-105. SAME; CONDEMNATION, RECONSTRUCTION. When any sidewalk, in the
opinion of the governing body, becomes inadequate or unsafe for travel thereon,
the governing body may adopt a resolution condemning such walk and providing
for the construction of a new walk in the place of the walk condemned. (K.S.A. 12-
1804; Code 1975, 17-105; Code 1991)
13-2
13-106. NOTICE; PUBLICATION. The resolution providing for the construction or
reconstruction of a sidewalk, shall give the owner of the abutting property not less
than 30 days or more than 60 days after its publication one time in the official city
paper in which to construct or cause to be constructed or reconstructed the
sidewalk at his or her own expense. If the sidewalk is not constructed by the
property owner within the time specified, the governing body shall cause the work
to be done by contract. (K.S.A. 12-1805; Code 1975, 17-106; Code 1991; Code
2010)
13-107. RIGHT OF ABUTTING OWNER. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
prohibit the owner of property abutting on a street, who desires to construct or
reconstruct a sidewalk at his or her own expense and in accordance with official
plans and specifications for the purpose and which meet such other requirements
as would have to be met if the sidewalk were constructed or reconstructed by the
city, to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk without any petition or a condemning
resolution by the governing body. If such property owner desires the sidewalk to
be constructed and reconstructed by the city and an assessment levied as
provided by law in other cases, he or she shall file a request with the governing
body. The governing body, in its discretion, may provide for the construction or
reconstruction of the sidewalk requested in the same manner as in other cases
where citizens or taxpayers petition the governing body. (K.S.A. 12-1806; Code
1975, 17-107; Code 1991)
13-108. REPAIRS BY OWNER OR CITY. It shall be the duty of the owner of the
abutting property to keep the sidewalk in repair, but the city may, after giving five
days' notice to the owner or his or her agent, if known, of the necessity for making
repairs or without notice if the lot or piece of land is unoccupied, make all
necessary repairs at any time. The same shall be done and the cost thereof
assessed against the lot or piece of land abutting on the sidewalk so repaired as
may be provided by law. (K.S.A. 12-1808; Code 1975, 17-108; Code 1991)
13-109. OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or
construct any step or other obstruction, whether temporary or permanent, or to
store, leave or allow to be left any implements, tools, merchandise, goods,
containers, benches, display or show cases, on any sidewalks or other public ways
in the city or to obstruct the same longer than is necessary for loading or unloading
any such article or object. (Code 1991)
13-110. SAME; EXCEPTION. The governing body may authorize the granting of
temporary permits in connection with a building or moving permit for limited times
only to the owner of property abutting on any sidewalk to use or encumber such
sidewalk or public way of the city during the construction of any building or
improvement thereon. No permit shall be issued for such purpose until plans for
warning and safeguarding the public during such use of sidewalks shall have been
submitted by the owner or his or her contractor and approved by the governing
body. (Code 1991)
13-3
ARTICLE 2. PAVEMENT, CURBS AND STREET REGULATIONS
13-201. CUTTING PAVEMENTS, CURBS, SIDEWALKS. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cut pavements, curbs or sidewalks or remove the same or make
excavation in the streets, alleys or public ways of the city for any purpose without
first applying for and receiving a permit from the city inspector. (Code 1975 17-
201; Code 2010)
13-202. PERMIT; HOW SERVED. Any person desiring to obtain a permit for the
purposes of section 13-201 of this article shall make an application to the city
inspector describing the work to be done and the location thereof. Upon approval
by the city inspector, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant and shall
supply the applicant with a copy of the specifications established, if any, for the
doing of such work. (Code 1975, 17-202; Code 2010)
13-203. WORK TO BE DONE AT EXPENSE OF PERMIT HOLDER. All curbs,
pavements, sidewalks or excavations in streets, alleys or public ways are to be cut
or removed, or cut and replaced at the expense of the person holding the permit
for such work, the same to be done in accordance with the specifications, if any,
furnished by the city engineer. (Code 1975, 17-203; Code 2010)
13-204. CUTTING PAVEMENT; HOW. When the condition of the sidewalk or
pavement, in the opinion of the city engineer, requires it, the pavement or sidewalk
shall be cut by the use of a concrete saw; provided, that the city may supply such
cutting equipment with an operator at a fee sufficient to pay the reasonable cost of
labor and replacement of the equipment. (Code 1975, 17-204)
13-205. RECONSTRUCTION OF PAVEMENT OR SIDEWALK. The sums
hereinbefore required to be paid to the city shall be used for the replacement of the
surface of paved or improved streets, alleys or sidewalks in accordance with the
plans and specifications of the city therefor. All such work shall be done by
employees of the city under the direction of the street superintendent; provided,
that the street superintendent may require that contractors shall backfill, with well
tamped material, all excavations in dirt, gravel, sealed earth and sidewalk locations
and if the same is not done to the reasonable satisfaction of the street
superintendent, the completion may be done by the city and the cost of the same
shall be paid by the contractors. (Code 1975, 17-205)
13-206. EXCAVATIONS; BARRICADES; LIGHTS. It shall be unlawful for any person
to make any excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or public way of the city
without a permit thereof or to leave any excavation, building material, vehicle,
stones, bricks, other materials or obstructions in or on any street, alley, sidewalk or
public way in the city during the course of any work, unless the same be protected
by barricades at all times or in the nighttime unless the excavation, building
materials or obstruction is guarded with red lanterns or flares, sufficient in number
and so located as to guard and warn vehicles and passers-by of the extent and
danger of such excavation or obstruction. Such lights shall be illuminated before
dark and left burning during the nighttime; provided, that it shall be the duty of any
officer or any employee of the city having charge of any of the foregoing work, to
13-4
place suitable warning signs and barricades to guard the public against injury and
in the nighttime to keep and maintain a sufficient number of warning lights as in the
case of other persons provided further, that the street superintendent is authorized
to direct the placing any barricade, warning sign or lights herein required, and he
or she may, if the public safety requires it, during the progress of any such work,
close off the public street or sidewalk or any portion thereof to prevent public use
of the same; provided further, that any person holding a permit to cut streets or
sidewalks shall not be released from any obligation to barricade, light and
otherwise guard or warn vehicles or passers-by of the extent and danger of the
excavation until 24 hours after notification has been given to the street
superintendent, Sundays and holiday excepted, that the excavation is ready for
backfill and/or surface replacement. (Code 1975, 17-206)
13-207. DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE. It shall be the duty of the city engineer to prepare
suitable plans and specifications for the cutting and removal of curbs when it is
desired to construct any driveway entrance to any private premises or lots used in
the city for parking purposes. It shall be the duty of any person having a permit for
the removal of curbs to construct or reconstruct any entrance or sidewalk
constituting part of such entrance in accordance with the plans and specifications
therefor. No such entrance shall block or impede the free flow of water along the
gutter or drainage ditch and no such entrance shall be constructed above the
grade level or drainage course. (Code 1975, 17-207)
13-208. ABANDONMENT OF DRIVEWAY; DUTY OF OWNER. Whenever the owner
of real property shall abandon the use of a driveway entrance for which there is an
opening or cut in the curb, it shall be the duty of the owner of such real estate, at
his or her own expense, to cause the opening or cut in the curb to be closed;
provided, that he or she must first apply for and secure a permit for such work in
the same manner as a permit is secured under section 13-202 of this article; the
work shall be done in accordance with the specifications, if any, furnished by the
city engineer. (Code 1975, 17-208; Code 2010)
13-209. USE OF CULVERTS. When it shall be impracticable to open, construct or
maintain an entrance across any drainage ditch or drain under the foregoing
section, such places may be bridged by culverts at driveway entrances. Such
culverts or bridges shall comply with the plans and specifications of the city
engineer. All such culverts shall be of sufficient capacity as not to interfere with
the drainage, and the same shall be subject to approval by the city engineer or
street superintendent. The abutting lot owners shall pay the cost of all such
culverts in the manner provided by law. (Code 1975, 17-209)
13-210. OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE. It shall be unlawful for any person to place in
or fill with concrete, dirt, planks, stones, snow, ice or other materials any drainage
ditch, or to bridge any gutter except as provided in the foregoing section, or in any
manner change the course of any drainage ditch or obstruct any open drain in the
city. (Code 1975, 17-210)
13-5
13-211. MUNICIPAL PROJECTS. Nothing in this article shall be co construed as to
prohibit the backfill of excavations, repair and replacement of surfaces by
contractors in the performance of street sewer and waterline and other
improvement projects under the direction of the city engineer. (Code 1975, 17-
211)
13-6
ARTICLE 3. STREET USES REGULATED
13-301. WORK ADJACENT TO STREETS; ENCUMBERING STREETS. It shall be
unlawful for any person making an excavation or doing any work adjacent to or
under any sidewalk or street to do any such work without proper barricades or
safety guards or lights or to obstruct any street, alley or sidewalk of the city by
placing or disposing therein building materials, or to obstruct any such street, alley,
sidewalk without first securing the approval of the city engineer. Upon completion
of the work, the contractor or person in charge shall clean up the public ways
within not less than 10 days after the completion of the work. (Code 1975, 17-301)
13-302. CELLAR ENTRANCES. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or
reconstruct any entrance into a cellar-way in a sidewalk or street without the
approval of the governing body. All cellar-ways or pavement entrances now
existing in any sidewalk or street, or which may hereafter be so constructed, shall
be protected by a good and substantial iron railing to be approved by the building
inspector in accordance with the building code. Any person who shall open or
leave unprotected any cellar entrance, cellar-way, coal hole or grating in any street
or sidewalk in the city, or permit the same to remain or be in an unsafe condition
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than $5.00 nor more
than $100.00. (Code 1975, 17-302)
13-303. TRESPASSING ON PARKING; CURBS. It shall be unlawful for any person
to drive, ride or cross with either vehicles, livestock or by foot, any portion of the
street parking adjacent to the premises of any person owning or occupying
property in the city which has been prepared and plotted as parking to the
premises. It shall further be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over curb
or a sidewalk, except at an established entrance, or to break or remove any such
sidewalk or curb without a permit therefor; provided, that the governing body may
authorize the use of the parking for the standing or parking of vehicles under such
conditions as may be determined by the governing body. (Code 1975, 17-303)
13-304. STORAGE ON SIDEWALKS, STREETS, ALLEYS. It shall be unlawful for
any person to leave or allow to be left any implements, tools, boxes, merchandise,
goods, trash cans, crates, garbage containers, corn poppers, peanut or popcorn
roasters, ice cream containers, advertising or showcases on any sidewalk, street,
alley or traveled way in the city longer than is necessary for unloading or loading
the same; provided, that the city manager may grant temporary permission for a
limited time only for the sidewalks, streets, alleys or traveled way to be used by the
occupants of premises adjacent thereto when the same shall not endanger or
inconvenience the public. The city reserves the right at any time upon notice to the
owner or occupant of such premises to order the removal of any such obstruction
at the expense of the owner or occupant, the same to be collected as provided by
law. (Code 1975, 17-304)
13-305. UNLAWFUL STREET DEPOSITS. It shall be unlawful for any person to
throw, place, deposit or leave or cause to be thrown, placed, deposited or left in
any of the public streets, alleys, parks or thoroughfares in the city, any dirt, filth,
sewage, sweepings, excrement, compost, papers, garbage, stable manure, boxes,
13-7
ashes, lumber, coal, wood, kindling, grass, weeds, vegetables, sops or litter of any
kind. (Code 1975, 17-305)
13-306. CURB PUMPS PROHIBITED. No person shall hereafter erect or install any
gasoline or oil pumps or compressed air devices in or along the parking of any
street or along the curbline thereof where it shall be necessary for the person
served by such pumps or devices to stop their vehicles in the streets while
receiving such service. (Code 1975, 17-307)
13-307. POSTING BILLS. It shall be unlawful for any person to post or put up any
handbill, advertisements, posters, showbills or other signs on any building, pole or
property in or along any public street or way in the city, except with the permission
of the owner thereof. (Code 1975, 17-308)
13-308. GLASS, TACKS, NAILS. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw,
or cause to be placed or thrown on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
property of the city any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or any other substance or thing
that might do injury to any person or animals, or cut or puncture any pneumatic tire
when passing over the same. (Code 1975, 17-309)
13-309. HEAVY VEHICLES. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or
move any heavy vehicle, tractor, trailer or other heavy object equipped with metal
lugs or sharp metal rims on or over any paved streets in the city unless the paving
shall be protected by planks sufficient to protect against injury from such lugs or
rims, or unless such vehicles or objects are otherwise protected to save such
street from injury. (Code 1975, 17-310)
13-310. HAULING OVER STREETS. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or
carry over the streets, sidewalks or public ways any garbage, rubbish or refuse of
any kind except in a vehicle so covered, constructed or protected as to prevent the
escaping, splashing or spilling of such material or substance therein contained or
hauled. (Code 1975, 17-311)
13-311. MOLESTING PAVING AND SIDEWALKS. It shall be unlawful for any person
to walk upon, drive over or across any pavement, sidewalk or similar public
improvement in the street, during the course of construction and before the same
has been opened for public travel. (Code 1975, 17-312)
13-312. INJURY BY PETROLEUM PRODUCTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit or throw any waste, crankcase oil, fuel oil, coal oil, gasoline or other
petroleum liquid products or acids into or on or willfully permit the same to be
spilled, dripped or otherwise come into contact with the surface of any street
improved by asphalt paving. (Code 1975, 17-313)
13-313. REMOVAL OF BARRICADES AND LIGHTS. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove, throw down, run down, destroy or otherwise injure any
barricade or safety wall erected as required by ordinance, or to remove, carry
away or injure any warning lights placed on or about any such work, except such
person who shall be in charge of any such work. (Code 1975, 17-314)
13-8
13-314. RAILROAD CROSSINGS. No person operating or who may hereafter
operate a railroad into or through the city shall permit any train to remain across
any street crossing or sidewalk of the city so as to interfere with the passage of
vehicles and pedestrians for a longer period of time than 10 minutes, and in case it
is necessary for such train to remain standing for a longer period of time than 10
minutes, it shall be uncoupled at such crossing and the cars separated so that
vehicles and pedestrians may pass. (Code 1975, 17-315)
13-315. WIDTH OF STREETS, ALLEYS, EASEMENTS. For the purpose of allowing
unobstructed passage of traffic and the maintenance of public utilities in the
streets, alleys, parkings and easements of the city, it is hereby declared that in all
areas hereinafter annexed to or subdivided in the city, all streets shall be a
minimum width of 60 feet or greater as directed by the governing body, and all
alleys shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and all utility easements and parkings
and other public property in which utilities may hereafter be installed shall have a
minimum width of 14 feet. (Code 1975, 17-316)
13-316. PENALTY. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or be imprisoned not to exceed 30
days, or be both so fined and imprisoned; provided, that if any person shall
continue any obstruction or make any unlawful use, as in this article provided, of
any sidewalk, street or public way in the city after being notified by the director of
public safety to remove the obstruction or cease to make unlawful use of such
place, the same shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. (Code 1975, 17-
317)
13-9
ARTICLE 4. SPECIAL REGULATIONS; CERTAIN STREETS
13-401. ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful, except as
hereinafter provided, for any person to erect, construct, install, place, maintain or
allow to remain or to permit the erection, construction, installation, placing
maintenance or remaining of any encroachment upon or above the right-of-way, or
any portion thereof, of the following designated streets:
(a) Walnut Street from Second to Seventh Avenue;
(b) Seventh Avenue from Ohio Street westward to the city limits.
(Code 1975, 17-401; Code 2010)
13-402. DEFINITIONS. The word encroachment when used in this article shall mean
and include any sign, awning, canopy, marquee, billboard or other advertising
device, merchandise stand or display, building or other structure, or other use for
private purposes of any character which exists in or rests upon or projects above
the right-of-way of any portion thereof of a public street. (Code 1975, 17-402)
13-403. NOTICE TO REMOVE; REMOVAL. Whenever any encroachment exists in
violation of the provisions of this article, the city inspector will issue a notice
requiring the removal of such encroachment within a time specified in such notice.
If the owner of such encroachment, or his or her agent, is known, such notice shall
be a written notice served in person or by mail upon such owner or agent. If the
owner or agent is unknown, such notice shall be published once in the official city
paper. If the owner or agent shall fail or refuse to remove the encroachment within
the time fixed in the notice, the city shall cause the encroachment to be removed.
(Code 1975, 17-403; Code 2010)
13-404. PENALTY. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a code violation and upon conviction thereof shall, for each
offense, be fined a sum not exceeding $50.00 and each day that a violation is
continued shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1975, 17-404)
13-405. NOT TO AFFECT OTHER STREETS. Nothing in this article is intended to
affect encroachments upon streets or portions of streets not described in section
13-401 of this article. (Code 1975, 17-405)
13-10
ARTICLE 5. SNOW AND ICE
13-501. SNOW AND ICE TO BE REMOVED. It is hereby made the duty of the owner
and the occupant of any lot abutting upon any sidewalk to cause to be removed
from such sidewalk all snow and ice within 12 hours from the time that the snowfall
or ice storm ceases, and to keep such sidewalks at all times free from the
accumulation of snow and ice. (Code 1975, 17-601; Code 1991)
13-502. BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES NEAR STREETS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS. It is
hereby made the duty of the owner and of the occupant of any building or structure
located near or adjacent to any street, alley or sidewalk to remove at his or her
own expense any accumulation of snow or ice upon the roof or side thereof which
overhangs or is likely to fall on such street, alley or sidewalk and which is
dangerous or hazardous to pedestrians or vehicles on such street, alley or
sidewalk. (Code 1975, 17-602)
13-503. PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of section 13-501 of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100.00 or be
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or be both so fined and imprisoned. (Code
1975, 17-603)
14-1
CHAPTER XIV. TRAFFIC
Article 1. Standard Traffic Ordinance
Article 2. Local Traffic Regulations
Article 3. Hazardous Materials
Article 4. Bicycles
Article 5. Emergency Snow Routes
Article 6. Emergency Access Routes
____________________
ARTICLE 1. STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
14-101. INCORPORATING STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE. There is hereby
incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating traffic within the corporate
limits of the City of Augusta, Kansas, the standard traffic ordinance known as the
"Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities," Edition of 2008, prepared and
published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas.
No fewer than three copies of said Standard Traffic Ordinance shall be marked or
stamped “Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1969,”, and filed with the city
clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours.
The department of public safety, municipal judge and all administrative
departments of the city charged with enforcement of the Standard Traffic
Ordinance shall be supplied, at the cost of the city, such number of official copies
of such Standard Traffic Ordinance similarly marked, as may be deemed
expedient. (Ord. 1969; Code 2008)
14-102. SAME; TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS AND TRAFFIC OFFENSES. (a) An
ordinance traffic infraction is a violation of any section of this article that prescribes
or requires the same behavior as that prescribed or required by a statutory
provision that is classified as a traffic infraction in K.S.A. Supp. 8-2118.
(b) All traffic violations which are included within this article, and which are
not ordinance traffic infractions as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be
considered traffic offenses.
(Ord. 1930, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
14-103. PENALTY FOR SCHEDULED FINES. The fine for violation of an ordinance
traffic infraction or any other traffic offense for which the municipal judge
establishes a fine in a fine schedule. (Ord. 1969, Sec. 3; Code 2010)
14-104. SAME; AMENDMENTS. The following sections of the Standard Traffic
Ordinance are hereby changed to read as follows:
Section 33. Maximum Speed Limits. (a) Except when a special hazard exists
that requires lower speed for compliance with Section 32, the limits specified in
this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful
speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of such
maximum limits:
14-2
(1) 20 miles per hour in any business district;
(2) 30 miles per hour in any residence district;
(3) 20 miles per hour in any park;
(4) as otherwise posted in all other locations; and
(5) 20 miles per hour in any duly marked school zone, provided that
such limit will only apply at such times as the lighted signals are flashing
except that the school zone shall not apply on such days as school is not in
session.
The maximum speed limit established by or pursuant to this paragraph shall
be of force and effect unless otherwise posted. (Ord. 1845, Sec. 1; Ord. 1844,
Sec. 1; Code 2010)
14-105. TRESPASS TO PARK. Trespass to park is defined as:
(a) Driving a vehicle upon the real property of another for the purpose of
parking a vehicle without the express authority or permission of the owner or
occupied to do so; or
(b) Driving a vehicle upon the real property of commercial establishment
during business hours to park a vehicle:
(1) Without conducting any business at the commercial establishment;
or
(2) Not removing the vehicle from the property of the establishment
within a reasonable time after completing a business transaction at the
establishment.
(Code 2010)
14-3
ARTICLE 2. LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
14-201. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS. The Standard Traffic
Ordinance as adopted is hereby modified by adding thereto the following:
The governing body may delegate to the city manager the power to establish
and fix the location of such traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary to
guide and warn traffic under the provisions of this chapter, other traffic ordinances
and the state laws. The city shall place and maintain such traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as may be required by the authority of the
governing body to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances for the regulation of traffic. (Code 1991, 13-201)
14-202. MAJOR TRAFFICWAY. It is deemed necessary and expedient that State
Street from its intersection with the south line of Third Avenue to its intersection
with the east line of Walnut Street be designated as a main trafficway as defined in
K.S.A. 12-685. The trafficway serves a primary function in the movement of traffic
between areas of concentrated activity within the city and as a connecting link with
traffic facilities outside the city. (Code 1975, 18-204; Code 1991, 13-203)
14-203. ONE-WAY STREETS. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, all
persons operating any vehicles, at any time, shall:
(a) Travel northward only on Cliff Drive from a point that is 107.5 feet north
of the south line of Reserve No. 1 in Herman and McKitrick's Addition to the city.
(b) Travel eastward only on that portion of Columbia Street bounded on the
west by the east line of State Street and on the east by the west line of Osage
Street.
(c) Alleyway between 5th and 6th, running parallel to State and School.
(Ord. 1416, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 13-204; Code 2010)
14-204. SCHOOL ZONES; SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS. On such dates that
schools of any school system within the City or adjacent thereof shall be in session
the speed of 20 miles per hour shall be declared to be the effective speed when
appropriate signs giving notice thereof shall be erected upon the following
described streets or parts thereof, to wit:
(a) On State Street from its intersection with Main Street northward to
Harrington Avenue;
(b) On High Street from its intersection with State Street eastward to Ada
Street;
(c) On Columbia Street from its intersection with State Street eastward to a
point 200 feet east of Osage Street;
(d) On Clark Street from a point 125 feet west of Cliff Drive eastward to a
point 300 feet east of State Street;
(e) On Osage Street from a point 300 feet north of High Street to Broadway
Avenue;
(f) On Fanny Street from its intersection with Cron Street to its intersection
with Ohio Street;
(g) On Cron Street from its intersection with Fanny Street to its intersection
with Sunflower Avenue;
14-4
(h) On Robbins Street from its intersection with Shirley Avenue to its
intersection with Fanny Street;
(i) On Dearborn Street from its intersection with Shirley Avenue to its
intersection with Sunflower Avenue;
(j) On Sunflower Avenue from its intersection with Cron Street to its
intersection with Ohio Street;
(k) On Kelly Avenue from its intersection with Bobbie Street westward to a
line 300 feet westward from its intersection with Helen Street.
(l) From the north curb line of Kelly Avenue southward on Helen Street 300
feet southward from its intersection with Summit Avenue;
(m) On Summit Avenue from its intersection with Bobbie Street westward to
its intersection with Leckliter Street;
(n) On Belmont Avenue from a point 135 feet east of Crest Street to a point
60 feet west of Custer Lane;
(o) On Mainsgate Road from its intersection with Belmont Avenue to its
intersection with Linden Court.
(p) On Augusta Avenue from its intersection with Ohio Street to its
intersection with Greyhound Drive.
(q) On Greyhound Drive from its intersection with Augusta Avenue to its
intersection with Belmont Avenue.
The aforesaid speed shall be the effective limit during the hours posted by
signs giving notice thereof.
(Ord. 1854, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
14-205. SPEEDING IN EXCESS OF 20 MILES PER HOUR PROHIBITED DURING
CERTAIN HOURS. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive or
operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city in areas designated as “School
Zone” under Section 14-205 of this article in excess of 20 miles per hour during the
hours when traffic warning light signals are visible indicating that such speed limit
is in effect. (Ord. 1844, Sec. 3; Code 2010)
14-206. SCHOOL ZONE; SPEED LIMIT; FINES DOUBLED. (a) It shall be unlawful
for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city in
areas designated as “School Zone” under section 14-205 in excess of 20 miles per
hour during the hours when traffic warning light signals are visible indicating that
such speed limit is in effect.
(b) For any person convicted of a traffic infraction committed within a school
zone during hours in which the school zone in effect, the fine schedule for such
infraction shall be double what is assessed outside a school zone.
(c) Signs shall be posted at all school zones indicating that fines are doubled
when committed within a school zone. The absence of such signs at a school
zone shall not be a defense to doubling fines for traffic citations under this article.
(Code 2010)
14-207. ANGLE PARKING. Angle parking is hereby permitted wherever indicated by
markings on the curb, sidewalk or pavement or by signs as authorized by the
governing body of the city. (Code 1975, 18-208; Code 1991, 13-207)
14-5
14-208. TRUCK ROUTES. The governing body shall be authorized to designate and
establish truck routes through the city for the use of trucks or other commercial
vehicles. All such routes shall be marked by suitable signs to advise the traveling
public of existence of such truck route or routes. (Ord. 1378, Sec. 2; Code 1991,
13-210)
14-209. SAME; DEFINITION. For the purpose of sections 14-210:213, trucks or other
commercial vehicles means any truck, pickup truck trailer, tractor or any vehicle
whether self-propelled by an engine or motor or whether the same is towed behind
or pushed ahead of a motor vehicle when such vehicle or combination of vehicles
has a gross weight of 26,000 pounds or more, including, but not limited to, any
construction equipment such as motor patrols or graders, bulldozers or caterpillartype
tractors. For the purpose of sections 14-210: 213 gross weight shall mean the
total weight of any truck or trailer or any other combination of vehicles being towed
or pushed by a similar propelling vehicle. (Ord. 1848, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
14-210. SAME; TRUCKS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL VEHICLES REQUIRED TO
FOLLOW TRUCK ROUTES. From and after the designation of truck routes as
provided by sections 14-210 and 14-213, every truck or other commercial vehicle,
as defined in section 14-211 shall use and follow such prescribed route or routes
while in the city and shall not use any residential street or other street except those
designated and marked as truck routes. Provided, that when it may be necessary
for any such vehicle to deliver or unload cargo or to load or receive cargo at any
destination within the city and the same is not prohibited by ordinance, such
vehicle may leave the truck route at the street intersection nearest to the place of
the truck route by the most direct street to the truck route. Provided further, that
public safety officers of the city may direct the routing of all such vehicles. (Ord.
1378, Sec. 4; Code 1991, 13-212)
14-211. SAME; TRUCK ROUTES DESIGNATED. For the purpose of sections 14-
210:213, the following streets and avenues of the city are hereby designated as
truck routes:
(a) All of Seventh Street within the city limits.
(b) All of Walnut Street within the city limits.
(Ord. 1848, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
14-212. PARKING CERTAIN TRUCKS IN PROHIBITED AREAS. (a) No vehicle, as
defined within K.S.A. 8-126, as amended, including but not limited to transport,
truck tractor, semitrailer, commercial trailer not mechanized, recreational vehicle or
truck of a rated capacity of more than 1 1/2 tons or being in an aggregate length of
20 feet, including one or more connected vehicles, shall be, at any time, parked or
left unattended on any street, avenue or public way within those portions of the city
that are zoned A-1, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, PR-1, PUD, PR-1,
PR-2, PR-3, C-M-CC and I; provided, that nothing herein shall deny the right to
park any such vehicles for emergency refueling or making an emergency repair or
for the purpose of making delivery or pick up within prohibited areas; provided
further, that all such vehicles may he parked in other areas of the city so long as
such parking shall not be contrary to other ordinances of the city relating to the
parking of such vehicles.
14-6
(b) It shall he unlawful for any person or persons to park vehicles as set forth
in this section and any such person so violating any of the provisions shall upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00.
(Ord. 1640, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
14-213. SAME; PRESUMPTION, OWNER ILLEGALLY PARKED MOTOR VEHICLE.
In a prosecution for parking a vehicle as set forth in section 14-214 of this article,
proof of identify of the registered owner of the vehicle, as shown by the registration
license plate upon the vehicle in violation, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed
such vehicle at the place where the violation occurred. (Code 1975, 18-213)
14-214. PARKING, STANDING OF TAXICABS, BUSES. The driver of a bus or
taxicab shall not stand or park the same upon any street in any business district at
any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand respectively, except that this
provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping in
accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. (Code 1975,
18-214; Code 1991, 13-216)
14-215. UNAUTHORIZED MOTOR VEHICLES. (a) Prohibited Acts. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any unauthorized motor vehicle, motor cycle or
motor driven cycle, except those of the city or any other governmental unit
authorized by the city manager, to go upon any levee dike, dam, embankment, in
any ditches or upon any public lands owned by the city, or under its control and
supervision; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the
operation of any such vehicle as above set forth in any street, roadway, driveway
or parking areas so used and dedicated.
(b) Exceptions. By designation, the governing body of the city may
authorize certain areas in which the vehicles or any of them, above set forth in this
section, may be operated upon certain prohibited areas of the city as set forth in
subsection (a) of this section when the same shall be posted.
(c) Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a code violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a
sum not more than $50.00.
(Code 1975, 18-220; Code 1991, 13-218)
14-216. PARADES AND PROCESSIONS. No parade or procession of persons or
vehicles, excepting the military forces of the United States, the State of Kansas
forces of police or fire departments, or funeral processions, shall occupy, march or
proceed along any street or highway until the city manager shall have been
notified by the person in charge thereof and until the city manager shall have made
provisions for such purpose together with an escort if he or she deems such escort
necessary; provided that no such parade or procession shall be authorized during
such time as the public peace shall be disturbed or acts of violence are likely or
threatened thereby. (Code 1975, 18-301; Code 1991, 13-219)
14-217. SAME; REGULATIONS. All parades shall be governed by the following
regulations:
14-7
(a) All parades shall be formed and shall be confined within an area
bounded by Kelly Avenue on the north, by Osage Street, projected northward to
Kelley, on the east, and shall be bounded on the north and west by the city limits;
provided, that in special cases the city manager may designate and authorize
parade routes, formations, and the time of the event. Permit to be issued by the
city manager.
(b) All participants and drivers of vehicles shall conform to the direction of
the officers of the department of safety in connection with the formation and
movement of such parade or procession.
(Code 1975, 18-302; Code 1991, 13-220; Code 2010)
14-218. CARELESS DRIVING. Any person who shall operate or halt any vehicle on
the streets, lanes, alleys or other public highways in the city in a careless or
inattentive, or imprudent manner, or in such a manner as to indicate a careless or
heedless disregard for the rights or the safety of others, or in such a manner as to
endanger or be likely to endanger, any person or property, shall be guilty of
careless driving. (Code 1991, 13-221)
14-219. OUTDOOR PARKING/STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. The
outdoor parking and/or storage of major recreational equipment such as boats,
camping or house trailers, motor homes, horse trailers or utility trailers shall be
regulated as follows:
(a) Major recreational equipment shall not be utilized for living purposes,
except for the convenience of temporary lodging and when stored as personal
property of the occupant. Temporary lodging shall be limited to 30 days in a
calendar year.
(b) Parking and/or storage in the public right-of-way, whether in whole or in
part, is prohibited.
(c) Parking and/or storage that obstructs the view for ingress and egress of
alleys, driveways, and street corner sight triangles is prohibited.
(d) Parking and/or storage shall not impair utility and drainage easements.
(e) Parking and/or storage between the front property line and the front
building line (extending to the lot’s side property lines) is allowed only on a paved
hard surface such as concrete, asphalt or at least 4 inches of packed rock or
gravel. The drive area between the street and property line shall be poured
concrete or asphalt. Paving on City property requires a permit. The minimum
number of off street parking spaces required in the zoning district must still be
maintained.
(f) Parking and/or storage in the side yard or back yard is allowed.
(Ord. 1977; Code 2010)
14-8
ARTICLE 3. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
14-301. HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DEFINED. As used in this article, the term
hazardous material shall mean any substances or materials in such quantity and
form which may pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety or property, which
may include, but are not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, etiologic
agents, flammable liquids and solids, combustible liquids or solids, poisons,
oxidizing or corrosive materials and compressed gases, or any material that due to
its nature may cause death or disability injury upon contact therewith. (Code 1991,
13-301)
14-302. SAME; EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any
container which shall have a capacity of 150 gallons or less which shall be used
for the purpose of supplying fuel for the vehicle on which it is mounted. The
provisions of this article shall not apply to the delivery of small containers intended
for use by consumers or the delivery of hazardous materials to fixed sites as part
of normal operations of that site. (E.g. portable propane cylinders for cooking, fuel
delivers for fixed site, etc.) (Code 1991, 13-302)
14-303. TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Except as provided in
section 14-304 it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity
to transport any hazardous material upon any street, avenue, highway, road, alley
or any other public right-of-way in the city. (Code 1991, 13-303)
14-304. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ROUTES. The provisions of section 14-303 shall
apply to all streets, avenues, highways, roadways, alleys or other public right-ofways
within the city except those specified within this section where transportation
of hazardous materials shall be allowed. Transportation of hazardous materials
shall be allowed upon the following streets, avenues, highways or roadways:
(a) US Highway 400 (Seventh Street)
(b) US Highway 77 (Walnut Street)
(c) Osage Street between Seventh and Main (only for the purpose of
making deliveries)
(d) Main Street between Osage and Ohio (only for the purpose of making
deliveries)
(e) Ohio Street between Main and the North city limit (only for the purpose of
making deliveries)
(Code 1991, 13-304)
14-305. PARKING OF VEHICLES OR TRAILERS CARRYING HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other
entity to park any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer carrying any hazardous material
within any of the following city zoning districts as defined in Chapter 16 of this
code:
(b) This section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers parked
for continuous periods of time not to exceed one hour where such vehicles, trailers
or semi-trailers are parked along those routes specified in section 14-304.
(Code 1991, 13-305)
14-9
14-306. REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED TRAILERS. If any vehicle, trailer or a
semi-trailer is found parked in violation of the provisions of this article, the Director
of Public Safety, or his or her designee, or any law enforcement officer may
require the owner, operator or lessee of the vehicle to move it within one hour. If
such removal is not accomplished on the order of any such officer, it may be
accomplished by any such officer, by any reasonable means, if the continued
presence of the vehicle at its parked location constitutes, adds to or prevents
correction of a situation threatening imminent injury or damage to persons or
property. (Code 1991, 13-306)
14-10
ARTICLE 4. BICYCLES
14-401. DEFINITIONS. A bicycle is defined as every device propelled by human
power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of
which is more than 14 inches in diameter. (Code 1975, 18-401; Code 1991, 13-
401)
14-402. APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE. Every person owning a bicycle propelled
wholly or in part by muscular power, shall procure, and the safety department is
hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written application therefor, a
bicycle license. Whenever any person shall acquire by purchase, gift or otherwise
such a bicycle, such person shall, within five days after the acquisition of the
same, upon written application therefor, apply for a license which shall be issued
by the public safety department. The license shall entitle the licensee to operate
the bicycles for which the licenses have been issued, upon all the streets, alleys
and public ways, exclusive of sidewalks, in the city. (Code 1975, 18-403; Code
1991, 13-403)
14-403. LICENSE PLATES, REGISTRATION CARDS. The city shall provide a
license plate or other physical indications of registration, together with registration
cards having numbers stamped thereon in numerical order; such license plates or
other physical evidence of registration shall be suitable for attachment upon the
frames of the bicycles which shall be displayed on the bicycles at all times. The
Department of Public Safety shall also keep a record of the issue of each license
to whom issued, and the number thereof. It shall be unlawful to operate or use a
bicycle without obtaining a license or registration. (Code 1975, 18-404, Code 1991,
13-404; Code 2010)
14-404. BICYCLE DEALERS; DAILY RECORDS. All persons engaged in the
business of buying second-hand bicycles are hereby required to keep daily
records, giving the name and address of the person from who each bicycle is
purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof,
and the number of the license plate found thereon, if any. All persons engaged in
the business of selling new or second hand bicycles are hereby required to keep
daily records, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include
the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold,
together with the description and frame number thereof, and the number of the
license plate attached thereto, if any. All such records, shall be open to inspection
by the Director of Public Safety at all reasonable times, and such daily records
shall be preserved for not less than two years. (Code 1975, 18-405; Code 1991,
13-405)
14-405. SALES, TRANSFERS OF OWNERSHIP; DUTIES OF PARTIES. It shall be
the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, to report
such sale or transfer by returning to the department of public safety the registration
card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and
address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred, and such
report shall be made within five days of the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be
the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of
14-11
registration therefor within five days of the sale or transfer. (Code 1975, 18-406;
Code 1991, 13-406)
14-406. UNLAWFUL ACTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or
maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame
licensed pursuant to this article. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time
in which such license plate, seal or registration card is operative; provided, that
nothing in this article shall prohibit the department of public safety from stamping
numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on
which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Code 1975,
18-407; Code 1991, 13-407)
14-407. OPERATION OF BICYCLE ON CERTAIN STREETS. It shall be unlawful for
any person or person to operate any bicycle within the city limits, upon a sidewalk
or a sidewalk area located on State Street from Third Street northward to seventh
Street and for one block on Fourth Street, Fifth Street and Sixth Street on either
side of State Street except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a code violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to
exceed the sum of $25.00. This provision shall not apply to law enforcement.
(Code 1975, 18-408; Code 1991, 13-408; Code 2010)
14-408. LICENSE FEE. The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be
established by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas
and shall be paid in advance. Pursuant to section 14-506 of this article, such
license may be transferred, and the fee shall be paid for the registration of such
transfer. All license fees collected under this article shall be paid into the general
operating fund of the city. (Code 1975, 18-409; Code 1991, 13-409)
14-409. PENALTY. Every person violating any of the provisions of this article for
which a penalty is not otherwise provided, shall upon conviction thereof be fined in
an amount not more than $100.00. In addition to the penalty herein above
provided, the safety department or any safety officer may impound and retain
possession of any bicycle operated in violation of the provisions of this article, and
retain possession of the same until the license provided for herein is obtained by
the owner of such bicycle. (Code 1975, 18-410; Code 1991, 13-410)
14-12
ARTICLE 5. EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES
14-501. FINDINGS OF THE GOVERNING BODY. The governing body finds that
parking and operation of vehicles on certain streets covered by a heavy
accumulation of snow is a matter affecting the health, safety and welfare of the
/citizens of the city, for the reason that parked and stalled vehicles impede snow
removal operations and cause serious traffic congestion. (Ord. 1466, Sec. 1; Code
1991, 13-501)
14-502. DECLARATION OF TRAFFIC EMERGENCY. Whenever snow has
accumulated or there is a possibility that snow will accumulate to such a depth that
snow removal operations will be required, the city manager, or in his or her
absence the director of safety, may declare a traffic emergency and until such
traffic emergency is terminated it shall be unlawful:
(a) To park a vehicle on any street designated an emergency snow route in
section 14-505.
(b) To operate a motor vehicle on any emergency snow route in such
manner or condition that such motor vehicle stalls and is unable to proceed by
reason of the fact that the driving wheels are not equipped with tire chains or snow
tires.
(Ord. 1466, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 13-502)
14-503. NOTICE OF PARKING EMERGENCY; TERMINATION. Upon declaring a
traffic emergency the city manager shall forthwith cause appropriate notice thereof
to be given through the local press, cable TV and other media. The parking
emergency shall be terminated by notice given substantially in the same manner
as the parking emergency was declared. (Ord. 1466, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 13-503)
14-504. REMOVAL OF PARKED VEHICLES. All vehicles parked on emergency
snow routes must be removed within two hours after notice of a traffic emergency
has been given. Any vehicle parked on an emergency snow route after such
period of time may be removed or caused to be removed by a public safety officer,
to the nearest garage or other place of safety and the vehicle may not be
recovered until the towing charges have been paid. (Ord. 1466, Sec. 4; Code
1991, 13-504)
14-505. EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES; ESTABLISHMENT; SIGNS. The following
streets are hereby established as emergency snow routes within the city;
a) Walnut Street from south city limits to Seventh Street;
b) Seventh Street from the west city limits to the east city limits;
c) Osage Street from Seventh Street north to Main Street;
d) Main Street from Osage Street east to Ohio Street;
e) Ohio Street from Main Street north to the north city limits;
f) Lulu-Money Street from Seventh Street north to Kelly Avenue;
g) Kelly Avenue from Money Street east to Custer Lane;
h) State Street from Second Street north to Fanny Avenue;
i) Custer Lane from 100th Street north to Belmont Avenue;
j) 12th Street from Ohio Street east to Custer Lane;
k) High Street from State Street east to Ohio;
14-13
l) Park Lane Drive from Kelly Avenue north to Highland Drive;
m) Fanny Street from State Street east to Ohio Street;
n) Dearborn Street from Fanny Avenue north to Belmont Avenue;
o) Belmont Avenue from Dearborn Street east to Custer Lane
p) Augusta Avenue – Greyhound Drive east from Ohio Street and north to
Belmont Avenue;
q) Stadium Drive from Ohio Street east to Fairway Drive;
r) Fairway Drive from Stadium Drive south to Kelly Avenue;
s) Lakepoint Drive from Ohio Street east to where the street enters into
private property;
t) David Avenue from Ohio Street east to Stone Lake Drive.
(Ord. 1466, Sec. 5; Code 2010, 13-505)
14-506. SNOW DISPOSAL. Snow removed from driveways and sidewalks of private
property will be placed on unpaved right-of-way or individual's property. (Ord.
1466, Sec. 6; Code 1991, 13-506)
14-14
14-15
ARTICLE 6. EMERGENCY ACCESS ROUTES
14-601. DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY ACCESS ROUTE. Whenever life, limb
and/or property of a private citizen is threatened, it shall be permissible to operate
a motor vehicle on an emergency route. It shall be unlawful:
(a) To operate a vehicle on any street, road or lane designated an
emergency route in 14-603 of this Article, except whenever life, limb and/or
property of a private citizen is threatened.
(b) To park a vehicle on any street, road or lane designated an emergency
route in 14-603
(c) To operate a vehicle during time of an emergency as declared by the
Mayor, City Manager, Director of Public Safety, or designated representatives of
these offices, on designated emergency route.
(Ord. 1648, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
14-602. REMOVAL OF PARKED VEHICLES. Removal of Parked Vehicles. All
vehicles, not operated by City employees or designated representatives of the
City, parked on emergency routes shall be removed by the Department of Public
Safety, to an impound facility and vehicle may not be recovered until impound fees
have been paid. (Ord. 1648, Sec. 3; Code 2010)
14-603. EMERGENCY ROUTES; ESTABLISHMENT; SIGNS. The following streets
are hereby established as emergency routes within the City;
(a) Grove Street from the Water Plant North.
(Ord. 1648, Sec. 4; Code 2010)
14-604. SAME; PENALTY. Any operator of a vehicle who shall violate the provisions
of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, he fined in an amount not to
exceed fifty ($50.00) dollars. (Ord. 1648, Sec. 5; Code 2010)
15-1
CHAPTER XV. UTILITIES
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Water
Article 3. Electricity
Article 4. Sewers
Article 5. Solid Waste
Article 6. Water Conservation
____________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
15-101. DEFINITION. For the purposes of this article “utility services” shall include
water, electrical, sewer, solid waste (refuse) and other services provided by the
city. (Ord. 1951, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
15-102. DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS. Unless otherwise provided, water, electric,
sewer, solid waste (refuse) or other utility service shall be terminated for
nonpayment of service fees or charges in accordance with section 15-103. (Ord.
1951, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
15-103. NOTICE; HEARING. (a) If a utility bill has not been paid on or before the due
date as provided in this chapter, a delinquency and termination notice shall be
issued by the city within five days after the delinquency occurs and mailed to the
customer at his or her last known address. A copy also shall be mailed to the
occupant of the premises if the occupant and the customer are not the same
person.
(b) The notice shall state:
(1) The amount due, plus delinquency charge;
(2) Notice that service will be terminated if the amount due is not
paid within ten days from the date of the notice unless the date on the notice
to pay the charges due shall be on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in
which event such notice will give the consumer until 8:00 a.m. of the next
business day in which to pay the charges;
(3) Notice that the customer has the right to a hearing before the
designated hearing officer.
(Ord. 1951, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
15-104. ADJUSTMENT OF BILLS. Administrative and Hook-up Errors. An
adjustment, refund or back-billing shall be made for any overcharge or
undercharge resulting from incorrect reading of the meter, incorrect application of
the rate schedule, incorrect meter connection, or other similar reason.
(a) Overcharges. The amount of the overcharge will be refunded or
credited to the customer. The time period for which the utility will adjust, refund, or
credit the customer’s bill shall not exceed two years.
(b) Under charges. The bills will be recalculated back to a period not to
exceed one year for commercial customers and a period not to exceed six months
15-2
for residential customers. Back-billing will be completed within six months of the
discovery of the error. If the back-billing creates customer hardship, a reasonable
agreement to pay shall be offered.
(c) Illegal connections. This section does not apply to under charges
caused by an illegal action or illegal hookup.
(Ord. 1951, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
15-105. BILLING CONSOLIDATED. It is hereby deemed necessary by the governing
body to consolidate its billing to utility customers in and upon one statement. The
statement shall show clearly on the face thereof, the amount of the separate
charge for each such utility service. (Code 1975, 20-119; Code 1991, 14-221)
15-106. BILLING AREA NO. 1. The city clerk shall bill all customers located in Area
No. 1, on the 15th day of each month. Such bills shall be due and payable on or
before the 27th day of the month following such billing. (Code 1975, 20-122; Code
1991, 14-224)
15-107. BILLING; AREA NO. 2. The city clerk shall bill all customers located in Area
No. 2, on the 31st day of each month. Such bills shall be due and payable on or
before the 12th day of the month, following such billing. (Code 1975, 20-123; Code
1991, 14-225)
15-108. DELINQUENT BILLS; RECONNECTING FEE; AREA NO. 1. Should any
customer of water or electric service or both located in Area No. 1 fail, refuse or
neglect to pay any bill on or before the 27th day of the month following such billing,
a penalty of five percent of such bill shall be added. The city clerk shall notify in
writing any customer who has filed, refused or neglected to pay any bill on or
before the 27th day of the month following such billing, of the intention of the city to
discontinue service unless the bill be paid within 10 days after the mailing of the
notice. Should such customer fail to pay the bill or request a hearing within 10
days following such notice, the city shall disconnect such service or services.
Before any such service or services may be restored, the customer shall pay all
past due bills plus fees to cover the cost to the city in disconnecting and
reconnecting such service or services. The fees for disconnecting and
reconnecting services will be established by Resolution of the Governing Body of
the City of Augusta, Kansas. (Code 1975, 20-124; Ord. 1489, Sec. 2; Code 1991,
14-226)
15-109. DELINQUENT BILLS; RECONNECTING FEE; AREA NO. 2. Should any
customer of water or electric service or both located in Area No. 2 fail, refuse or
neglect to pay any bill on or before the 12th day of the month following such billing,
a penalty of five percent of such bill shall be added. The city clerk shall notify in
writing any customer who has failed, refused or neglected to pay any bill on or
before the 12th day of the month following such billing of the intention of the city to
discontinue service unless the bill be paid within 10 days after the mailing of the
notice. Should such customer fail to pay the bill or request a hearing within the 10
days after the mailing of the notice, the city shall disconnect such service or
services. Before any such service or services may be restored, the customer shall
pay all past due bills plus fees to cover the cost of the city in disconnecting and
15-3
reconnecting such service or services. The fees for disconnecting and
reconnecting services will be established by Resolution of the Governing Body of
the City of Augusta, Kansas. (Code 1975, 20-125; Ord. 1489, Sec. 2; Code 1991,
14-227)
15-110. DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; NOTICE; HEARING; FINDING; LIABILITY.
Water service shall be terminated for nonpayment of service fees or charges as
provided in this Article. (Code 1991, 14-228; Code 2010)
15-111. LANDLORD LIABILITY. (a) Owners of premises served by utility service
under this article shall be liable for payment of the cost of any utility service
account delinquency arising from service provided to such premises, regardless of
whether the utility service was furnished upon the application and request of the
owner or the lessee of the premises. This provision shall also apply when the
premises are leased by or through an agent or other representative of the owner.
(b) In the event a delinquency arises involving leased premises, the owner
or owner's agent shall be notified in writing of the delinquency of the lessee by first
class regular mail within 10 days after the billing to the lessee becomes delinquent.
Notice shall be sufficient if mailed to the last known address of the owner or
owner's agent known to city personnel responsible for said mailing, after
reasonable inquiry. If the delinquent billing, interest and penalty are not paid within
15 days of the mailing, the affected utility service may be discontinued and no
further such service shall be furnished by the city to the premises until all billings
for the utility service to said premises, interest, late payment charges and a
reconnection charge, if applicable, is paid in full.
(c) If utility service is furnished to leased premises on the application and
request of the lessor of the premises, then all billings for utilities furnished to such
leased premises shall be made directly to the lessor, and the lessor shall be fully
liable for the cost of service furnished. (Code 2010)
15-4
ARTICLE 2. WATER
15-201. REGULATIONS. The furnishing of water to customers by the city through its
waterworks system shall be governed by the regulations set out in this article.
(Code 1991, 14-201)
15-202. SERVICE NOT GUARANTEED. The city does not guarantee the delivery of
water through any of its mains and connecting services at any time except only
when its mains, pumping machinery, power service connection are in good
working order, and the supply of water is sufficient for the usual demand of its
consumers. (Code 1975, 20-112; Code 1991, 14-202)
15-203. SERVICE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED. (a) The owner of all houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purpose, situated within the city abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located public water mains, is
hereby required at his or her own expense to make connection to such public
water main.
(b) Before any connection is made to the city's water system an application
must be made in writing to the city clerk by the owner of the premises, or his or her
authorized representative, for a permit to make such connection.
(Code 1991, 14-203)
15-204. APPLICATION FOR SERVICE. (a) Any person, firm or corporation desiring
a connection with the municipal water system shall apply in writing to the city clerk,
on a form furnished by the city for that purpose, for a permit to make the
connection.
(b) The application shall:
(1) Contain an exact description including street address of the
property to be served;
(2) State the size of tap required;
(3) State the size and kind of service pipe to be used;
(4) State the full name of the owner of the premises to be served;
(5) State the purpose for which the water is to be used;
(6) State any other pertinent information required by the city;
(7) Be signed by the owner or occupant of the premises to be
served, or his or her authorized agent.
(c) Each application for a connection permit shall be accompanied by
payment of fees and/or costs specified in section 15-206.
(Code 1991, 14-204)
15-205. CITY TO MAKE CONNECTIONS. All taps shall be given, street excavations
made, corporation cocks inserted, pipes installed from main to curb, and the curb
cock installed in a meter box to which the service pipe is to be connected by city
employees only. (Code 1991, 14-205)
15-206. WATER CONNECT FEES; COSTS. Regulations relating to water connection
fees and costs shall be as follows:
15-5
(a) All charges for water service installation in the amounts as hereinafter
fixed shall be paid to the city clerk when application is made for a new service
installation for the supply of water from the city mains. The city shall make such
installation when the applicant shall have extended his or her service line to the
proper location for a meter as determined by the water department. A water
connection fee shall be charged to each customer as established from time to time
by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas.
(b) Whenever services shall be permitted by the city to a water user outside
of the city limits, then the water connection fee shall be fixed by the governing
body of the city upon the granting of an application therefor.
(Ord. 1303, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 14-206)
15-207. CURB COCKS. There shall be a curb cock in every service line attached to
the city main, the same to be placed within the meter box. Curb cocks shall be
supplied with strong and suitable "T" handles. (Code 1975, 20-106; Code 1991,
14-207)
15-208. CHECK VALVES. Check valves are required on all connections to steam
boilers or on any other connection deemed necessary by the water
superintendent. Safety and relief valves shall be placed on all boilers or other
steam apparatus connected with the water system where the steam pressure may
be raised in excess of 40 pounds per square inch. (Code 1975, 20-111; Code
1991, 14-208)
15-209. UNAUTHORIZED SERVICE. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation, other than duly authorized city officials or employees to turn water on
or off at the water meter or curb cock shut off, with a key or in any other manner,
without first obtaining written permission from the city manager or his or her
designee. (Code 1975, 20-118; Code 1991, 14-209; Code 2010)
15-210. METERS. (a) All water furnished to customers shall be metered.
(b) Meters shall be located between the sidewalk or property line and
curbing when the main is in the street, and on private property within three feet of
the alley line when the main is in the alley.
(c) The city's responsibility stops at the property line.
(Code 1975, 20-104; Code 1991, 14-210; Code 2010)
15-211. SAME; TESTING. Meters shall be tested before being set and at any other
time thereafter when they appear to be measuring incorrectly. If a test is
requested by the customer and the meter is found to be accurate within two
percent, the meter will be deemed correct and a charge established from time to
time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas will be
made to the customer. (Code 1991, 14-211)
15-212. TAMPERING WITH METER. It shall be unlawful for any person to break the
seal of any meter, to alter the register or mechanism of any meter, or to make any
outlet or connection in any manner so that water supplied by the city may be used
or wasted without being metered. It shall be unlawful for any person except an
15-6
authorized employee of the city to turn any curb cock on or off, except an
authorized employee of the city to turn any curb cock on or off. (Code 1975, 20-
115; Code 1991, 14-212; Code 2010)
15-213. LEAKS. No allowances shall be made for water used or lost through leaks,
carelessness, neglect or otherwise after the same has passed through the meter.
However, every customer shall have the right to appeal to the city from water bill or
meter reading which he or she may consider excessive. (Code 1991, 14-213;
Code 2010)
15-214. DISCONNECTION, RECONNECTION CHARGE. The governing body shall
establish, by resolution, a water service disconnection and reconnection charge.
Any service disconnected for nonpayment of delinquent bill shall be reconnected
only upon payment of the delinquent bill, interest penalty thereon, and the
disconnection and reconnection charge. (Code 1991, 14-214)
15-215. WATER SERVICE MAINTENANCE. Property owners shall at their own
expense repair, replace or remove all such waterlines on their own premises as
may be required by the department to prevent loss to the city or damage to the
public. When the owner shall fail promptly to repair waterlines on his or her own
premises after notice by the city, the department may disconnect the service until
repaired or until the condition causing loss or damage shall be corrected. (Code
1975, 20-107; Code 1991, 14-215)
15-216. INTERRUPT SERVICE. The city reserves the right to interrupt water service
for the purpose of making repairs or extensions to water lines or equipment. (Code
1975, 20-103; Code 1991, 14-216)
15-217. PROHIBITED ACTS. It shall be a violation of this article for any unauthorized
person to:
(a) Perform any work upon the pipes or appurtenances of the city's
waterworks system beyond a private property line unless such person is employed
by the city;
(b) Make any connections with any extension of the supply pipes of any
consumer without written permission to do so having been first obtained from the
city manager or his or her designee;
(c) Remove, handle or otherwise molest or disturb any meter, meter lid,
cutoff, or any other appurtenances to the water system of the city;
(Code 1991, 14-217; Code 2010)
15-218. WASTING WATER. Water users shall prevent unnecessary waste of water
and shall keep sprinklers, hydrants, faucets and all apparatus, including the
service line leading from the property to the meter in good condition at their
expense. (Code 1991, 14-218)
15-219. RIGHT OF ACCESS. Authorized employees of the city may enter upon any
premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of reading the meter or servicing or
inspecting meters or water lines. (Code 1975, 20-114; Code 1991, 14-219)
15-7
15-220. RATES. The rates charged for water received from the municipal water
system of the city shall be as follows:
(a) Rates; Within City. The rates for water used within the city shall be as
follows:
Base charge, per month - $11.65
1 to 10,000 gallons - $3.00 per thousand (1,000) gallons
10,001 to 20,000 gallons - $3.25 per thousand (1,000) gallons
20,001 to 50,000 gallons - $3.50 per thousand (1,000) gallons
Over 50,000 gallons - $3.75 per thousand (1,000) gallons
(b) Rates; Outside City. The rates for water used outside the city shall be
as follows:
Base charge per month - $12.90
1 to 10,000 gallons - $3.20 per thousand (1,000) gallons
10,001 to 20,000 gallons - $3.45 per thousand (1,000) gallons
20,001 to 50,000 gallons - $3.70 per thousand (1,000) gallons
Over 50,000 gallons - $3.95 per thousand (1,000) gallons
(Ord. 1985, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
15-221. OWNERSHIP OF WATER INSTALLATION AND METER. The city expressly
retains the title to and the ownership of the water service installation, the water
meter and all service equipment used in connection with the supply of water to any
premises or building within the city. In the event of subdivision of any lots or
parcels of ground or the transfer of the title to other persons, any water service
installed previous to the subdivision of the lot shall be and remain with the building
or premises immediately adjacent thereto. All transfers of the ownership of any
property in the city now or thereafter reserved by water by any existing installation
shall be deemed not to affect this rule and the city will only supply water to the
building or premises immediately adjacent to the service connection through the
service previously installed. (Code 1975, 20-108; Code 1991, 14-229)
15-222. EXTENSION OF WATERLINES. The city may extend its waterlines within or
without the city by construction or purchase when applications have been made
and agreements entered into by persons along the proposed extension that will in
the judgment of the governing body produce a revenue sufficient to pay the
interest on the cost of the extension and the cost of extending water service;
provided, that the city may make extensions within the city without application in
the manner provided by law; provided further, that the city may at its option require
any applicant from outside the city limits to who it may decide to sell water to
construct his or her own connection to the waterlines within the city at his or her
own expense and to maintain the same at the expense of the owner; provided
further, that any extension of water service outside the city limits shall be subject to
the approval of the governing body. (Code 1975, 20-109; Code 1991, 14-230)
15-223. TRENCHING AND BACKFILLING. No excavation made by a plumber in the
public grounds shall be kept open longer than is absolutely necessary to make the
connections required and while open, the ditch or excavation shall be protected by
suitable barriers, guards and lights, as provided by ordinances pertaining to such
15-8
work. The backfilling shall be thoroughly compacted and left in a condition
satisfactory to the department. Where such excavation or backfilling is made in an
unsatisfactory manner, the department shall cause it to be corrected and the
charges thereof shall be charged to the plumber. (Code 1975, 20-110; Code 1991,
14-231)
15-224. CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED. No person, company, corporation or
institution shall establish, or permit to be established, or maintain, or permit to be
maintained, any cross connection whereby a private water supply, or any source of
contamination, may enter the public water supply of the City of Augusta, unless
said source is approved by the City Council of the City of Augusta and the Kansas
Department of Health and Environment. (Ord. 1867, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 14-232;
Code 2010)
15-225. SAME; PROTECTIVE BACKFLOW DEVICES REQUIRED. Approved
devices to protect against backflow or backsiphonage shall be installed at all
fixtures and equipment where backflow and/or backsiphonage may occur and
where there is a hazard to the potable water supply in that polluted water or other
contaminating materials may enter into the public water supply. Any situation in
which a heavy withdrawal of water, such as a sudden break in the main or water
being used from a fire hydrant, may cause a negative pressure to develop which
could lead to backsiphonage of polluted water into the system shall be improper
and must be protected by approved backflow preventive valves and systems as
determined by the superintendent. (Ord. 1867, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 14-233)
15-226. SAME; INSPECTION. The Public Works Director or his designate of the City
of Augusta shall have the right of entry into any building or premises in the City as
frequently as necessary in order to ensure that plumbing has been installed in a
manner as to prevent the possibility of contamination of the public water supply of
the City of Augusta, Kansas. (Ord. 1867, Sec. 4; Code 1991, 14-234; Code 2010)
15-227. SAME; PROTECTION FROM CONTAMINANTS. Pursuant to the authority
given under Home Rule Powers and K.S.A. 65-163a, the City of Augusta, may
refuse to deliver water to any premises where a condition exists which might lead
to the contamination of the public water and may continue to refuse to deliver
water until the condition is corrected to the satisfaction of the City. In addition, the
City shall have the authority to immediately terminate water service to premises
where a backflow or backsiphonage condition exists which may be hazardous to
the health of customers served by this public water supply system of the City of
Augusta. (Ord. 1867, Sec. 5; Code 1991, 14-235)
15-228. INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE. There is hereby incorporated by
reference for the purpose of regulating cross connections between the public water
supply and any source of contamination that certain manual adopted by the
Governing Body of the City Augusta, known as, “MANUAL OF REGULATIONS
REGULATING BACKFLOW AND BACKSIPHONAGE OF CONTAMINANTS DUE
TO CROSS CONNECTIONS FOR THE CITY OF AUGUSTA PUBLIC WATER
SUPPLY”. No fewer than three (3) copies of said manual shall be marked or
15-9
stamped, “Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1867“, and to which shall be
attached a copy of this ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open to
inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 1867, Sec. 6;
Code 2010)
15-10
ARTICLE 3. ELECTRICITY
15-301. ELECTRIC SERVICES. Any person desiring electric current of the Augusta
Municipal Electric Light Plant for any of the services herein set forth, and having
made a meter deposit for each service required as provided for herein, shall be
entitled to receive electric current for the service required for the premises or
fixture designated; provided, that the electric wiring and apparatus in such
premises or fixture shall conform and continue to conform to the ordinances of the
city, relating to the installation, operation and maintenance of electric wiring and
apparatus. The electric metering shall be installed as directed by the electric
distribution superintendent. (Code 1975, 20-102, Code 1991, 14-301)
15-302. RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE. The city hereby reserves the right to
discontinue service to any or all electric customers, without notice, when same is
necessary in the repair of the electric system or any part thereof. (Code 1975, 20-
103; Code 1991, 14-302)
15-303. RATES. The users of electrical current or electrical energy from the
municipally owned electric utility of the city shall be classified as follows:
(a) Residential;
(b) Commercial;
(c) Power;
(d) Commercial and Power services combined.
The charges under such classified uses of electrical current or electrical
energy shall be as stated as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 1310, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 14-303)
15-304. RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. The Application, character of services and net
monthly rate for residential service shall be as follows:
(a) Application: To provide electric service for all domestic purposes in
single family residences and individually metered apartments when supplied at
one point of delivery and measured through one watt hour meter.
(b) Character of Service: Alternative current at approximately 60 cycles,
single phase at such voltage as may be available for the service required.
(c) Net Monthly Rate:
Base Rate: $8.00 per month
$0.1055 per kWh for first 500 kWh
$0.1015 per kWh for next 500 kWh
$0.0965 per kWh for all additional kWh
(d) Fuel and Energy Cost Adjustment (FECA): The Augusta retail
electric rates are based on the total cost of natural gas, diesel and lubricants
consumed at the Augusta Power Plants, and for all costs associated with
purchased power. The annual average base cost is equivalent to $0.0471 per Net
Kilowatt Hour (KWH) delivered to the Augusta electric system.
Whenever the monthly average cost of fuel and lubricants plus purchased
power differs from the base cost of $0.0471 per Net KWH, all Augusta billings of
the succeeding month shall be increased or decreased accordingly as the actual
15-11
cost of fuel and lubricants plus purchased power was above or below the base
cost.
The monthly electric usage for all streetlights and traffic lights will be
deducted from the calculation of the fuel and energy cost adjustment to assist with
covering the costs of these services to the City of Augusta. For the purpose of this
calculation, 85,000 kWh will be used as the monthly electric usage for the
streetlights and traffic lights.
This fuel and energy cost adjustment (FECA) shall be made each month, and
shall apply to each KWH sold.
(Ord. 1937, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
15-305. COMMERCIAL SERVICE. The application, character of service and rates for
commercial electric service in the city shall be as follows:
(a) Application : To all electric service supplied to any commercial customer
whose entire requirements on the premises are supplied under this rate at one
metering point
Base Rate: $25.00 per month
$0.1015 per kWh for the first 8,000 kWh
$0.0895 per kWh for the next 20,000 kWh
$0.0865 per kWh for all additional kWh
To all electric service supplied to any commercial customer located 1,500 feet
or more outside of the city limits using three phase commercial power.
Base Rate: $200.00 per month
$0.1015 per kWh for the first 8,000 kWh
$0.0895 per kWh for the next 20,000 kWh
$0.0865 per kWh for all additional kWh
(b) Fuel and Energy Cost Adjustment (FECA):
The Augusta retail electric rates are based on the total cost of natural gas,
diesel and lubricants consumed at the Augusta Power Plants, and for all costs
associated with purchased power. The annual average base cost is equivalent to
$0.0471 per Net Kilowatt Hour (KWH) delivered to the Augusta electric system.
Whenever the monthly average cost of fuel and lubricants plus purchased
power differs from the base cost of $0.0471 per Net KWH, all Augusta billings of
the succeeding month shall be increased or decreased accordingly as the actual
cost of the fuel and lubricants plus purchased power was above or below the base
cost.
The monthly electric usage for all streetlights and traffic lights will be
deducted from the calculation of the fuel and energy cost adjustment to assist with
covering the costs of these services to the City of Augusta. For the purpose of this
calculation, 85,000 kWh will be used as the monthly electric usage for the
streetlights and traffic lights.
This fuel and energy cost adjustment (FECA) shall be made each month, and
shall apply to each KWH sold.
(Ord. 1999, Sec. 2; Code 2010)
15-306. TOTAL ELECTRIC. The users of electrical current or electrical energy from
the municipally owned electric utility of the city, who shall use such electrical
energy, to the exclusion of all other power sources, for the source of all heating, air
15-12
conditioning, lighting and water heating in any residence, business or commercial
establishment shall pay effective January 1, 2007, the following rates for the
following time period, as follows:
(a) Net Monthly Rate - Business/Commercial November through May:
Base Rate: $25.00 per month
$0.0860 per kWh
June through October:
Base Rate: $25.00 per month
$0.0860 per kWh for the first 600 kWh
$0.0910 per kWh for all additional kWh
(b) Net Monthly Rate - Residential November through May:
Base Rate: $8.00 per month
$0.0860 per kWh
June through October:
Base Rate: $8.00 per month
$0.0860 per kWh for the first 600 kWh
$0.0910 per kWh for all additional kWh
Provided, that prior to the application of the above rates any user shall
make application to the City Clerk and upon inspection of facilities and
acceptance thereof by the City, the rates and charges herein above fixed
shall apply so long as the facilities, as to power sources, shall remain the
same as of the time of the original inspection; but at such time as such power
sources shall change or the connected load shall exceed that herein above
set forth, the rates above set forth shall no longer apply.
(c) Fuel and Energy Cost Adjustment (FECA)
The Augusta retail electric rates are based on the total cost of natural gas,
diesel and lubricants consumed at the Augusta Power Plants, and for all costs
associated with purchased power. The annual average base cost is equivalent to
$0.0471 per Net Kilowatt hour (KWH) delivered to the Augusta electric system.
Whenever the monthly average cost of fuel and lubricants plus purchased
power differs from the base cost of$0.047l per net KWH, all Augusta billings of the
succeeding month shall be increased or decreased accordingly as the actual cost
of fuel and lubricants plus purchased power was above or below the base cost.
The monthly electric usage for all streetlights and traffic lights will be
deducted from the calculation of the fuel and energy cost adjustment to assist with
covering the costs of these services to the City of Augusta. For the purpose of this
calculation, 85,000 kWh will be used as the monthly electric usage for streetlights
and traffic lights.
This fuel and energy cost adjustment (FECA) shall be made each month, and
shall apply to each kWh sold. (Ord. 1999; Code 2010)
15-307. CONNECT FEE. The governing body shall establish, by resolution, a fee for
each connection to the electrical and water utilities operated by the city for those
customers who are currently connected to the system, who have no past due
balances with their account in good standing and wish to have their service
relocated to another address within the utility system. For those customers who do
not currently have connections to the utility system the fee is hereby established in
the sum established from time to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the
15-13
City of Augusta, Kansas for each connection to the electrical and water utilities
operated by the city. Such fee shall be payable each time the electrical or water
utility is reconnected at the request of the customer. (Ord. 1849, Sec. 2; Code
2010)
15-308. ELECTRIC TRANSFORMER AND SERVICE CONNECTION FEES. (a) The
City shall supply and install the transformer and associated materials which are
necessary to provide electric service for all new residential, commercial and
industrial customers. For underground service, the developer or customer shall be
responsible for trenching and the installation of conduit according to city
specifications. The City will be responsible for supplying the meter can to the
electrician except that the City shall retain and install the meter can for three phase
pad mount transformers. The City shall charge an Electric Transformer Fee to
assist in the payment of the expenses associated with the provision of electric
service to the customer. The Electric Transformer Fee shall be paid to the City at
the time the required building permits are issued by the Building Department.
(b) Fees for all overhead and underground three phase service shall be
calculated based on the cost to the City for the transformer and associated
materials. The City shall work with the customers to identify the amperage load
and size of transformer. They city will also document to the customer the cost of
the transformers and associated materials.
(c) Single Phase Electric Transformer and Service Connection fees shall be
established from time to time by Resolution of the Governing Body for the City of
Augusta, Kansas.
(d) Fees for all overhead to underground service conversions shall be
calculated on the actual cost of associated wire and materials to the city. The
customer shall be responsible for the conduit and installation of the conduit from
the meter can to the transformer pad or utility pole. Conduits shall be installed by
a licensed electrician in accordance with the most recently adopted National
Electric Codes and any local amendments.
(e) For an upgrade of an existing service over 200 amps single phase which
requires a new transformer, the customer will receive a credit for the existing
transformer and pay the difference between the two transformer costs.
(f) Connection of the overhead service cable to the customer shall be at the
service mat or attachment point on the house as applicable. Installation of the
meter can, service mast, attachment point and electrical cable from the meter can
to the weather head/attachment point shall be installed by a licensed electrician in
accordance with the most recently adopted National Electric Codes and any local
amendments.
(g) The City retains ownership of all transformers, meters, meter cans and
service drop cable or service lateral cable. (Ord. 1941; Code 2010)
15-14
ARTICLE 4. SEWERS
15-401. DEFINITIONS. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of words and terms used in this article shall be as follows:
(a) Building Drain - shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning two feet (0.61 meter) outside the innerface of the building wall.
(b) Building Sewer - shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
(c) B.O.D. (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) - shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in
parts per million by weight.
(d) City - shall mean the City of Augusta.
(e) Combined Sewer - shall mean a sewer receiving both surface run-off
and sewage
(f) Garbage - shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
(g) Industrial Wastes - shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct form sanitary sewer.
(h) Natural Outlet - shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
(i) Normal Domestic Wastewater - shall mean wastewater than has a BOD
concentration of not more than 250 mg/1 and a suspended solids concentration of
not more than 300 mg/1.
(j) Operation and Maintenance - shall mean all expenditures during the
useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor utilities and other items which
are necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve the
capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
(k) pH - shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
(l) Person - shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group. Singular includes plural, male includes female.
(m) Properly Shredded Garbage - shall mean the wastes from the
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions, normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
(n) Public Sewer - shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
(o) Replacement - shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary furthering the
useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for
which such works were designed and constructed. The term operation and
maintenance includes replacement.
15-15
(p) Residential Contributor - shall mean any contributor to the city's
treatment works whose lot, a parcel or real estate or building is used for domestic
dwelling purposes only.
(q) Sanitary Sewer - shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(r) Sewage - shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
(s) Sewage Treatment Plant - shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
(t) Sewage Works - shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage.
(u) Sewer - shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
(v) Shall is mandatory; May is permissive.
(w) Slug - shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
(x) Storm Drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) - shall mean a sewer
which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
(y) Suspended Solids (SS) - shall mean solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
(aa) Treatment Works - shall mean any devices and systems for storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or
liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage
collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and
their appurtenances; extensions improvement, remodeling, alterations thereof;
elements essential to provide a reliable recycle supply such as stand-by treatment
units and clean well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land
that will be an integral part of the treatment process.
(bb) Useful Life - shall mean the estimated period during which a treatment
works will be operated.
(cc) User Charge - shall mean that portion of the total wastewater service
charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
(dd) Water Meter - shall mean a water volume measuring and recording
device, furnished and/or installed by the city or furnished and/or installed by a user
and approved by the city.
(ee) Watercourse - shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 1475, Art. I, Secs. 1:22; Ord. 1523, Art II, Secs. 1:11; Code 1991, 14-401)
15-402. NATURAL OUTLET. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet
within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
15-16
with subsequent provisions of this article. (Ord. 1475, Art. II, Sec. 1; Code 1991,
14-402)
15-403. PRIVY UNLAWFUL. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 1475, Art. II, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 14-
403)
15-404. SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED. The owner of all houses, buildings, or
properties used for human employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated
within the city which buildings are or shall be located near a sewer, or a block
within any sewer district to which a sewer extends, shall make such connection
with such sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article. This may be
necessary in the judgment of board of health for the purpose of disposing of all
substances in such building affecting the public health which may be lawfully and
properly disposed of by means of the sewer. (Ord. 1475, Art. II, Sec. 3; Code
1991, 14-404)
15-405. FAILURE TO CONNECT. If any such person shall fail, neglect, or refuse to
connect any building or buildings with the sewer systems as aforesaid and as
herein provided for, for more than 10 days after being notified in writing by the
board of health, then the city may advertise for bids for the construction in making
the sewer connection and may contract therefore with the lowest responsible
bidder or bidders and cause such premises to be connected with the sewer
system. The cost and expense thereof shall be assessed against the property on
the premises so connected, such assessment to be made in the same manner as
other special assessments are made; provided, that all such sewer connections as
ordered by the board of health are in accordance with the provisions of this article
and shall be in full compliance with the requirements and provisions of the
plumbing code of the city. (Ord. 1475, Art. II, Sec. 4; Code 1991, 14-405)
15-406. PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is
not available under the provision of section 15-404, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of
this article. (Ord. 1475, Art. III, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 14-406)
15-407. SAME; PERMIT. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 1475, Art. III, Sec. 2; Code
1991, 14-407)
15-408. SAME; INSPECTION. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall
not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
plumbing inspector. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
15-17
plumbing inspector when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours,
by the plumbing inspector after the inspection has been called for, excepting
Sundays and holidays. (Ord. 1475, Art. III, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 14-408)
15-409. SAME; DISCHARGE. (a) The type, capacities, location and layout of a
private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the local
health department and Kansas Department of Health and Environment. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(b) At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 15-404, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and
any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Ord. 1475, Art. III, Secs. 4:5; Code 1991, 14-409)
15-410. SAME; MAINTENANCE. The owner shall operate and maintain the private
sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city. (Ord. 1475, Art. III, Sec. 6; Code 1991, 14-410)
15-411. SAME; PLUMBING INSPECTOR; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. No
statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the plumbing inspector. (Ord.
1475, Art. III, Sec. 7; code 1991, 14-411)
15-412. SAME; BUILDING SEWER CLOSING. When a public sewer becomes
available the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days and
the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean
bank-run gravel or dirt. (Ord. 1475, Art. III, Sec. 8; Code 1991, 14-412)
15-413. TAMPERING WITH SEWER. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make
any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. (Ord.
1475, Art. IV, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 14-413)
15-414. SEWER; BUILDING PERMITS; CLASSES. There shall be two classes of
building sewer permits:
(a) For residential and commercial service;
(b) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application of a
special form furnished by the city. The permit applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed.
(Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 14-414)
15-415. SAME; COSTS. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
15-18
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec. 3;
Code 1991, 14-415)
15-416. SAME; SEPARATE SEWER CONNECTION. A separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer. (Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec.
4; Code 1991, 14-416)
15-417. SAME; OLD BUILDING SEWER USE. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the plumbing inspector, to meet all requirements of this article. (Ord. 1475, Art.
IV, Sec. 5; Code 1991, 14-417)
15-418. SAME; MATERIALS. Materials required for the building sewer shall conform
to Table A, Chapter 7 of the 2003 International Plumbing Code. (Ord. 1475, Art. IV,
Sec. 6; Code 1991, 14-418)
15-419. SAME; SPECIFICATIONS. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be
subject to the approval of the plumbing inspector, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four inches. The slope for six inch pipe shall not be less
than one-eighth inch per foot. If four inch pipe is allowed, one-quarter inch per foot
slope should be the minimum for that size connection. (Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec. 7;
Code 1991, 14-419)
15-420. SAME; ELEVATION. (a) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building
sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might
therefore be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from
frost. The building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment
in so far as possible. Changes of direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipe and fittings, including clean-out fittings.
(b) In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
approved sump pump or ejectors and discharged into the building sewer. The use
of any pumping equipment for which cross-connections with a public water supply
systems are needed, is prohibited.
(Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Secs. 8:9; Code 1991, 14-420)
15-421. SAME; EXCAVATIONS. All excavations required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city.
Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M.
Specifications (C12-19) except no backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected. (Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec. 10; Code 1991, 14-421)
15-19
15-422. SAME; JOINTS. (a) All joints and connections shall be made gas tight and
water tight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and
filled with molten lead, federal specification (QQ-L-156), not less than one inch
deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish, or
other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material after the joint has been
tested and approved. All joints in vitrified clay pipe and between such pipe and
metal shall be made with approved hot-poured or cold-formed asphaltic jointing
material as specified below. Clay pipe may have factory applied joint, meeting
A.S.T.M. Specifications (C-425).
(b) Material for hot-poured joints should not soften sufficiently to destroy the
effectiveness of a joint subjected to a temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit nor
be solvent in any of the waste carried by the drainage system. Joints shall be
caulked tight with jute, hemp or familiar approved material.
(c) See sewer specifications for jointing compounds and other pertinent
information if neither hot-poured or cold-asphaltic materials were specified. Other
jointing materials and methods may be used only if approved by the Kansas State
Department of Health and Environment.
(Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec. 11; code 1991, 14-422)
15-423. SAME; SEWER CONNECTION. The connection of a building sewer into the
public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a
suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no
properly located "Y" branch is available, the owner shall at his or her expense
install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at locations specified by the building
inspector. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no
properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hold may be cut into the public
sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry into the downstream direction at an
angle of about 45 degrees. The 45 degree elbow may be used to make such
connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of
the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made
secure and water tight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used
for the connection only when approved by the plumbing inspector. (Ord. 1475, Art.
IV, Sec. 12; Code 1991, 14-423)
15-424. SAME; INSPECTION. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
plumbing inspector or his or her representative.
(Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec. 13; Code 1991, 14-424)
15-425. SAME; BARRICADES. All excavation for public sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord.
1475, Art. IV, Sec. 14; Code 1991, 14-425)
15-426. ROOF; FOUNDATION DRAINS. No person shall make connection of
downspouts, exterior foundation drainage, area way drains, surface run-off or
15-20
groundwater to a building sewer building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to the public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1475, Art. IV, Sec. 15; Code 1991,
14-426)
15-427. STORMWATER DRAIN. (a) No persons shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, subsurface
drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(b) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specially designed as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the city to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 1475, Art. V, Secs. 1:2; Code 1991, 14-427)
15-428. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas.
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in
excess of two mg/1 as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
and personnel of the sewage works.
(d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec. 3; code 1991, 14-428)
15-429. SAME; LIKELY HARM. No persons shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, water, or wastes if it
appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or can endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The substances prohibited:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade).
15-21
(b) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1 or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees
Fahrenheit (0 degrees and 65 degrees centigrade).
(c) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the city.
(d) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
(e) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city
for such materials.
(f) Any waters or wastes containing phenols, or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to
meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters.
(g) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
(h) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of (9.5).
(i) Material which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
(j) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving water.
(k) Any waters or wastes having (1) a five-day BOD greater than 250 parts
per million by weight, or (2) containing more than 250 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or (3) having an average daily flow greater than two percent of
the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the city.
Where necessary in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide, at his or her
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the
biochemical oxygen demand to 250 parts per million by weight, or (2) reduce the
suspended solids to 300 parts per million by weight, or (3) control the quantities
15-22
and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any
other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall
be submitted for the approval of the city and no construction of such facilities shall
be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing.
(Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec. 4; Code 1991, 14-429)
15-430. SAME; OPTIONS OF CITY. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 14-429 of this
article, and which in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
(a) Reject the wastes;
(b) Require the pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing rates or sewer charges under the provisions of
section 14-435 of this article.
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws. (Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec. 5; Code 1991, 14-430)
15-431. INTERCEPTORS. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec.
6; Code 1991, 14-431)
15-432. PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; EXPENSE. Where preliminary treatment or
flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his
or her expense. (Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec. 7; Code 1991, 14-432)
15-433. CONTROL MANHOLE. When required by the city, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
manhole shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all
times. (Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec. 8; Code 1991, 14-433)
15-434. TESTING STANDARDS. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall
15-23
be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all outfalls of a
premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab
samples.) (Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec. 9; Code 1991, 14-434)
15-435. SPECIAL AGREEMENTS. No statement contained in this article shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore,
by the industrial concern. (Ord. 1475, Art. V, Sec. 10; Code 1991, 14-435)
15-436. DAMAGE TO SEWERS. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully,
or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct. (Ord. 1475, Art. VI, Sec. 1; Code 1991, 14-436)
15-437. INSPECTION BY CITY. The city and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials an identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the proposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city or his or her
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond
that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. (Ord. 1475, Art. VII, Sec. 1;
Code 1991, 14-437)
15-438. COMPANY INDEMNIFIED; WHEN. While performing the necessary on
private properties referred to in section 15-437, the city or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss
or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as
required in section 15-433. (Ord. 1475, Art. VII, Sec. 2; code 1991, 14-438)
15-24
15-439. ENTRY BY CITY. The city and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved. (Ord. 1475, Art. VII, Sec. 3; Code 1991, 14-439)
15-440. PENALTIES. (a) Any person found to be violating any provision of this article
except section 15-436 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the
notice, permanently cease all violations.
(b) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (a) above, shall be guilty of a code violation, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceed $100.00 for each
violation. Each 24 hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of
such violation.
(Ord. 1475, Art. VIII, Secs. 1:3; Code 1991, 14-440)
15-441. BILLS. Bills shall be rendered monthly as provided in sections 15-225:226
and shall be collected as a combined utility bill. (Code 1991, 14-441)
15-442. SEWER SERVICE RATES. The monthly sewer charge for service
connections to the public sanitary sewer system of the City shall be based upon
the average monthly water usage during the months of December, January and
February as rounded to the nearest 1,000 gallons, herein after referred to as the
average winter water usage and calculated using the following rates:
(A) Inside the City
(1) Minimum charge for all individual residential, commercial and
industrial billing units contributing sewage to the system shall be $7.00 per
month.
(2) Based upon the average winter water usage each billing unit
shall pay the following commodity charges per 1,000 gallons per month:
(a) First10,000 gallons - $0.61 per 1,000 gallons
(b) Next40,000 gallons - $0.72 per 1,000 gallons
(c) Next50,000 gallons - $0.77 per 1,000 gallons
(d) Over100,000 gallons - $0.88 per 1,000 gallons
(3) For calculating the monthly sewer service rates for a building with
multiple billing units which share a common water meter and sewer
connection and where one customer is billed for all water and sewer service
to that building, the rate shall include the minimum charge for each billing unit
within the facility and the commodity charge per 1,000 gallon usage based
upon the average winter water usage.
15-25
(4) For the purpose of calculating the commodity charge for sewer
customers who are not connected to the City*s water system or for those
sewer customers where there exists no established average winter water
usage, the City will use an average of 6,000 gallons per month.
(5) The average winter water usage from which the service fees are
based will be adjusted annually on or after April 1.
(B) Sewer Capital Fee - Inside the City
(1) Each residential, commercial and industrial billing unit with
service connections contributing sewage to the system shall pay a monthly
sewer capital fee that is to be used toward the retirement of the debt for the
wastewater treatment plant, annual costs related to inflow and infiltration
maintenance and repairs within the sewer collection system, sewer collection
system equipment and a wastewater system capital reserve fund. This
monthly fee is in addition to the regular monthly sewer service charges as
identified in Section 15-443 (A).
(2) The monthly sewer capital fee shall be based upon the average
winter water usage as rounded to the nearest even 1,000 gallons. For
calculating this monthly fee for sewer customers who are not connected to the
City*s water system or for those sewer customers where there exists no
established water usage, the City shall use the average of 6,000 per month.
(3) Upon determining the average winter water usage, each sewer
customer shall be placed within a user class tier and pay the monthly sewer
capital fee for that usage tier. The average winter water usage used to
determine the sewer capital fee will be reviewed annually and adjusted at the
same time the average winter water usage is adjusted for the regular monthly
sewer commodity charges.
(4) Based upon the average winter water usage, each sewer
customer shall pay the following sewer capital fee:
(a) Tier One0 to 5,000 gallons - $ 15.00
(b) Tier Two5001 to 10,000 gallons - $ 25.00
(c) Tier Three10,001 to 20,000 gallons - $ 50.00
(d) Tier Four20,001 to 50,000 gallons - $ 75.00
(e) Tier Five50,001 to 100,000 gallons - $120.00
(f) Tier SixOver 100,000 gallons - $180.00
(5) The average winter water usage will be used to determine the
sewer capital fee for a building with multiple billing units which share a
common water meter and sewer connection and where one customer is billed
for all water and sewer service to that building.
(C) Outside the City
(1) Minimum charge for all individual residential, commercial and
industrial billing units contributing sewage to the system shall be $8.50 per
month.
(2) Based upon the average winter water usage each billing unit
shall pay the following commodity charges per 1,000 per gallon per month:
(a) First10,000 gallons - $0.72 per 1,000 gallons
(b) Next40,000 gallons - 0.83 per 1,000 gallons
(c) Next50,000 gallons - $0.88 per 1,000 gallons
(d) Over100,000 gallons - $0.99 per 1,000 gallons
15-26
(3) For calculating the monthly sewer service rates for a building with
multiple billing units which share a common water meter and sewer
connection and where one customer is billed for all water and sewer service
to that building, the rate shall include the minimum charge for each billing unit
within the facility and the commodity charge per 1,000 gallon usage based
upon the average winter water usage.
(4) For the purpose of calculating the commodity charge for sewer
customers who are not connected to the City*s water system or for those
sewer customers where there exists no established average water usage, the
City will use an average of 6,000 per month.
(5) The average winter water usage from which the service fees are
based will be adjusted annually on or after April 1.
(D) Sewer Capital Fee - Outside the City
(1) Each residential, commercial and industrial billing unit with
service connections contributing sewage to the system shall pay a monthly
sewer capital fee that is to be used toward the retirement of the debt for the
wastewater treatment plant, annual costs related to inflow and infiltration
maintenance and repairs within the sewer collection system, sewer collection
system equipment and a wastewater system capital reserve fund, This
monthly fee is in addition to the regular monthly sewer service charges as
identified in Section 15-443 (C).
(2) The monthly sewer capital fee shall be based upon the average
winter water usage rounded to the nearest even 1,000 gallons. For calculating
this monthly fee for sewer customers who are not connected to the City*s
water system or for those sewer customers where there exists no established
water usage, the City shall use the average of 6,000 per month.
(3) Upon determining the average winter water usage, each sewer
customer shall be placed within a user class tier and pay the monthly sewer
capital fee for that usage tier. The average winter water usage used to
determine the sewer capital fee will be reviewed annually and adjusted at the
same time the average winter water usage is adjusted for the regular monthly
sewer commodity charges.
(4) Based upon the average winter water usage, each sewer
customer shall pay the following sewer capital fee:
(a) Tier One0 to 5,000 gallons - $ 18.00
(b) Tier Two5001 to 10,000 gallons - $ 30.00
(c) Tier Three10,001 to 20,000 gallons - $ 60.00
(d) Tier Four20,001 to 50,000 gallons - $ 90.00
(e) Tier Five50,001 to 100,000 gallons - $145.00
(f) Tier SixOver 100,000 gallons - $215.00
(5) The average winter water usage will be used to determine the
sewer capital fee for a building with multiple billing units which share a
common water meter and sewer connection and where one customer is billed
for all water and sewer service to that building.
(Ord. 1986, Sec. 1; Code 2010)
15-443. SERVICE CHARGES. The following be and the same are hereby established
as just and equitable rates of service charges to be paid to the city for the use of
15-27
the city's sewer disposal system by all persons, firms, corporations, the United
States, the State of Kansas and political subdivisions and any organizations whose
premises are connected, or may hereafter be connected, to the sanitary sewer
system of the city:
(a) Single-Family Dwelling Units. The base rate shall apply.
(b) Multiple-Family Dwelling Units. Each separate dwelling unit is the
multiple-dwelling establishment shall be charged per month, the same being the
minimum charge under the base rate plus water usage.
(c) Rooming Houses. The rate for rooming houses shall be the same as
computed in the same manner as single-family dwelling units to be extent and as
though the same were a single-family dwelling unit, taking into consideration, of
course, the entire average water use of such premises.
(d) Business and Commercial Building, Institutions, Schools and Churches,
Other than Offices and Office Buildings. Where such building is occupied by a
single business, industrial or commercial enterprise, or institution, schools or
churches, each separate building or buildings, as the case may be, having a
separate water metering facility, shall have its sewage service charge computed
upon the base rate.
(e) Office Buildings and Other Industrial Establishments, Institutions,
Schools and Churches. Where more than one of such are occupied and
maintained as separate entities, using a separate quarter, room or space, all of
which are under the same roof and in the same building, having a single water
meter in the facility for all such establishments, shall have each of their respective
sewage service charges computed in the same manner as provided for multiplefamily
dwellings as set out herein above.
(f) Extra Strength Users. All establishments having a connection to the
sanitary sewer facility of the city discharging wastes greater than normal strength
waste as defined by this article shall have their monthly sewage service charge
established by the base rate plus the charge as computed by the equation for
extra strength users. Twenty-four hour composite sample will be ran at least every
six months to determine the surcharge. The samples collected shall have sample
collected at no less than hourly intervals over a 24 hour period.
(g) Unusual or Exceptional Circumstances or Classifications. If any unusual
or exceptional case or circumstances such as where a leak, wastage or stoppage
of water use has occurred during the base period, or such as where the subject
premises are unoccupied for a substantial period of time during the base period, or
such as where the average water use during the base period is either excessive or
less than which would normally be expected thereon, or such as here accurate
metering or measuring of average water use cannot be obtained, or such as where
the premises connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city are creating a
substantially greater or less load upon the sewer system by reason of a
substantially larger or smaller or peculiar or unusual type of discharge in the
sanitary sewer system, and such as where the premises is a newly erected
building not in existence during the entire base period, or such as water used on
the premises connected to the city's sanitary sewer system is both from a metered
and unmetered use, and such as where for any other cause or reason it would be
inequitable, unjust or unreasonable, either to the owner or occupant of the
premises or to other users of the sanitary sewer system of the city, to charge a
15-28
rate under any of the classifications herein above described, the city manager, in
his or her discretion, may and is hereby authorized, from time to time to adjust
such sewage service charges for such premises, either upward or downward to a
rate, which he or she deems equitable, just and reasonable. Provided, that
nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting any person who feels
aggrieved by such adjustment.
(h) Extra Strength Charge. The charge to users which contribute greater
than normal domestic strength wastewater. The surcharge shall be computed by
the following equality:
Cs = [Bc (B) + Sc (S)] 0.00084 Vu
Where:
Cs = A surcharge for wastewaters of excessive strength.
Bc = Operation and Maintenance Cost for Treatment of a unit of
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) = 0.121.
B = Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level as stated in
Sc = Operation and Maintenance Cost for treatment of a unit of
Suspended Solids (SS) = 0.124
S = Concentration of Suspended Solids from a user above a base
level as stated in
Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time
0.00084 = Unit conversion factor per 1,000 gallons
Extra Strength Unit Charges are established as follows:
Inside City and Outside City:
BOD 0.121/# BOD
Suspended Solids0.124/ # SS
(i) Toxic Pollutant Charge. Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants
which causes an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from
the city's treatment plants shall pay for such increased costs.
(j) Monitoring Charge. When regulations, as set forth, by federal, state and
city require monitoring of the waste from an industry, whether of strength,
calculations or for NPDES compliance, that industry shall pay a monitoring charge.
The monitoring charge shall consist of all costs for personnel, material and
equipment sued to collect and analyze samples from the user's wastewater.
The exact charge shall be based on actual costs and shall be determined by
the city.
(Ord. 1523, Art. IV, Sec. 2; Code 1991, 14-444)
15-29
ARTICLE 5. REFUSE
15-501. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall
apply:
(a) Contractor - shall mean a person with whom the city has a contract to
collect and dispose of refuse and garbage.
(b) Person - shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust, other legal entity having proprietary interest in a
premises, or other legal entity having responsibility for an act.
(c) Garbage - shall mean the solid or semisolid animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooling and serving of foods,
including cans, bottles and cartons in which it was received and wrapping in which
it may be placed for disposal.
(d) Refuse - shall mean all solid waste from residential, commercial or
industrial premises. It shall include semi-liquid or wet wastes with insufficient
moisture and other liquid contents to be free flowing. It shall not include, except
for minor amounts incidental to other wastes, any refuse resulting from building
evacuation, demolition, or remodeling work, or any construction work, nor shall it
include stumps, grass clippings, yard waste, limbs, tree trunks, tree trimmings, and
limbs, or the tree trimmings resulting from the cutting down, or the topping of any
tree, regardless of who performs the work, nor shall it include refuse resulting from
tornado, cyclone, extreme windstorms, ice storms, flood or other act of God, or the
burning of any building.
(e) Standard Containers - shall mean tapered plastic or galvanized metal
containers, watertight with tight setting covers approximately 32 gallons or less in
capacity with cover, handle and side bails or plastic bags, in or out of the
container, tied or sealed, or as otherwise approved by the city; provided, that a
standard container when full of garbage and refuse as used herein shall not
exceed the total weight of 60 pounds inclusive of the container.
(Code 1975, 14-101; code 1991, 14-501)
15-502. COLLECTION; REFUSE, GARBAGE BY CITY. All refuse and garbage
accumulated within the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the
city or by the employees of the city or by contractors specifically authorized to
collect and dispose of refuse and garbage or by persons collecting and disposing
of their own refuse and garbage. (Code 1975, 14-102; Code 1991, 14-502)
15-503. CONTRACTS. The governing body of the city shall have the right to enter
into a contract with any responsible person or persons; provided, that the
contractor shall collect and dispose of all, or any part of refuse within the city, the
terms of the contract to be arranged and determined by the governing body of the
city and the contract to be awarded to a responsible person or persons after
proper negotiation; provided further, that the contract for the collection and
disposal of refuse as herein defined shall in no way conflict with the terms and
conditions of this article. (Code 1975, 14-103; Code 1991, 14-503)
15-504. ACCUMULATION; STORAGE OF REFUSE; GARBAGE. It shall be the duty
of every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises or
15-30
any place where garbage or refuse accumulates, to provide, and at all times to
maintain in good order and repair, on any premises a portable container or
containers for refuse storage of sufficient capacity and of sufficient numbers to
accommodate and securely hold all of the garbage and refuse that may
accumulate between regular scheduled collection. Garbage and refuse shall be
accumulated and handled for pickup or transported as follows, to wit:
(a) All refuse and garbage shall be placed in standard containers; except, it
shall not be necessary to place books, boxes, magazines, or newspapers n
containers; provided, that they are securely tied in bundles or completely
contained in disposal boxes not larger than 24"x24"x36", provided further, that in
collection of garbage and refuse as set forth and defined in section 15-508(c) of
this article containers other than standard containers may be used when such
other containers shall be accepted and approved in advance by application made
to the city clerk.
(b) Baskets, boxes, and noncomplying refuse or garbage cans or containers
shall be considered disposable refuse and shall be removed by the contractor if
they are the proper size and otherwise acceptable for collection; or shall be left
uncollected if they are larger than the allowable size or unacceptable for collection.
(c) Large bulky items such as furniture and appliances that cannot be
reduced to fit approved containers will not be collected by routine collection as
provided herein but the same will be collected by the city, or by persons acting
under the authority or by contract with such city upon notification by any person or
persons that such items are to be collected. A rate shall be charged for such
collections commensurate with the amount of time and equipment necessary to
collect and dispose of such items.
(d) Within the corporate limits of the city, all garbage or refuse, consisting of
waste, animal and vegetable matter, which may attract flies, dogs, or rodents, shall
be drained of all excess liquid, wrapped in paper or disposal containers and placed
or stored, until collected, in covered standard containers.
(e) No person shall permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or
vacant, or on any public place in the city, such quantities of garbage or refuse,
either in containers or not, that shall in the opinion of the city, constitute a health or
sanitation hazard.
(f) No person shall permit to accumulate quantities of refuse, papers, trash,
ashes, or other waste materials, within or close to any building in the city, unless
the same is stored in containers in such a manner as not to create health or fire
hazard.
(g) No person shall bury refuse and garbage at any place within the city or
keep, place, or deposit refuse and garbage on any public or private grounds or
premises whatsoever, except in containers or receptacles for collection upon
premises owned, occupied, or under possession and control of such person;
provided, that lawn and garden trimmings may be composted.
(h) No person shall accumulate and transport garbage and refuse upon any
premises and transport the same to other premises within the city for the purpose
of collection by the city, but collection shall be made only upon premises where
such garbage and refuse shall have accumulated by use.
(i) No person shall create, cause, or add to any refuse accumulation not
placed for regular or special haul, or cause unwholesome odors, or cause the
15-31
attraction or collection of insects or rodents, or burn any garbage, leather, rubber,
plastic, green or wet vegetation or organic material, or burn any other substance
producing some problems within the city unless the operations are carried out in
an approved type incinerator.
(j) No person shall haul or cause to be hauled any garbage, refuse, or
other waste material of any kind, to any dumping place or site or area, within or
without the corporate limits of the city, unless such place, or site is operated by the
contractor or is a sanitary landfill site approved by the Kansas State Department of
Health; in addition to complying with all applicable health ordinances of the city.
(k) No person shall deposit in a garbage or refuse container or otherwise
offer for collection any hazardous garbage, refuse, or waste. Hazardous materials
shall be transported by the owner, responsible person or his or her agent, to a
place of safe deposit or disposal as prescribed by the sanitation officer or his or
her authorized representative. Hazardous material shall include: explosive
materials, rags or other waste soaked in volatile and flammable materials, drugs,
poisons, radioactive materials, highly combustible material and/or other wastes,
contaminated by infection or contagious disease, and other materials which may
present a special hazard to collection or disposal personnel or equipment or to the
public.
(Code 1975, 14-104; Code 1991, 14-504)
15-505. COLLECTION; GARBAGE, REFUSE. The city, or its authorized contractor,
shall collect from the residential areas of the city not less than twice weekly and
from the designated business routes and all food establishments of the city, not
less than twice weekly. It shall be the duty of any person in possession or in
control of any premises to make available for collection all garbage and refuse as
follows, to wit:
(a) Residential Areas. Standard containers and supplemental material to
be collected as aforesaid shall be placed on the outside of the fence in areas
where there is an alley contiguous to the particular premises and to the curb at the
front side of the house in all areas where there are no contiguous alleys; provided,
that when any person or persons shall live alone and shall have a physical
impairment that makes the moving of containers for pickup to the designated spots
unusually difficult then such person may make application to the city clerk for
variance from the requirements for placing containers in designated places. The
city clerk shall be authorized to permit variances by changing collection to a
specific place on the premises and may require such proof of impairment as may
be necessary to make full determination.
(b) Commercial Areas. Standard containers, other approved containers
and supplemental material shall be placed outside of buildings or other enclosures
in areas where alleys shall be contiguous to the establishment. Otherwise in such
place or places readily accessible to the collector.
(c) Heavy accumulations such as brush, broken concrete, ashes, sand, or
gravel, automobile frames, dead trees, and other bulky, heavy materials shall be
disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling same.
(d) Manure, waste oils from garages or filling stations, tire rubber or
materials considered hazardous and/or dangerous, shall be removed and
15-32
disposed of at the expense of the person controlling same in the manner and by
the method directed by the sanitation office.
(Code 1975, 14-105; Code 1991, 14-505)
15-506. PERMITS. No person shall collect or haul over the city streets in the city, any
garbage or refuse unless such person shall have a contract with the city; provided,
that this section shall not apply to departments of city government of the city;
provided further, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a person
from hauling or disposing of his or her own refuse accumulated at his or her
residence or business establishment, in such a manner as not to endanger the
public health or safety, not to create a nuisance to the inhabitants of the city and
not to litter the streets and alleys of the city. (Code 1975, 14-106; Code 1991, 14-
506)
15-507. AUTHORIZED PERSONS; EXCEPTION. The contractor or any person
authorized by him or her, his or her agents and employees shall have the right to
remove or haul garbage or refuse, and shall not be a prohibited person as
provided in the above section. Nothing elsewhere contained in this article shall be
construed as prohibiting construction contractors, tree surgeons, roofers and other
private contractors, whose operations result in the accumulations of refuse, from
hauling and disposing of accumulations of garbage and refuse resulting form their
own operations; provided, that they shall at all times comply with the regulations
and provisions of this article. (Code 1975, 14-107; Code 1991, 14-507)
15-508. CHARGES; COLLECTION; DISPOSAL. The City in providing the service of
collecting and disposing of all refuse and garbage accumulated within the City for
the purpose of preventing unsanitary, unsightly, hazardous, unhealthful and
dangerous conditions caused by the accumulation of garbage and refuse, shall
establish and collect a service charge or fee to defray the cost and maintenance of
service and to pay any person contracting with the City for the collection and
disposal by the contractor for the collection and disposal thereof Such charges and
fees shall be computed, based and charged to the owners or occupants of
dwelling units or commercial establishments as nearly as practicable upon the
basis of volume or time expended in the collection and disposal thereof.
(a) There shall be a charge, assessed and collected from each residential
unit within the City the sum of$13.00 per month.
(b) In the case of multiple or group dwellings, other than motels or boarding
houses, there shall be a charge as hereinafter set forth. Such buildings, where a
two cubic yard or larger trash container approved by the City and capable of being
lifted mechanically by the refuse truck is located at a central point accessible to the
refuse truck and shall be large enough to accommodate all refuse from the living
units shall be charged at the rate of $13.00 per month per occupied unit for two
pickups per week. Charges will be added to the water or electric billing if each unit
is billed separately for water or electric service. Where all of the living units are on
a single meter the charges for the number of occupied units will be billed to the
owner. Where each unit has its individual pickup point, without a two cubic or
larger trash container, the charge will be $13.00 per month and billed as stated
above, The owner of the building or dwelling shall be charged the rental fee of the
15-33
container when the City provides such container(s), under the rate structure set
forth below.
(c) There shall be charged, assessed and collected from each commercial
institution, establishment, office, including but not limited to motels, restaurants,
boarding houses, office buildings, stores, etc., charges to be assessed as
provided, to wit:
(1) There shall be a minimum charge of $14.95 per month to each
person so long as on each collection the pickup shall consist of not more than
three standard containers, which must be used, as defined herein.
(2) For pickups of over three standard containers, there shall be the
minimum charge of$14.95 per month to each commercial establishment plus
$2.20 for each standard container above three and less than seven, so long
as only standard containers are used. If more than six standard containers
are needed, the owner must provide a container approved by the City and
capable of being lifted mechanically by the refuse truck.
(3) For the collection of garbage, refuse and rubbish by the City
where approved attachable containers rented from the City are utilized, the
following monthly fees shall be charged:
Collections Per Week
Dumpster Size 2 3 4 5 6
2 Yards $52.73 $72.74 $92.82 $112.84 $132.62
2.5 Yards $60.79 $85.05 $108.96 $133.25 $156.81
3 Yards $63.69 $90.54 $117.09 $143.88 $170.73
4 Yards $74.72 $106.74 $141.67 $167.58 $209.84
5 Yards $93.39 $133.42 $177.09 $220.73 $262.30
6 Yards $112.08 $160.11 $212.51 $264.88 $314.77
(4) Privately owned containers shall not be charged the rental fee
established hereby. The owner of the private containers indemnifies and
holds harmless the City for damages and maintenance of the container.
(5) City owned containers rented for use shall only be used for
collection of refuse described herein. Other uses are strictly prohibited. All
containers, either privately or City owned shall retain all lids in operable
condition. Properly sized containers must be used, all refuse must be
contained inside the container, with the lid closed tight.
(6) If for any reason that the City is required to add a lock to secure
the lids of a container for a customer, there will be an additional charge of
$2.00 per month per container.
Rates for multiple container rentals shall be computed on a monthly basis as
follows:
Dumpster Size Rental
2 Yards $20.70
2.5 Yards $25.30
3 Yards $28.75
4 Yards $34.50
5 Yards $43.70
6 Yards $51.75
15-34
(1) Any commercial customer receiving twice-weekly service who
shall place for collection any refuse not in a prescribed container, shall pay an
additional charge which shall be computed at the rate of $67.00 per hour
consumed in each pickup.
(2) The person or establishments above may request additional
pickups be made each week with rates to be increased by $14.95 per
collection for a container up to two cubic yards or $29.84 per collection for a
container between 2.5 and 4 cubic yards, $37.31 per collection for a container
of 5 cubic yards, or $44.77 per collection for a container of 6 cubic yards.
(3) The person or establishments above located outside the City,
shall be charged 125 percent of the in-city rate.
(Ord. 1997; Code 2010)
15-509. DUTY TO REQUEST GARBAGE SERVICE. To assist in maintaining the
general sanitation of the city, it shall be the duty of every person occupying or
having control of the occupancy of any premises located on a regularly established
garbage and refuse route to notify the city clerk of the city at the beginning of such
occupancy and request, accept and use the garbage and refuse pickup and
collection service; provided, that the failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant
of such premises to make such request shall not prevent nor in any way impair or
impede the city from adding the address of such premises to the proper garbage
and refuse collection route records and providing such service and otherwise
enforcing by appropriate action the regulatory measures herein prescribed an
causing the fees or charges therefor to be paid. (Code 1975, 14-109; Code 1991,
14-509)
15-510. BILLING; COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE. The city clerk shall
prepare monthly billings or charges to be made by virtue of section 15-508 of this
article and such charges shall be payable monthly except any charges which may
be made by the city manager with the consent of the governing body for unusual
accumulation of garbage; provided, that such charges may be billed by the city
clerk on any monthly statement rendered for electricity or water bills and any
unpaid charges under this article are hereby declared to be a lien upon and may
be deducted from any electric or water utility deposit in the hands of the city clerk.
Payment of the aforesaid charges are hereby expressly declared to be the liability
of the tenant of the premise using the garbage and refuse collection service, but in
the event that the owner or landlord of such premises is liable for the payment of
either the electric or water utility bills thereon, the landlord or the owner, as the
case may be, shall also be liable for the payment of the charges assessed herein.
In the event that persons using the garbage and refuse collection system shall not
be a customer of the city water department, a bill shall be rendered for such
service in the manner directed by the city manager and all bills shall be payable at
the same time and in the same manner as city water or electric bills. (Code 1975,
14-110; Code 1991, 14-510)
15-511. CHARGES TO BE ON UTILITY BILL. The charges as herein set shall be
assessed against every person as herein above defined that shall receive either
15-35
water or electric service from the city and no payment shall be accepted by the
city, except for the full amount billed for all services, and delinquent refuse and
garbage bill shall carry the due dates, grace periods and penalties as utility bills.
(Code 1975, 14-111; Code 1991, 14-511)
15-512. COMMERCIAL DUMPING AT COMPOST/LIMB SITE. (a) All Commercial
Businesses operating within the City of Augusta that include Tree Services and/or
Mowing Services will be required to obtain a permit to allow for the dumping of
grass clippings, yard waste, and limbs at the City compost/limb site located at 400
South grove during its normal hours of operation. Permits will be monitored by
City of Augusta employees at the compost/limb site.
(b) USD 402 will not be required to obtain a permit allowing the dumping
grass clippings, yard waste, and limbs a the City compost/limb site as long as they
do not hire commercial operators for these types of services.
(Ord. 1998; Code 2010)
15-513. SAME; PERMIT. Permits can be purchased at the Inspection Office located
in City Hall at 113 East 6th Avenue. The permit fee shall be established from time
to time by Resolution of the Governing Body of the City of Augusta, Kansas.
Permits will be valid from the date of purchase until December 31st if the year of
purchase. Permit fees will not be pro-rated based on the date of purchase. (Ord.
1998; Code 2010)
15-36
ARTICLE 6. WATER CONSERVATION
15-601. PURPOSE. The purpose of this article is to provide for the declaration of a
water supply emergency and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water
conservation measures throughout the city in the event such an emergency is
declared. (Code 1991, 14-601)
15-602. DEFINITIONS. (a) Water - shall mean water available to the city for
treatment by virtue of its water rights or any treated water introduced by the city
into its water distribution system, including water offered for sale at any coinoperated
site.
(b) Customer - shall mean the customer of record using water for any
purpose from the city's water distribution system and for which either a regular
charge is made or, in the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of
delivery.
(c) Waste of Water - includes, but is not limited to (1) permitting water to
escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain, or (2) failure to repair a
controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing.
(d) The following classes of uses of water are established:
Class 1: Water used for outdoor watering, either public or private, for
gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, parks, golf courses, playing fields,
swimming pools or other recreational area; or the washing of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers, or the exterior of any building or structure.
Class 2: Water used for any commercial or industrial, including
agricultural, purposes; except water actually necessary to maintain the health
and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employees are
engaged in the performance of their duties at their place of employment.
Class 3: Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in
either classes 1 or 2.
Class 4: Water necessary only to sustain human life and the lives of
domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation.
(Code 1991, 14-602)
15-603. DECLARATION OF A WATER EMERGENCY. Whenever the governing
body of the city finds that an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water
supply needed for essential uses, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution
that a water supply emergency exists and that it will encourage voluntary water
conservation or impose mandatory restrictions on water use during the period of
the emergency. Such an emergency shall be deemed to continue until it is
declared by resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions
declaring the existence and end of a water supply emergency shall be effective
upon their publication in the official city newspaper. (Code 1991, 14-603)
15-604. VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION MEASURES. Upon the declaration of a
water supply emergency as provided in section 15-603, the mayor is authorized to
call on all water consumers to employ voluntary water conservation measures to
limit or eliminate non-essential water uses including, but not limited to, limitations
on the following uses:
15-37
(a) Sprinkling of water on lawns, shrubs or trees (including golf courses).
(b) Washing of automobiles.
(c) Use of water in swimming pools, fountains and evaporative air
conditioning systems.
(d) Waste of water.
(Code 1991, 14-604)
15-605. MANDATORY CONSERVATION MEASURES. Upon the declaration of a
water supply emergency as provided in section 15-603, the mayor is also
authorized to implement certain mandatory water conservation measures,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Suspension of new connections to the city's water distribution system,
except connections of fire hydrants and those made pursuant to agreements
entered into by the city prior to the effective date of the declaration of the
emergency;
(b) Restrictions on the uses of water in one or more classes of water use,
wholly or in part;
(c) Restrictions on the sales of water at coin-operated facilities or sites;
(d) The imposition of water rationing based on any reasonable formula
including, but not limited to, the percentage of normal use and per capita or per
consumer restrictions;
(e) Complete or partial bans on the waste of water; and
(f) Any combination of the foregoing measures.
(Code 1991, 14-605)
15-606. EMERGENCY WATER RATES. Upon the declaration of a water supply
emergency as provided in section 15-603, the governing body of the city shall
have the power to adopt emergency water rates by ordinance designed to
conserve water supplies. Such emergency rates may provide for, but are not
limited to:
(a) Higher charges for increasing usage per unit of the use (increasing
block rates);
(b) Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit rate); or
(c) Extra charges in excess of a specified level of water use (excess
demand surcharge).
(Code 1991, 14-606)
15-607. REGULATIONS. During the effective period of any water supply emergency
as provided for in section 15-603, the mayor is empowered to promulgate such
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, any
water supply emergency resolution, or emergency water rate ordinance. Such
regulations shall be subject to the approval of the governing body at its next
regular or special meeting. (Code 1991, 14-607)
15-608. VIOLATIONS, DISCONNECTIONS AND PENALTIES. (a) If the city
manager, water superintendent, or other city official or officials charged with
implementation and enforcement of this article or a water supply emergency
resolution or ordinance learn of any violation of any water use restrictions imposed
15-38
pursuant to sections 15-605 or 15-607, a written notice of the violation shall be
affixed to the property where the violation occurred and the customer of record and
any other person known to the city who is responsible for the violation or its
correction shall be provided with either actual or mailed notice. The notice shall
describe the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately
or within such specified time as the city determines is reasonable under the
circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the city may terminate water
service to the customer subject to the following procedures:
(1) The city shall give the customer notice by mail or actual notice
that water service will be discontinued within a specified time due to the
violation and that the customer will have the opportunity to appeal the
termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the city governing body
or a city official designated as a hearing officer by the governing body.
(2) If such a hearing is requested by the customer charged with the
violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard before
termination is ordered; and
(3) The governing body or hearing official shall make findings of fact
and order whether service should continue or be terminated.
(b) A fee of $50.00 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service
terminated pursuant to subsection (a). In the event of subsequent violations, the
reconnection fee shall be $200.00 for the second violation and $300.00 for any
additional violations.
(c) Violation of this article shall be a municipal offense and may be
prosecuted in municipal court. Any person so charged and found guilty in
municipal court of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
municipal offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalty for an initial violation shall be a mandatory fine of $100. In addition, such
customer may be required by the court to serve a definite term of confinement in
the city or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not exceed
30 days. The penalty for a second or subsequent conviction shall be a mandatory
fine of $200. In addition, such customer shall serve a definite term of confinement
in the city or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not
exceed 30 days.
(Code 1991, 14-608)
15-609. EMERGENCY TERMINATION. Nothing in this article shall limit the ability of
any properly authorized city official from terminating the supply of water to any or
all service as required to protect the health and safety of the public. (Code 1991,
14-609)
16-1
CHAPTER XVI. ZONING AND PLANNING
Article 1. City Planning Commission /
Board of Zoning Appeals
Article 2. Zoning Regulations
Article 3. Subdivision Regulations
Article 4. Flood Plain Zoning
____________________
ARTICLE 1. CITY PLANNING COMMISSION/
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
16-101. COMMISSION RE-ESTABLISHMENT. There is hereby established the
Augusta City Planning Commission which is composed of seven members of
which five members shall be residents of the city and two members shall reside
outside the city, but within the designated planning area of the city which is within
at least three miles of the corporate limits of the city. (Code 2010)
16-102. MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, INTEREST AND COMPENSATION. The members
of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of
the governing body at the first regular meeting of the governing body in May of
each year and take office at the next regular meeting of the commission. All
members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years each. The
appointments shall be so made that the terms of office of the members residing
outside of the corporate limits of the city do not expire within the same year. By
the re-establishment of the commission, all current members continue to serve
their present terms of office. In case of death, incapacity, resignation or
disqualification of any member, appointment to such a vacancy on the commission
shall be made of the unexpired term of the member leaving the membership.
Should any member have a conflict of interest, either directly or indirectly, in any
matter coming before the commission, he or she shall be disqualified to discuss or
vote on the matter. The governing body may adopt rules and regulations providing
for removal of members of the commission. Members of the commission shall
serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses actually
incurred in the performance of their duties as deemed desirable by the governing
body. (Code 2010)
16-103. MEETINGS, OFFICERS AND RECORDS. The members of the planning
commission shall meet at such time and place as may be fixed in the commission's
bylaws. The commission shall elect one member as chairperson and one member
as vice-chairperson who shall serve one year and until their successors have been
elected. A secretary shall also be elected who may or may not be a member of
the commission. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson
or in the chairperson's absence by the vice-chairperson. The commission shall
adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and hearing procedures. All actions
16-2
by the commission shall be taken by a majority vote of the entire membership of
the commission; except that, a majority of the members present and voting at the
hearing shall be required to recommend approval or denial of an amendment to
the zoning regulations, a rezoning amendment or a special use permit. A proper
record of all the proceedings of the commission shall be kept. The commission,
from time to time, may establish subcommittees, advisory committees or technical
committees to advise or assist in the activities of the commission. (Code 2010)
16-104. POWERS AND DUTIES. The governing body and planning commission shall
have all the rights, powers and duties as authorized in K.S.A. 12-741 et seq., and
amendments thereto, which are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this
section and shall be given full force and effect as if the same had been fully set
forth. The commission is hereby authorized to make or cause to be made,
adopted and maintained a comprehensive plan for the city and any unincorporated
territory lying outside of the city but within Butler County in which the city is
located, which in the opinion of the commission forms the total community of which
the city is a part. The commission shall also cause to be prepared, adopted and
maintained zoning and subdivision regulations on all land within the jurisdiction
designated by the governing body. The comprehensive plan and zoning and
subdivision regulations are subject to final approval of the governing body by
ordinance. Periodically, the governing body may request the commission to
undertake other assignments related to planning and land use regulations. (Code
2010)
16-105. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The planning commission is hereby
designated to also serve as the city's board of zoning appeals with all the powers
and duties as provided for in K.S.A. 12-759. The board shall adopt rules in the
form of bylaws for its operation which shall include hearing procedures. Such
bylaws shall be subject to the approval of the governing body. Public records shall
be kept of all official actions of the board which shall be maintained separately
from those of the commission. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing evidence presented findings of fact, decisions and the vote upon each
question or appeal. A majority of the members of the board present and voting at
the hearing shall be required to decide any appeal. Subject to subsequent
approval of the governing body, the board shall establish a scale of reasonable
fees to be paid in advance by the appealing party. (Code 2010)
16-106. BUDGET. The governing body shall approve a budget for the planning
commission and make such allowances to the commission as it deems proper,
including funds for the employment of such employees or consultants as the
governing body may authorize and provide, and shall add the same to the general
budget. Prior to the time that moneys are available under the budget, the
governing body may appropriate moneys for such purposes from the general fund.
The governing body may enter into such contracts as it deems necessary and may
receive and expend funds and moneys from the state or federal government or
from any other resource for such purposes. (Code 2010)
16-3
ARTICLE 2. ZONING REGULATIONS
16-201. ZONING REGULATIONS INCORPORATED. (a) There are hereby
incorporated by reference as if set out fully herein, the zoning regulations adopted
by the governing body of the City of Augusta, Kansas, as prepared by the city and
consisting of Ordinance Nos. 1455, 1472, 1480, 1505, 1553, 1582 and entitled,
"Zoning Regulations of the City of Augusta, Kansas." No fewer than three copies
of the zoning regulations, marked "Official Copy as Incorporated by Ordinance No.
1480" and to which there shall be a published copy of this section attached, shall
be filed with the city clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all
reasonable business hours.
(b) Aforementioned zoning regulations are amended and supplemented by
ordinances 1632, 1662, 1696, 1719 ,1758, 1800, 1870, 1929, 1949, 1954, 1955,
1974, 1977, 1982, 1994 and 1995.
(Ord. 1455; 1472; 1480; 1505; 1553; 1582; 1632; 1662; 1696; 1719; 1758; 1800;
1870; 1929; 1949; 1954; 1955; 1974; 1977; 1982; 1994; 1995; Code 2010)
16-4
ARTICLE 3. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
16-301. REGULATIONS INCORPORATED. (a) There are hereby incorporated by
reference, as if set out fully herein, certain regulations governing the subdivision of
land located within the City of Augusta, Kansas and certain surrounding area as
described therein, as adopted by the governing body of the City of Augusta,
Kansas and prepared by the city and consisting of Ordinance Nos. 1481, 1506,
1552 and 1578, and entitled "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Augusta,
Kansas." No fewer than three copies of the subdivision regulations marked
"Official Copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1481" and to which there shall be
a published copy of this section attached, shall be filed with the city clerk to be
open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours.
(b) Aforementioned subdivision regulations are amended and supplemented
by ordinances 1643,1661, 1697, 1759, 1789, 1813, 1834, 1872, 1933 and 1943.
(Ord. 1552; 1578; 1661; 1834; 1872; 1933; 1943; Code 2010)
16-5
ARTICLE 4. FLOOD PLAIN ZONING
16-401. Pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3009, 12-3010 and 12-3301,
there is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of providing floodplain
management regulations within the City of Augusta, Kansas, all of the
regulations contained in the document known as the “Floodplain Management
Ordinance for the City of Augusta, Kansas”, which is known as The Model
Floodplain Management Ordinance as approved and recommended by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency Region VII and the Kansas
Department of Agriculture, Division of Water Resources, Floodplain Program.
No fewer than three copies of the Floodplain Management Ordinance for the
City of Augusta, Kansas, shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy as
incorporated by Ordinance No. 1982 of the City of Augusta, Kansas,” and such
copies shall be filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to
the public at all reasonable business hours, provided that such official copies
may not be removed from city hall. All city officials requiring the use of the
Floodplain Management Ordinance for the City of Augusta, Kansas, shall be
supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of such
ordinance as may be deemed expedient by the Governing Body. (Ord. 1982;
Code 2010)
16-6
ARTICLE 5. PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION
16-501. CREATION. Under the authority of the Act there is hereby created by
the Governing Body a municipal corporation to be known as the “City of
Augusta, Kansas Public Building Commission” (the PBC). (Ord. 1822; Code
2010)
16-502. COMPOSITION. The PBC shall be composed of nine (9) members (the
“Members”). The members of the Governing Body and the Mayor are hereby
appointed as Members and the terms of office of the Members shall be coterminus
with such Members’ terms of office as members of the Governing
Body, or as Mayor, respectively, and terms of office for such future Members
shall be co-terminus with such Members’ terms of office as members of the
Governing Body, or as Mayor respectively. In the event that the PBC provides
building or structures that are leased to governmental entities other than the
City, the composition of the PBC shall be modified by subsequent ordinance of
the Governing Body to conform to the requirements of the Act. (Ord. 1822;
Code 2010)
16-503. PURPOSE, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS. The PBC is created for the
purposes of and shall have the powers and shall perform the functions set forth
in, the Act, as may be amended or supplemented, including by home rule action
of the City. The Governing Body, by ordinance or charter ordinance hereafter
taking effect, shall have the authority to limit, expand or otherwise alter the
purposes, powers, and functions of the PBC. (Ord. 1822; Code 2010)
16-504. SUPPORT SERVICES. Unless otherwise approved by the Governing
Body, the City administrative staff shall provide administrative services to the
PBC and the City’s financial advisor, bound counsel and City Attorney shall
provide legal services to the PBC. (Ord. 1822; Code 2010)
16-505. FURTHER ACTION. The PBC shall have the authority to adopt bylaws,
resolutions or other official actions authorized by the Act and not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Article to govern its actions. (Ord. 1822; Code 2010)

City of Augusta, Kansas 
Zoning Regulations
Incorporated into the City of Augusta Municipal Code
by Ordinance No. XXXX

Public Hearing Notice Publication Date
(Date)

Public Hearing Date
(Date)

Adopted by Augusta Planning Commission
(Date)
Adopted by Augusta City Council
(Date)
Effective Date/Publication Date
(Date)

Prepared for the City of Augusta by
Professional Engineering Consultants, P.A. (PEC)
303 South Topeka
Wichita, KS 67202
These regulations are based on PEC’s Zoning Code Model Template.
© Professional Engineering Consultants, P.A., 2018.  All rights reserved.

Public Hearing Notice

Adopting Ordinance

Publication of Adopting Ordinance

Table of Contents
ARTICLE 01	ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY............................................................................101.01.	Title...............................................................................................................................................................................1
01.02.	Jurisdiction...................................................................................................................................................................1
01.03.	Authority......................................................................................................................................................................1
01.04.	Purpose........................................................................................................................................................................1
01.05.	Separability..................................................................................................................................................................2


ARTICLE 02	RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION................................................302.01.	Rules of Construction...................................................................................................................................................3
02.02.	Rules of Interpretation ................................................................................................................................................3


ARTICLE 03	DEFINITIONS............................................................................................................503.01.	Purpose........................................................................................................................................................................5
03.02.	General........................................................................................................................................................................5
03.03.	Definitions of Words and Terms..................................................................................................................................5


ARTICLE 04	GENERAL PROVISIONS..........................................................................................1304.01.	Purpose......................................................................................................................................................................13
04.02.	Uses & Activities Governed.......................................................................................................................................13
04.03.	Establishment of Districts...........................................................................................................................................13
04.04.	Official Zoning Map..................................................................................................................................................14
04.05.	Zoning District Boundaries........................................................................................................................................14
04.06.	General Provisions.....................................................................................................................................................14
04.07.	City Utility Connections.............................................................................................................................................18
04.08.	Conditions of Approval.............................................................................................................................................18
04.09.	Annexed Land............................................................................................................................................................18
04.10.	Nonconforming Uses & Structures............................................................................................................................19
04.11.	Floodplain Regulations..............................................................................................................................................19


ARTICLE 05	LAND USES.............................................................................................................2105.01.	Purpose .....................................................................................................................................................................21
05.02.	Primary Land Uses.....................................................................................................................................................21
05.03.	Table of Primary Uses by Zoning District.................................................................................................................35
05.04.	Secondary Land Uses...............................................................................................................................................40
05.05.	Table of Secondary Uses & Structures by Zoning District.......................................................................................42
05.06.	Requirements for Secondary Uses & Structures.......................................................................................................43
05.07.	Accessory Uses & Structures....................................................................................................................................43


ARTICLE 06	ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.........................................................................4506.01.	Purpose.....................................................................................................................................................................45
06.02.	“A-1” Agricultural District........................................................................................................................................45
06.03.	“R-R” Single-Family Rural Residential District.........................................................................................................46
06.04.	“R-1” Single-Family Residential District..................................................................................................................47
06.05.	“R-2” Small Lot/Zero Lot Line (ZLL) Residential District.........................................................................................48
06.06.	“R-3” Multi-Family Residential District....................................................................................................................49
06.07.	“R-4” Manufactured Home Park District.................................................................................................................50
06.08.	“C-1” Main Street District.........................................................................................................................................51
06.09.	“C-2” Central Commercial District...........................................................................................................................52
06.10.	“C-3” General Commercial District.........................................................................................................................53
06.11.	“I-1” Industrial District..............................................................................................................................................54
06.12.	“PDO” Planned Development Overlay District.......................................................................................................55
06.13.	Dissolution & Redesignation of Previous Zoning Districts........................................................................................57


ARTICLE 07	OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING........................................................................5907.01.	Applicability .............................................................................................................................................................59
07.02.	General Parking Provisions......................................................................................................................................59
07.03.	Table of Required Off-street Parking by Land Use..................................................................................................62
07.04.	Required Off-street Parking for Persons with Disabilities........................................................................................64
07.05.	Table of Required Off-street Parking for Persons with Disabilities..........................................................................65
07.06.	Off-street Parking & Loading General Design Provisions ......................................................................................66
07.07.	Off-street Parking & Loading Minimum Design Standards.....................................................................................68


ARTICLE 08	SIGN REGULATIONS..............................................................................................6908.01.	Intent and Purpose....................................................................................................................................................69
08.02.	Applicability..............................................................................................................................................................69
08.03.	Substitutions Clause...................................................................................................................................................70
08.04.	General Sign Definitions............................................................................................................................................70
08.05.	Sign Structural Classification.....................................................................................................................................71
08.06.	Sign Display Classification........................................................................................................................................73
08.07.	Measurements and Calculations...............................................................................................................................75
08.08.	Signs Exempt from Regulation..................................................................................................................................76
08.09.	Prohibited Signs........................................................................................................................................................77
08.10.	General Sign Standards...........................................................................................................................................77
08.11.	Fixed Sign Regulations by Zoning District & Land Use...........................................................................................79
08.12.	Portable Sign Regulations by Zoning District & Land Use......................................................................................82
08.13.	Maintenance Provisions............................................................................................................................................83
08.14.	Nonconforming Signs...............................................................................................................................................83
08.15.	Sign Permitting Process.............................................................................................................................................84
08.16.	Implementation and Enforcement............................................................................................................................84


ARTICLE 09	COMPATIBILITY BUFFERS.......................................................................................8709.01.	Purpose.....................................................................................................................................................................87
09.02.	Applicability..............................................................................................................................................................87
09.03.	General Provisions....................................................................................................................................................88
09.04.	Visual Buffer Design Standards................................................................................................................................88
09.05.	Supplemental Landscape Buffer Requirements.......................................................................................................89
09.06.	Visual & Landscape Buffer Plans..............................................................................................................................89
09.07.	Buffer & Landscaping Installation & Maintenance..................................................................................................90
09.08.	Height Compatibility Standards...............................................................................................................................90


ARTICLE 10	SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS.....................................................................................9110.01.	Purpose......................................................................................................................................................................91
10.02.	Accessory Apartment or Dwelling; Guest Home or Pool House.............................................................................91
10.03.	Adult Entertainment...................................................................................................................................................91
10.04.	Adult Retail Store......................................................................................................................................................92
10.05.	Arena or Stadium......................................................................................................................................................92
10.06.	Automotive Maintenance Shop; Automotive Repair Shop; Vehicle Maintenance or Repair Garage..................92
10.07.	Automotive or Equipment Sales, Rental or Leasing (all listed uses); Manufactured Home Dealers......................92
10.08.	Bar or Tavern; Brewpub............................................................................................................................................92
10.09.	Boarding Kennel.......................................................................................................................................................93
10.10.	Broadcast Tower.......................................................................................................................................................93
10.11.	Car Wash..................................................................................................................................................................93
10.12.	Concrete or Asphalt Pavement Mixing Plant............................................................................................................94
10.13.	Detached Residential Carport or Garage................................................................................................................94
10.14.	Detached Structure for Home Occupation................................................................................................................95
10.15.	Distributed Antenna System; Small Cell System.......................................................................................................95
10.16.	Drive-Thru Banking Service or ATM; Drive-Thru Window for Services, Retail Sales or Restaurants.....................95
10.17.	Duplex, Single-Family Attached..............................................................................................................................96
10.18.	Earth Sheltered Home...............................................................................................................................................96
10.19.	Garbage Dumpster or Liquid Waste Container......................................................................................................96
10.20.	Golf Course or Country Club...................................................................................................................................97
10.21.	Guard or Security Booth..........................................................................................................................................97
10.22.	Home & Garden Center...........................................................................................................................................97
10.23.	Junk, Scrap or Salvage Yard; Vehicle or Equipment Storage Yard........................................................................97
10.24.	Multi-Tenant Lifestyle Center; Shopping Mall; Strip Center....................................................................................98
10.25.	Neighborhood Clubhouse or Swimming Pool.........................................................................................................98
10.26.	Non-Commercial Greenhouse or Hoop House.......................................................................................................98
10.27.	On-site Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS)..................................................................................................98
10.28.	Outdoor Display of Retail Merchandise for Sale....................................................................................................99
10.29.	Outdoor Festival, Carnival or Gathering...............................................................................................................100
10.30.	Outdoor Kennel Run or Play Yard..........................................................................................................................100
10.31.	Outdoor Market.....................................................................................................................................................100
10.32.	Outdoor Storage of Retail Merchandise Stock......................................................................................................101
10.33.	Petroleum or Natural Gas Extraction......................................................................................................................101
10.34.	Quarry or Mine; Sand, Rock or Mineral Extraction Pit.........................................................................................102
10.35.	Recreation, Sport & Amusement Center................................................................................................................102
10.36.	Sawmill....................................................................................................................................................................103
10.37.	School or Educational Campus; Technical School or Job Training Center...........................................................103
10.38.	Self-Storage, Commercial......................................................................................................................................103
10.39.	Shooting Range, Indoor.........................................................................................................................................103
10.40.	Shooting Range, Outdoor......................................................................................................................................103
10.41.	Storage Shed or Structure......................................................................................................................................104
10.42.	Tattoo or Body Piercing Studio...............................................................................................................................104
10.43.	Truck Stop................................................................................................................................................................104
10.44.	Unattended Donation Box......................................................................................................................................105
10.45.	Utility Support Facility............................................................................................................................................105
10.46.	Vehicle Fueling Station; Fuel Pump........................................................................................................................106
10.47.	Wind Energy Generation Structures......................................................................................................................107
10.48.	Wireless Communication Tower.............................................................................................................................107


ARTICLE 11	HOME OCCUPATIONS..........................................................................................10911.01.	Purpose...................................................................................................................................................................109
11.02.	Restrictions & Limitations........................................................................................................................................109
11.03.	Allowable Home Occupations ..............................................................................................................................109
11.04.	Prohibited Home Occupations ..............................................................................................................................109
11.05.	Home Occupation Day Care Services....................................................................................................................110


ARTICLE 12	ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES..................................................................................11112.01.	Purpose.....................................................................................................................................................................111
12.02.	Planning Commission  ..............................................................................................................................................111
12.03.	City Council...............................................................................................................................................................111
12.04.	Office of the Zoning Administrator.........................................................................................................................112
12.05.	Office of the City Clerk............................................................................................................................................112


ARTICLE 13	SITE PLAN REVIEW.................................................................................................11313.01.	Purpose  ..................................................................................................................................................................113
13.02.	Applicability.............................................................................................................................................................113
13.03.	Zoning Site Plan Requirements................................................................................................................................113
13.04.	Development Site Plan Requirements......................................................................................................................114
13.05.	Development Site Plan Approval............................................................................................................................115


ARTICLE 14	PROCESSES & PROCEDURES.................................................................................11714.01.	Purpose....................................................................................................................................................................117
14.02.	Amendments; Conditional & Temporary Uses........................................................................................................117
14.03.	Public Notification & Conduct of Hearings.............................................................................................................119
14.04.	Official Actions & Decisions...................................................................................................................................120
14.05.	Petitions of Protest....................................................................................................................................................121
14.06.	Other Planning Actions & Approvals......................................................................................................................121
14.07.	Standards of Review...............................................................................................................................................123
14.08.	Finality of Council Decisions...................................................................................................................................123
14.09.	Zoning Compliance Certificates.............................................................................................................................123
14.10.	Building Permits........................................................................................................................................................124


ARTICLE 15	BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.............................................................................12515.01.	Authorization...........................................................................................................................................................125
15.02.	General Rules & Procedures....................................................................................................................................125
15.03.	Powers and Jurisdiction  .........................................................................................................................................125
15.04.	Appeals of Zoning Administrator Determinations..................................................................................................126
15.05.	Requests for Variance..............................................................................................................................................126
15.06.	Notice & Conduct of Hearings................................................................................................................................128
15.07.	 Finality of Board Decisions.....................................................................................................................................129


ARTICLE 16	GROWTH AREA REGULATIONS............................................................................13116.01.	Authority..................................................................................................................................................................131
16.02.	Building Code & County Regulations......................................................................................................................131
16.03.	Residential Infrastructure Requirements..................................................................................................................131
16.04.	Manufactured Homes..............................................................................................................................................132


ARTICLE 17	ENFORCEMENT.....................................................................................................13317.01.	Violations................................................................................................................................................................133
17.02.	Enforcement Actions...............................................................................................................................................133
17.03.	Enforcement Procedures..........................................................................................................................................134


APPENDIX A - SUPPLEMENTAL LANDSCAPE GUIDANCE............................................................137


Article 01	
Enactment and Applicability

01.01.	
Title


These regulations, including the zoning district maps made a part hereof, shall be known as the “City of Augusta Zoning Regulations,” hereinafter referred to as “these regulations.” 
01.02.	
Jurisdiction


These regulations shall apply to all buildings, structures and land within the corporate limits of the City of Augusta and the established Growth Area of the City of Augusta, as defined as follows:
A.	
Legal Description


Beginning at the Northeast corner of Section 36, Township 26, Range 4 East, of the Sixth Principal Meridian; thence West along the section lines to the Northwest corner of Section 34, Township 26 South, Range 4 East; thence South along the section line to the northwest corner of Section 3, Township 27 South, Range 4 East; thence West along the section lines to its intersection with the center line of the Whitewater River; thence South along the center line of the Whitewater River to its intersection with the North section line of Section 21, Township 27 South, Range 4 East; thence West along the section lines to the Northwest corner of Section 23, Township 27 South, Range 3 East; thence South along the section lines to the Southwest corner of Section 26, Township 27 South, Range 3 East; thence East along the section lines to its intersection with the centerline of the Walnut River; thence Northeasterly along the centerline of the Walnut River to its intersection with the East section line of Section 18, Township 27 South, Range 5 East; thence North along section lines to the Northeast corner of Section 6, Township 27 South, Range 5 East; thence West along the section line to the northeast corner of Section 1, Township 27 South, Range 4 East; thence North along the section line to the point of beginning; except for the area within the City of Augusta corporate limits.
B.	
This area includes the following sections of land:
1.	
Township 26 South, Range 4 East
a.	
All of Sections 34, 35, and 36.



2.	
Township 27 South, Range 3 East
a.	
All of Sections 23, 24, 25, and 26.



3.	
Township 27 South, Range 4 East
a.	
All of Sections 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 28, 29 and 30.

b.	
Portions of Sections 4, 5, 8, 9, and 16 east of the Whitewater River.

c.	
Portions of Sections 13, 23, 24, 26, and 27 east of the Whitewater River and north of the Walnut River.



4.	
Township 27 South, Range 5 East
a.	
All of Sections 6 and 7.

b.	
Portions of Sections 18 and 19 north of the Walnut River.






01.03.	
Authority


These regulations are adopted under the authority granted to the City under K.S.A. 12-7, 12-30, and 12-33.
01.04.	
Purpose


These regulations are intended to:
A.	
Promote the health, safety, comfort and general welfare.

B.	
Implement the vision, goals, objectives and strategies of the Comprehensive Plan.

C.	
Preserve, protect and enhance property values.

D.	
Ensure the adequate and efficient provision of public services, utilities, infrastructure and facilities.

E.	
Provide adequate open space.

F.	
Preserve and protect natural, historic and cultural resources.

G.	
Encourage a land use pattern that is consistent with community growth and economic development goals.

H.	
Divide the City into districts, each having compatible land uses, building types, density and intensity of development.

I.	
Regulate the size, bulk, density and location of structures on properties within each district.

J.	
Control the general appearance of buildings, structures and land developed or redeveloped in the City.

K.	
Establish the processes and procedures whereby these regulations will be implemented, administered and enforced.


01.05.	
Separability


It is the intention of the City that the individual provisions of these regulations are separable, as follows:
A.	
If a court with jurisdiction over these regulations judges any provision invalid, it shall affect only the invalidated provision; all other provisions shall remain valid.

B.	
If a court with jurisdiction over these regulations judges a specific application of any provision invalid, it shall affect only the invalidated application of said provision; all other applications of said provision to any building, structure or property shall remain valid.


Article 02	
Rules of Construction and Interpretation

02.01.	
Rules of Construction


In the construction of these regulations, the provisions and rules of this section shall be preserved and applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise.
A.	
Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the past tense include the present.

B.	
Singular numbers include plural numbers; plural numbers include singular numbers.

C.	
“Used for” and similar language include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for,”and “occupied for.”

D.	
“Including,” “such as” and similar language are used to present examples for clarification purposes, not to limit the intent strictly to listed items.

E.	
“Shall (not),” “will (not),” “must (not),” and “may not” are mandatory.

F.	
“May,” “can,” “should,” and “could” are permissive.

G.	
“Prohibited” means not allowed and there are no provisions for an allowance in these regulations, except variances granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.

H.	
“Authorized” means that applicable permits or other approvals have been received.

I.	
“Allowed” means in conformance with applicable provisions of these regulations.

J.	
“Person” includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, governmental bodies and agencies, and all other legal entities.

K.	
“City” means City of Augusta, Kansas.

L.	
“Governing Body” means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Augusta.

M.	
“Planning Commission” and “Commission” mean the Augusta City Planning Commission.

N.	
“Board” means the Augusta City Board of Zoning Appeals.

O.	
“Zoning Administrator” means the Augusta City staff position appointed by the Mayor with the consent of City Council to administer and enforce these regulations. The title of Zoning Administrator and all authorities, duties, responsibilities, etc. assigned to that position shall apply equally to any individual or firm with which the City contracts and appoints to carry out the function of Zoning Administrator.

P.	
Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.


02.02.	
Rules of Interpretation 
A.	
The provisions included in these regulations shall be considered minimum requirements.

B.	
When the conditions of any provision in these regulations overlap or conflict with those of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulations, the more restrictive of these conditions shall apply.

C.	
The provisions in these regulations shall govern when they are more restrictive than the provisions of any easement, covenant or other legally binding instrument affecting private property.

D.	
No building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time these regulations are adopted shall be made unlawful by said adoption; any building, structure or use that exists unlawfully at the time these regulations are adopted shall remain unlawful only if, and to the extent they are in conflict with these regulations.

E.	
Any structure or use authorized by zoning permit, conditional use, special use, variance or other provision of previous zoning regulations of the City shall remain authorized after the adoption of these regulations, provided it is in compliance with said authorization at the time these regulations are adopted.  

F.	
Should these regulations unintentionally omit specific requirements or fail to account for unanticipated circumstances related to the development of structures or land uses, the City’s authority to regulate such shall be limited according to applicable provisions of Kansas State Statutes. 



Article 03	
Definitions

03.01.	
Purpose


The purpose of this article is to define the words and terms used throughout these regulations. Words and terms that are specific to a particular article of these regulations may be defined in said article.
03.02.	
General
A.	
Any definition of a word or term provided in these regulations shall apply to each use of the word or term within these regulations, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise or the meaning or scope is expressly limited.

B.	
Words or terms used, but not defined in these regulations, shall have their ordinary meaning as defined in a reputable dictionary.

C.	
Drawings, diagrams or other illustrations may be provided to clarify the meaning, interpretation or application of certain definitions.



03.03.	
Definitions of Words and Terms


Accessory:  A structure or use that is subordinate or incidental to the primary land use of a given property parcel. The following definitions are provided for specific related terms.
Accessory Apartment:  An accessory residential unit that is constructed within or attached to the primary structure on a parcel or another accessory structure, such as a garage. 
Accessory Dwelling:  An accessory residential unit that is detached from the primary structure on a parcel.
Accessory Structure:  A building or other structure that serves a function that is incidental to that of the primary structure on a parcel. Some typical examples include garages, carports and storage sheds.
Accessory Use:  A land use or activity that is incidental to that of the primary use of a parcel. Some typical examples include parking areas, tennis courts, swimming pools, and home occupations.
Aircraft:  A vehicle capable of flight, which may or may not carry passengers. Some typical examples include airplanes, helicopters, model aircraft and drones.
Alteration:  The physical modification or reconfiguration of an existing or approved structure or its component parts. Some typical examples include room/garage additions (expand building footprint), floor additions (extend building height) and sign relocations.
Applicant:  The property owner or other person with legal authorization to request approval for a building, structure or use governed by these regulations and whose signature must certify such authority on permit applications.
Basement:  Any usable story of a structure with at least one-half (½) of its height below the adjacent finished grade.
Block:  A contiguous tract of one or more parcels within a subdivision that has boundaries defined by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, city limits, other property lines, easements or natural barriers, such as waterways.
Buildable Area:  The area of a lot wherein allowable obstructions may exist or may be constructed.
Building:  A covered and enclosed structure where activities associated with a primary, secondary or accessory land use take place. Buildings that are interconnected by covered and enclosed walkways, breezeways and similar structures are considered a single building. Buildings sharing a common wall, but having separate entrances are considered individual buildings.
Building Footprint:  The area representing the perimeter of a structure at its foundation or point of vertical intersection with the adjacent finished grade.
Bulk Regulations:  Requirements or provisions that control the size of a structure and its location on a parcel. Examples included in these regulations are maximum height, maximum lot coverage, minimum yard size and setbacks.
By-Right Use:  A structure or use that is allowed within a specific zoning district because it is generally compatible with other uses allowed within the same zoning district. By-right uses must meet only the minimum zoning district requirements for the use, unless it is subject to specific use standards. 
Canopy:  A covered, but unenclosed accessory structure that provides shelter for individuals performing activities associated with the primary, secondary or accessory use of a parcel. Some typical examples include those found over a building entrance, drive-thru facility, fuel pumps or temporary parking spaces. This does not include structures meeting the definition of carport.
Carport:  A covered accessory structure, which may be fully or partially unenclosed, intended to shelter motor vehicles parked in permanent parking spaces. Carports may be freestanding, but if attached to another structure, may only be attached to the primary building on a parcel.
Conditional Use:  A structure or use that is not allowed by-right within a specific zoning district because of characteristics that are somewhat incompatible with other uses allowed in the same zoning district. A conditional use may be authorized according to the process and procedures defined in these regulations. Such authorization may be subject to additional provisions (conditions) intended to improve compatibility with other uses allowed in the zoning district.
Density:  The degree to which individual properties are developed with structures, which dictates the overall distribution of a community’s structures and population. These regulations control density primarily through bulk and lot size requirements.
Condominium: A type of residential ownership wherein a single structure is divided into multiple individually owned dwelling units with common areas owned by a property owners association. Examples of common areas in condominium apartments are hallways, stairs/elevators, lawns, and parking lots. Garden home and townhome condominium developments have separate ownership of individual dwelling units with common ownership of individual lots and amenities such as clubhouses, pools, etc. 
Develop: The act of making a tract of property suitable for a specific land use. Includes changing the physical characteristics of land in preparation for structures, utilities, streets and infrastructure or the construction of such improvements (development). Properties having such improvements are developed. Properties without such improvements are undeveloped or vacant. The individual or entity making such improvements is referred to as the developer. 
Disability:  A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a person’s major life activities or a record of having such an impairment.
District (Zoning): A section or sections of the zoning jurisdiction within which these regulations govern the use of buildings and land, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of uses in a uniform manner.
Driveway: A private roadway providing access to a parking space.
Dwelling: A structure designed and used primarily for residential purposes. Each portion of a dwelling specifically intended as an individual residence for one (1) family or household is considered a dwelling unit. Secondary uses and activities, such as allowable home occupations, may also take place within a dwelling unit.
Easement: A legal instrument wherein a landowner grants permanent or temporary use rights for a defined property to another person or legal entity, but retains title and ownership of said property.
Family: One (1) or more individuals living together in the same dwelling unit as a single household. 
Fence: A free-standing structure that meets the provisions of these regulations and serves as a protective, confining or decorative barrier between adjacent lots or uses.
Frontage: The length of distance along a lot line that abuts and is shared in common with a public street.
Garage: A covered and enclosed accessory structure that provides direct access to a driveway or parking space, which is intended solely for storage of motor vehicles owned by residents of the primary structure. A garage may be attached to or detached from a primary residential structure.
Gross Floor Area: The unit of measurement for the space within a structure as measured between the exterior faces of exterior walls or centerlines of shared common walls on each story (floor) of a structure. Includes basements and attics having headroom of seven (7) feet or more.
Height (Structure):  A vertical dimension measured from the finished lot grade at the front of a structure to the highest point on the structure. For buildings and other covered structures, this is measured to the highest point of the roof. For signs, towers and other uncovered structures, this is measured to the highest point of the structure itself or of anything attached to the structure, whichever is greater.
Home Occupation:  A business, profession, service or trade allowed by these regulations to be conducted for gain or support entirely within the primary residence of the business owner. Activities related to a home occupation are restricted from occurring in a secondary or accessory structure, except as allowed by these regulations.
House Pet:  A legally-owned domesticated small animal routinely kept as a family pet and generally housed within the primary residential structure. Some typical examples include dogs, cats, birds, hamsters and aquarium fish.
Intensity:  The degree of activity generated by a specific land use and the potential impacts those activities have on surrounding properties. The hierarchy of zoning districts is based on the intensity of land uses allowed within each district.
Landscaping:  Plants, trees, yard art and other improvements generally intended to beautify a property.  
Lot of Record:  An individual parcel of land under single ownership that has a legal description and deed recorded with the Butler County Register of Deeds. Various types of lots are defined below and illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Corner Lot:  A lot with frontage on two or more intersecting streets.
Flag Lot:  A lot shaped like a flag that has street frontage significantly narrower than its main portion, which is typically where the driveway is located. 
Interior Lot:  A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage on only one street.
Through (Double Frontage) Lot:  A lot with frontage on two non-intersecting street.
Figure 3.1: Depiction of Various Lot Types
Lot Line:  A legal boundary of a lot of record. See Figure 3.2.
Front (interior lot):  The lot line with street frontage. May also be referred to as the street line.
Front (corner lot):  The lot line along the primary access street, typically the street to which the address is assigned.
Rear:  The lot line that is most distant from and generally parallel to the front lot line (primary front lot line on a corner lot).
Side:  A lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
Exterior:  A rear or front lot line that is not shared by another lot of record, which typically marks the boundary of a block, right-of-way or natural barrier.
Interior:  A rear or side lot line shared by two or more lots of record.
Lot Size Requirements:  Restrictions on the dimensions of a lot. See Figure 3.2.
Lot Area:  The surface measurement encompassed by a lot’s boundaries.
Lot Depth:  The dimension between the front and rear lot lines, as measured from their midpoints.
Lot Width:  For an interior lot, the dimension between side lot lines as measured along the front yard setback line. For a corner lot, the dimension between the secondary front lot line and side lot line as measured along the primary front yard setback line.
Nonconforming:  A lot, structure, sign or land use within the City zoning jurisdiction that does not meet the applicable provisions of these regulations. Such is considered legal nonconforming if it existed lawfully prior to the adoption of these regulations, which is commonly referred to as being “grandfathered.”
Figure 3.2: Depiction of Lot Lines & Required Measurements
Figure 3.3: Depiction of Setbacks on Various Shaped Lots
Obstruction:  Any encroachment within a required setback area (yard), sight triangle or other area where such restrictions are indicated in these regulations.
Permanent:  A term referring to a use, structure or activity that is intended to remain in place or be conducted in perpetuity with no limit on its duration.
Premise(s):  The land, building and structures located on a lot.
Primary (or Principal) Structure:  The structure in which the main activities of a primary use take place.
Primary (or Principal) Use:  The main purpose for which a lot of record is used and developed.
Recreational Vehicle (RV): A legally licensed, appropriately registered, and operable single-chassis vehicle or trailer designed as a temporary lodging unit for travel or camping; a trailer-mounted “tiny home.”
Right-of-Way:  Real property that is dedicated to a public entity for current or future transportation, utility or other infrastructure uses, including the area on, below, and above such property. See Figure 3.2.
Screening:  A man-made or natural barrier used to minimize the visual impact of a property from outside its perimeter or minimize the effects of noise, dust or other impacts that may be generated on the site.
Setback: The required minimum distance between a structure and a front, side or rear lot line of the lot on which it is located. These are considered the front, side and rear setback lines respectively. The space between all setback lines is referred to as the buildable area. See Figure 3.3.
Sight Triangle: The area at a street’s intersection with another street, alley or driveway that must be kept clear from obstructions that may block a driver’s line of sight to oncoming traffic. See Section 04.06.L.
Street: A public right-of-way intended to carry vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic.
Alley: A minor right-of-way intended to provide secondary access to property parcels.
Local Street: A low volume street that functions mainly to provide direct access to property parcels.
Collector Street: A street that carries traffic between local and arterial streets, which has some direct access to property parcels.
Arterial Street: A street that carries traffic through and out of a community, which has limited direct access to property parcels.
Structure:  Anything constructed that is permanently attached to the ground or affixed to a permanent location on the ground that is subject to theses regulations, unless otherwise exempted.
Subdivision: A contiguous tract of land made up of one or more parcels that has been divided into individual lots intended for separate ownership. Subdivisions are broken into additions, blocks and lots, which are used to identify the properties by a legal description. This hierarchy of divisions is illustrated on a map, referred to as a “plat,” which is filed of record with the county Register of Deeds. The subdivision of land in Augusta is governed by the City of Augusta Subdivision Regulations.
Temporary: A term referring to a use, structure or activity that is not intended to remain in place or be conducted in perpetuity. Such may be allowed or permitted for a specific duration with a set time limit.
Use: The purpose for which a lot of record is developed or proposed to be developed. This generally describes the types of human activities that occur or will occur on the subject property.
Utility Trailer: A trailer (loaded or unloaded) with multiple axles or having a bed length that exceeds ten (10) feet that is designed to haul vehicles, watercraft, work equipment, or animals; or used for general utility purposes. 
Variance:  An approval granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals consistent with Section 15.05, which allows for deviations from one or more requirements of these regulations.
Wireless Communications: Personal wireless services and facilities defined by 47 USC § 332(c)(7)(C), including commercial mobile services defined by 47 USC § 332(d), provided to personal mobile communication devices through wireless facilities or any wireless services provided using such facilities. As used herein, the term applies specifically to the services and facilities defined in and regulated by K.S.A. 17-1902 et seq. This includes the following related terms.
Accessory Equipment: Apparatus serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility or wireless support structure including, but not limited to utility or transmission equipment; power supplies; generators; batteries; cables; equipment buildings and cabinets; and storage sheds, shelters or similar structures.
Antenna: Equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of wireless communications services.
Base Station: A structure that supports or houses an antenna, transceiver, coaxial cables, power cables or other associated equipment at a specific site that is authorized to communicate with mobile stations.
Collocation: The mounting or installation of wireless facilities on a building, structure, wireless support structure, tower, utility pole, base station or existing structure for the purposes of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communication purposes.
Substantial Modification: Any change to an existing wireless support structure or base station that will substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless support structure or base station under the objective standard for substantial change, established by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to 47 CFR 1.40001.
Transmission Equipment: Apparatus that facilitates transmission for a wireless service licensed or authorized by the Federal Communications Commission including, but not limited to radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber optic cable and regular and backup power supply. 
Wind Energy Conversion System: Equipment that converts and transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of electrical energy.
Wireless Facility: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network.
Wireless Infrastructure Provider: A person or entity that builds or installs transmission equipment, wireless facilities or wireless support structures, but is not a wireless services provider.
Wireless Services Provider: An entity that provides wireless services.
Wireless Support Structure: A freestanding monopole, self-supported lattice tower, guyed tower or any other vertical structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. See Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.5: Depiction of Required Yards
Yard: The open space on a lot within which only permitted obstructions are allowed. See Figure 3.5.
Front Yard: The required yard extending the full width of a lot, as measured between the front lot line and front setback line. On a corner lot, both yards abutting a street are considered front yards. May also be referred to as the street yard.
Rear Yard: The required yard extending the full width of a lot, as measured between the rear lot line and the rear setback line. On a corner lot, any yard not considered a side or front yard is a rear yard.
Side Yard: The required yard extending the depth of a lot between the front and rear setback lines. On a corner lot, any yard abutting the side yard of an adjacent property is considered a side yard.
Zero Lot Line (ZLL): The location of a building on a lot such that: (A) one or more exterior walls of a detached unit rest directly on an interior lot line, or (B) the shared common wall of two attached units rests on an interior lot line.  Some typical examples are patio homes, garden homes, and condominium townhomes.
Zoning Compliance Certificate: A document issued by the Zoning Administrator, which states that a given property is appropriately zoned and meets all applicable provisions of these regulations for: (A) establishing a specific use; (B) changing an established use; (C) constructing, altering, or modifying a structure; or (D) establishing occupancy in an existing structure previously occupied with a different type of use.
Zoning Jurisdiction: The geographic boundaries wherein the City has the legal authority to adopt and enforce zoning regulations. This is the City of Augusta corporate limits.
Zoning Lot: A contiguous area of property on one or more lots of record having the same owner, the entire area of which is within the same zoning district. Where a single lot of record has portions within different zoning districts, each portion within a different zoning district is considered an individual zoning lot. See Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Depiction of Zoning Lot Definition
Article 04	
General Provisions

04.01.	
Purpose


The purpose of this article is to outline general requirements of these regulations that apply after the effective date of adoption unless otherwise indicated.
04.02.	
Uses & Activities Governed
A.	
Structures
1.	
These regulations apply to all structures built, moved, rebuilt, remodeled or restored, unless such is exempted by other provisions of these regulations.

2.	
These regulations apply to any change in the use of a structure, unless such is exempted by other provisions of these regulations. The new use shall comply with all applicable provisions for said use. In cases when a change in structure use does not  comply with lot size requirements and bulk regulations, the structure shall be considered legal nonconforming.

3.	
The following requirements shall apply to structural alterations, as defined in these regulations:
a.	
The entire altered structure shall comply with all applicable use regulations.

b.	
Structural alterations and additions shall comply with applicable bulk regulations, except as otherwise indicated in these regulations.

c.	
Off-street parking shall not be reduced below applicable requirements of these regulations as a result of structural alterations.





B.	
Undeveloped Lots




All changes in use of undeveloped lots shall comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations.
C.	
Exemptions


The following structures and uses are exempted from the provisions of these regulations:
1.	
Underground utility distribution infrastructure for electricity, telecommunications, data transmission, gas, potable water, sanitary sewer and storm water.

2.	
Electric utility poles or towers, including any power, data, and cable TV lines installed on them. 

3.	
Structures, facilities, improvements, signs, etc. located within railroad rights-of-way or activities in such rights-of-way being conducted by authorized individuals.

4.	
Buildings, structures or land owned by the State of Kansas or federal government.

5.	
Agricultural land uses and structures as defined by these regulations or exempted from these regulations by state or federal laws. This exemption does not apply to uses and structures located in a designated floodplain. In cases when a change in use nullifies this agricultural exemption, all applicable provisions of these regulations shall apply to the new use.


04.03.	
Establishment of Districts
A.	
The zoning jurisdiction is hereby divided into the following ten zoning districts:
1.	
A-1 Agricultural District

2.	
R-R Single-Family Rural Residential District

3.	
R-1 Single-Family Residential District

4.	
R-2 Single-Family/ZLL Residential District

5.	
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District

6.	
C-1 Main Street District

7.	
C-2 Local Commercial District

8.	
C-3 General Commercial District

9.	
I-1 Industrial District

10.	
PDO Planned Development Overlay District



B.	
The numbered order of the above listing describes the relationship of land use intensity and density between each of the zoning districts, with A-1 providing for development of the lowest intensity land uses at the lowest density and I-1 providing the highest intensity and density. This relationship of intensity may not apply to the PDO district.



04.04.	
Official Zoning Map
A.	
The boundaries of the districts listed in Section 04.03 are shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Augusta.

B.	
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified on its face as part of these regulations, including all notes, references and other information as indicated by these regulations.

C.	
The Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file with the Zoning Administrator and accessible to the public during regular business hours of the City of Augusta.

D.	
All natural and man-made features encompassed by the zoning jurisdiction are included in the zoning district boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map.

E.	
Areas within the zoning jurisdiction that are not shown within a zoning district on the Official Zoning Map are deemed to be within the R-1 Single-Family Zoning District.



04.05.	
Zoning District Boundaries


The following rules shall apply when interpreting zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map:
A.	
District boundaries shall be interpreted as following lot lines or property parcel boundaries, unless otherwise indicated.

B.	
District boundaries appearing to follow rights-of-way, easements, streams or bodies of water shall be interpreted as following the centerlines of said features, unless otherwise indicated. When any such feature is not within the boundaries of a zoning district, it shall be deemed to be in the zoning district of the abutting properties to its centerline, as drawn on the same bearing as the property lines that mark the extents of the abutting properties.

C.	
District boundaries that do not coincide with another identifiable boundary shall be determined by the scale of the Official Zoning Map, unless an exact distance is shown.

D.	
District boundaries that divide a lot of record, may be extended to the ownership boundaries by the Zoning Administrator, upon written request by the property owner of record. Such requests shall not apply in cases where the zoning district boundary will be extended more than twenty-five (25) feet.

E.	
Where district boundaries divide a lot of record, they shall be parallel to a lot line and in no case shall they be allowed to divide any structure on that lot.


04.06.	
General Provisions


The following requirements shall apply, except as otherwise provided in these regulations.
A.	
Conformance Required for By-Right Uses & Structures


No lot or structure shall be occupied or designed for occupancy as a matter of right unless it is in conformance with the applicable provisions for by-right uses or structures of the zoning district in which it is located.
B.	
Specific Use Standards


No use or structure subject to the specific use standards of these regulations shall be established without being in conformance with the applicable standards.
C.	
Conditional Uses
1.	
No use or structure designated as a conditional use in any zoning district shall be established, except according to applicable provisions, processes and procedures of these regulations.

2.	
The authorization of a conditional use shall apply only to the specific structure or use approved and shall not transfer to other uses or structures designated as a conditional use without authorization according to these regulations.

3.	
Changes or modifications to a use or structure authorized by conditional use shall remain in compliance with the conditions and provisions of the conditional use permit, except those authorized according to these regulations. 

4.	
Approved conditional uses shall remain authorized upon transfer of property ownership, provided they remain in full compliance with the original conditional use permit.



D.	
Conformance Required for Modifications


No use or structure shall be established, changed or altered without being in conformance with applicable lot size requirements, setback requirements, height requirements and bulk regulations, unless otherwise provided for in these regulations.
E.	
Off-street Parking and Loading
1.	
No lot or structure shall be occupied or designed for occupancy without meeting the minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading space provided in these regulations.

2.	
No use or structure shall be changed or altered without meeting the minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading space for the modified use or structure provided in these regulations.



F.	
Allowed in All Districts


All of the following shall be allowed in all zoning districts, provided that none shall be established, expanded, changed or altered, except as in compliance with these regulations.
1.	
Accessory uses or structures

2.	
Temporary uses or structures

3.	
Home occupations

4.	
Signs

5.	
Off-street parking and loading


G.	
Use Definitions & Determinations
1.	
The various uses governed by these regulations are defined by Article 05. Such definitions shall be utilized for determining how the provisions of these regulations apply to a certain property, zoning lot, development, land use, structure, etc.

2.	
When an applicant’s proposed use is undefined by Article 05:
a.	
The Zoning Administrator shall, upon request, provide a written determination of the appropriate definition for the proposed use, based on the most comparable defined use, which shall include explanations for the rational behind the determination. 

b.	
This written determination shall then apply for the purposes of regulating the proposed use and dictate the appropriate application, review, and approval procedures.

c.	
Written determinations of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) in accordance with these regulations.  





H.	
Primary Uses and Structures
1.	
Each zoning lot shall be allowed only one primary use and structure; all other uses or structures must be an allowed secondary, accessory or temporary use or structure, except:
a.	
Residential mixed-uses in the C-1 district.

b.	
Multi-family dwellings in the R-3 district or approved by conditional use in the C-1 district.

c.	
Nursing, residential care and group homes allowed by-right or approved by conditional use in the indicated zoning districts.

d.	
When allowed in an approved PDO district.



2.	
A primary structure may be constructed over the interior lot lines of adjacent zoning lots having the same owner of record only when approved by conditional use. In such cases:
a.	
The structure is considered one building, subject to applicable provisions of these regulations and other City codes.

b.	
Such a structure shall be considered the primary structure for each zoning lot it occupies.

c.	
Each occupied lot shall be considered an individual zoning lot for the determination of setback and yard requirements, except those with interior lot lines crossed by the structure. In such cases, side setbacks are not required for the side lot lines crossed and rear setbacks are not required for the rear lot lines crossed.  

d.	
Bulk regulations, lot size and lot coverage requirements shall be determined using the aggregate requirements for all zoning lots occupied by the structure.





I.	
Setbacks
1.	
Setback requirements for each zoning district shall apply to all uses and structures approved after the adoption of these regulations, except when:
a.	
Setbacks for a zoning lot have previously been established on an approved subdivision plat.

b.	
A deed restriction or other private instrument dictates a setback requirement greater than the applicable minimum for the zoning district.

c.	
A front setback greater or less than the applicable minimum for the zoning district has been maintained on lots covering more than fifty percent (50%) of the block’s street frontage. In such cases, the minimum required setback shall be the average setback distance of the existing structures, provided that no minimum front setback shall be required greater than fifty (50) feet or less than twenty (20) feet. 





J.	
Required Yards
1.	
A zoning lot with a by-right or approved conditional use, but having no structures shall maintain the required yards for the zoning district in which it is located and keep them free from obstructions. Public open spaces, parks, and recreation areas shall be exempt from this requirement.

2.	
Required yards shall be provided on the same zoning lot for which they are required.

3.	
No required yard shall be reduced below the minimum area provided in these regulations as a result of change or alteration to a use or structure, except by variance according to the provisions of these regulations.

4.	
Subject to City codes, the Building Code and other provisions of these regulations, the following obstructions are allowed as indicated within a required yard.
a.	
Allowed in any yard:
i.	
Open terraces or patios not exceeding four (4) feet in height.

ii.	
Awnings and canopies.

iii.	
Stairways, steps and wheelchair ramps necessary to access a property or structure.

iv.	
Fire escapes, bay windows, eaves, gutters, chimneys, window wells and wing walls that project less than two (2) feet into the yard.

v.	
Arbors and trellises.

vi.	
Flagpoles.

vii.	
Basketball goals.

viii.	
Allowed accessory uses, except as otherwise prohibited by these regulations.

ix.	
Fences, subject to applicable provisions of these regulations.

x.	
Signs, subject to applicable provisions of Article 08.



b.	
Allowed in any yard, except the front yard:
i.	
Children’s play equipment, such as play houses, swings, slides and other play sets.

ii.	
Clothes lines.



c.	
Allowed only in rear yards:
i.	
Jetted spas and in-ground swimming pools.

ii.	
Storage sheds.



d.	
Other obstructions expressly allowed by these regulations.



5.	
The following obstructions are expressly prohibited within required yards.
a.	
Attached or detached garages and carports.

b.	
Covered patios and porches.

c.	
Decks.





K.	
Non-Residential Site Access


Except for public rights-of-way and access easements, no land within a residential zoning district shall be used for a driveway, walkway or other access to a zoning lot located within a commercial or industrial zoning district.
L.	
Sight Triangle
1.	
No permanent or temporary obstructions are allowed within the sight triangle between the height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet as measured from the nearest pavement edge of the street surface, except for allowable obstructions placed by government agencies and utility providers. This is generally limited to traffic signs, utility equipment and other similar items.

2.	
No use or structure shall be established, changed or altered if it will encroach a sight triangle.

3.	
Sight triangles shall be measured as shown in Figure 4.1.




Figure 4.1: Site Triangle Dimensions
M.	
Height Exemptions


The following structures are exempted from zoning district maximum height restrictions, except for such structures located within City of Augusta street rights-of-way, subject to applicable height provisions of Article 9, Article 10, or as regulated by state or federal law.
1.	
Freestanding Vertical Structures
a.	
Electric Transmission Towers

b.	
Flagpoles

c.	
Grain Silos & Elevators

d.	
Water Towers/Tanks

e.	
Wind Energy Conversion Systems



2.	
Freestanding Communication Structures 
a.	
Broadcast Towers

b.	
Collocated Wireless Facilities

c.	
Radio Antennas 

d.	
Wireless Communication Towers



3.	
Integrated & Attached Structures (including screening/housings)
a.	
Bell Towers & Carillons

b.	
Chimneys & Flues

c.	
Cupolas & Steeples

d.	
Electric Service Components

e.	
Elevator/Stair Enclosures

f.	
Fire Escapes

g.	
HVAC & Ventilation Components

h.	
Skylights & Solar Panels




N.	
All lots with primary uses other than agricultural and single-family residential shall provide suitable waste collection facilities meeting applicable specific use standards of Article 10.


04.07.	
City Utility Connections


All primary structures built after the adoption of these regulations shall be served by the City’s sanitary sewer, potable water, and natural gas utilities, except as provided in zoning district regulations or approved by the City Council when such connections are not possible.
04.08.	
Conditions of Approval
A.	
The following may be required as conditions of approval for any necessary authorizations governed by these regulations.
1.	
Dedication of street rights-of-way.

2.	
Easements for utilities, drainage, access, fire lanes, setback lines and other necessary public uses related to the purposes of these regulations.

3.	
Construction, removal or replacement of public improvements necessary for development of the subject property.

4.	
Platting, replatting or separate legal instrument for the subject property to enact necessary dedications according to the City Subdivision Regulations.



B.	
Conditions of approval may be required regardless of ownership status of the subject property.

C.	
A time limit not to exceed one year shall be placed upon all conditions of approval.

D.	
When conditions of approval accompany a zoning authorization, the City Council shall withhold publication of the ordinance enacting such authorization until all conditions have been met.

E.	
Failure to comply with the conditions of approval during the specified time limit, shall render the authorization null and void. No extensions of the time limit shall be provided without reapplication.



04.09.	
Annexed Land


Annexation of land into the City zoning jurisdiction may be initiated by the City Council or by property owner petition. To ensure due consideration of the appropriate zoning and adequate provision of municipal services for land to be annexed, the following shall apply.
A.	
City Council Initiated Annexations
1.	
Prior to annexation, the Zoning Administrator shall review the subject property and submit a report to the Planning Commission recommending an appropriate zoning district, which the Planning Commission shall consider.

2.	
If the Zoning Administrator recommends R-1 Single-Family Residential zoning and the Planning Commission concurs, upon completion of annexation proceedings the subject property shall be designated R-1, which is the most restrictive zoning district established in these regulations.

3.	
If the Zoning Administrator recommends zoning other than R-1 Single-Family Residential or the Planning Commission does not concur with a recommendation of R-1, the Planning Commission shall file an application for the zoning district it deems appropriate.
a.	
The application shall be considered according the process established in these regulations and the Planning Commission shall provide a zoning recommendation to the City Council.

b.	
Upon approval by the City Council, the zoning ordinance shall be published only after annexation proceedings have been completed and the subject property is within the City’s zoning jurisdiction.





B.	
Property Owner Petitioned Annexations
1.	
In the annexation petition, the property owner shall indicate which zoning district designation is desired for the land being annexed.

2.	
If the requested zoning is R-1, upon annexation into the City’s zoning jurisdiction the subject property shall be designated as R-1, which is the most restrictive zoning district established in these regulations.

3.	
If a zoning district other than R-1 is requested, the property owner shall file an application for the desired zoning district, which the Planning Commission shall considered according to the procedures established in these regulations.

4.	
If the requested zoning is approved by the City Council, the zoning ordinance shall be published only when:
a.	
Annexation proceedings have been completed and the subject property is within the City’s zoning jurisdiction.

b.	
All conditions of approval have been met.





C.	
The City Council shall not approve any annexation of land into the zoning jurisdiction without first determining appropriate zoning of the subject property as provided in Section 04.09.


04.10.	
Nonconforming Uses & Structures
A.	
All legal nonconforming uses and structures shall maintain legal nonconforming status so long as they remain in the state in which they existed at the time of achieving nonconforming status.

B.	
Any legal nonconforming use that has been abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, shall not be reestablished or resumed. Any legal nonconforming structure that has been abandoned for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall not be reoccupied or modified in nonconformance. Any use established or structure occupied/altered after that time shall only exist in conformance with these regulations.

C.	
Any legal nonconforming structure that has been damaged by any means, except by flooding, to an extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value, shall not be reconstructed or replaced without meeting all requirements of these regulations.

D.	
Upon receiving a completed application from the property owner, the Zoning Administrator shall verify the legal nonconforming status of a use or structure and issue a legal nonconforming use certificate for all validated claims of legal nonconforming status. 



04.11.	
Floodplain Regulations


No use or structure shall be established, changed or altered within a floodplain identified on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps without being subject to the City’s Floodplain Regulations and applicable City Codes.
Article 05	
Land Uses

05.01.	
Purpose 


The purpose of this article is to define primary and secondary land uses and structures; differentiate between primary and secondary uses and structures; and identify which land uses and structures are allowed by-right, permitted by conditional use, and disallowed within each zoning district.
05.02.	
Primary Land Uses


This section defines individual primary land uses, which are listed by major land use category and land use sub-category. A table of primary land uses allowed by zoning district is also provided. For context, definitions include in parentheses North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 2012 numbers. The NAICS is a hierarchical numbering system used by federal agencies in classifying business establishments for economic analysis purposes. Land uses are not regulated by the NAICS number. However, the numbers provide additional guidance as to the types of uses associated with the land use. Two-digit NAICS numbers identify the industry sector, three-digit numbers identify the industry sub-sector, four-digit numbers identify the industry group, and five- and six-digit numbers identify the specific industry. NAICS numbers are not provided for uses that have no corresponding NAICS numbers and those that generally do not produce income.
Agricultural Land Uses
General Agricultural Uses
Animal or Livestock Production: Establishments primarily engaged in raising or fattening animals for sale of animals or animal products (112111 - 112990).
Crop Production: Establishments primarily engaged in growing or producing crops mainly for food and fiber (111110 - 111219, 111910 - 111998).
Breeding Kennel: Establishments primarily engaged in providing breeding services for house pets and small animals allowed by City Code (112990).
Greenhouse or Hoop House: Establishments primarily engaged in growing and selling flowers, plants, fruits or vegetables that are wholly covered within a transparent or semi-transparent structure (111219, 111419, 111422).
Nursery or Orchard: Establishments primarily engaged in growing and selling trees, flowers, plants, fruits, vegetables or other vegetation that are grown in the open (111310 - 111422).
Residential Land Uses
Single-Family Dwellings
A detached single-family dwelling contains one (1) dwelling unit, which is designed and specifically intended to be occupied by one (1) family. An attached single-family dwelling has two (2) adjoined dwelling units, each unit designed and specifically intended to be occupied by one (1) family.
Duplex: Attached single-family dwellings with two (2) individual dwelling units located on a single lot that share a common wall or floor. The structure and lot have singular ownership, but each unit is intended to be occupied individually by one (1) family.
Earth Sheltered Home: Residential buildings designed to utilize earth as protection from the elements. They may be dug into the ground or have raised or mounded earth extending higher than the floor level on more than one (1) side of the building (not including basements).
Garden Home: Attached single-family dwellings designed for zero lot line development. Each structure has two (2) individual dwelling units, each on a separate lot and sharing a common wall located on the lot line. Each unit is intended to be occupied individually by one (1) family. Garden home subdivisions may be designed as condominium developments or traditional individual-owner developments.
Manufactured or Mobile Home: Transportable, factory-built structures, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling. Mobile homes were built prior to the June 15, 1976 enactment of the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act. Manufactured homes were built after said date and are subject to its provisions. This shall not include “tiny homes” or other portable dwellings mounted on a trailer or having no integrated wheeled framework, which shall be regulated herein as recreational vehicles.
Modular Home: Residential dwellings constructed of components manufactured at a remote location and transported to the home site, where they are assembled and installed on a permanent foundation. Components are fabricated utilizing assembly-line production techniques or other methods unique to the manufacturing process.
Patio Home: Detached single-family dwellings designed for zero lot line development. Each dwelling is owned independently and has one wall located on a side lot line. Patio home subdivisions may be designed as rental developments or traditional individual-owner developments.
Residential-Design Manufactured Home: Manufactured homes defined as such by K.S.A. 12-742(a)(7), with a minimum of twenty-two (22) body feet in width placed on permanent foundations, and having a pitched roof, siding and roofing materials that are customarily used on site-built homes, and that comply with the architectural and aesthetic standards of this Code.
Site-Built Home: Residential dwellings constructed of basic materials (i.e. lumber, piping, flooring) delivered to the home site. Building components are fabricated on-site, assembled, and installed on a permanent foundation.. 
Multi-Family Structures
Apartments: Multi-story residential buildings containing three (3) or more adjoining dwelling units, each unit intended to be occupied individually by one (1) family. Each unit shares a common wall, floor, or ceiling with at least one (1) other unit. Apartments may be developed rental, condominium, or dormitory units. This definition includes all similar dwelling types that are not otherwise defined (53111).
Boarding House: Residential buildings, typically private homes, with rooms rented to individuals on a monthly basis or longer. These generally offer private sleeping quarters with common kitchen, bathroom, and living areas. They may be owner-occupied with rooms rented to other individuals or group living quarters, such as fraternity and sorority houses, that are not defined herein as a Group Home (721310).  
Group Home: Dwellings for persons with a disability, which are licensed by the State of Kansas in accordance with K.S.A. 12-736, et seq. Maximum occupancy of such dwellings is ten (10) individuals, which may include up to eight (8) persons with a disability plus no more than two (2) staff residents (623210, 623220, 623990). 
Townhome: Residential buildings with three (3) or more adjoining multi-story dwelling units, each unit intended to be occupied independently by one (1) family. Each unit shares a common vertical wall with at least one (1) other unit. Townhome subdivisions may be designed as rental developments, condominium developments, or traditional individual-owner developments (53111).
Triplex or Quadplex: Residential buildings with adjoining one-story dwelling units, each unit intended to be occupied individually by one (1) family. Triplexes have three (3) adjoining units and quadplexes have four (4) adjoining units, each of which shares a common wall with at least one (1) other unit. Triplexes and quadplexes may be developed as rental or condominium units (53111).
Nursing & Residential Care Facilities
Assisted Living Facility: Group living quarters with on-site personal care services for elderly individuals or those needing limited personal care services, which has no on-site nursing care (623312, 623220, 623210).
Continuing Care Facility: Group living quarters with on-site personal care services for elderly individuals or those needing personal care services, which also has on-site nursing care (623311).
Nursing Care Facility: Establishments primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services. The care is generally provided for an extended period of time to individuals requiring nursing care. These establishments have a permanent core staff of registered or licensed practical nurses who, along with other staff, provide nursing and continuous personal care services (623110).
Residential Mixed Uses
Live/Work Office or Studio: A unit or units within a single building having separately defined residential and work spaces. Work spaces are restricted to allowable office-based uses as defined below or arts and culture uses as defined on pg. 24.
Loft or Apartment in Commercial Building: A residential unit located within a building primarily used for commercial purposes consistent with the zoning district in which it is located.
Office Land Uses
Administration & Management Offices
Business or Corporate Office: Establishments used for the headquarters or administrative operations of a business or corporation (551111 - 551114).
Governmental or Institutional Office: Establishments used for administrative operations of an institutional or governmental agency/organization (813110 - 813990, 921110 - 928120).
Medical & Health Offices
Medical or Diagnostic Laboratory: Establishments that provide analytic or diagnostic services, including body fluid analysis and diagnostic imaging, generally to the medical profession or to the patient on referral from a health practitioner (621511, 621512).
Medical Clinic: Establishments that provide outpatient health care services to ambulatory patients and having four (4) or more licensed medical professionals (621111 - 621498).
Medical Office: Establishments that provide outpatient health care services to ambulatory patients and having three (3) or fewer licensed medical professionals (621111 - 621498).
Professional & Technical Offices										
Accounting, Finance or Investment Service: Establishments that provide accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping, billing, payroll, financial management, and investments services (522210 - 523999, 525110, 525120, 525901 - 525990, 541211 - 541219).
Attorney or Law Office: Establishments of legal practitioners, lawyers or attorneys engaged in the practice of law, which may provide general expertise or practice specific areas of law, such as criminal, corporate, family and estate, patent, real estate, or tax law (541110).
Business Support or Consulting Service: Establishments that provide business support services, which may include routine functions traditionally conducted internally, research, assistance, or expert advice to businesses and other organizations (541611 - 541618, 541810 - 541930).
Design or Technical Profession: Establishments that provide planning and design activities, such as engineering, architecture, geotechnical services, survey, etc. (541310 - 541490, 541620, 541690, 541990).
Information Technology: Establishments that use technology involving the development, maintenance, and use of computer systems, software, and data processing/distribution networks (518210, 519130, 519190, 541511 - 541519). 
Insurance or Real Estate: Establishments that provide or service annuities or insurance policies, including related support activities such as sales, underwriting, investing premiums, or processing claims; establishments that provide professional real estate services including brokerage, sales agency, rental/leasing, property management, abstracting, title work, and appraisal services (524113 - 524298, 525190, 531110 - 531390).
Travel Agency: Establishments that sell or operate travel, tour, and accommodation services (561510 - 561599).
Other Office-Based Uses	
Corporate, Scientific or Government Campus: Contiguous developments that contain a group of office and support uses by a single entity or group of entities united for a singular purpose, and utilized as a consolidated base of operations (541690 - 541720, 551111 - 551114, 813110 - 813990, 921110 - 928120).
Multi-Tenant Office Building: Structures divided into separate units for conducting office-based activities having some shared common spaces for support functions (531120).
Research & Development Laboratory: Establishments that conduct original investigation undertaken on a systematic basis to gain new knowledge, or apply research findings or scientific knowledge to create or improve products or processes (541713 - 541720).
Veterinary Clinic (house pets): Establishments that practice veterinary medicine, dentistry, surgery or related testing services. These treat household pets exclusively and may include outdoor support facilities as allowed by these regulations (541940).
Veterinary Clinic (large animal): Establishments that practice veterinary medicine, dentistry, surgery or related testing services. These treat large animals and livestock, either exclusively or in addition to house pets and may include outdoor support facilities (541940).
Arts, Culture & Recreation Land Uses
Arts & Culture Uses 
Arts & Crafts Studio or Gallery: Establishments that create, store, display, or sell works of art or individually crafted items (453920, 711510).
Library: Establishments that contain collections of books, periodicals, films, music, or similar items for people to use, borrow, study, and reference (519120).
Motion Picture Studio: Establishments that produce or distribute motion pictures, videos, television programs, or commercials or provide post-production and related services (512110).
Museum: Establishments that contain exhibits of historical, scientific, artistic, or cultural objects and may also store, research, clean, or restore such items (712110).
Sound Recording Studio: Establishments that produce and distribute musical recordings, publish music, or provide sound recording and related services (512240).
Tattoo or Body Piercing Studio: Establishments that provide body tattooing or piercing services (812199).
Theater, Motion Picture: Establishments that project motion pictures or videos onto a screen for viewing by a group of individuals assembled in a venue designed specifically for such purposes (512131).
Theater, Performing Arts: Establishments that produce the performances of actors, singers, dancers, musical groups, or similar artists, and present the performances to a group of individuals assembled in a venue designed specifically for such purposes (711110, 711120, 711130).
Recreation & Sports Uses
Amusement Arcade: Establishments that contain collections of coin-operated games or entertainment devices, board games, card games, and similar items used by individuals solely for recreation and not gambling purposes (713120).
Fitness Center or Health Club: Indoor establishments that contain equipment and related facilities for individuals to engage in exercise or physical fitness activities (713940).
Golf Course or Country Club: Establishments that contain golf courses, which may include associated driving ranges, retail sales, dining facilities, and other sports, fitness or recreational facilities (713910).
Horse Riding Stable: Indoor or outdoor establishments for equestrian instruction, practice, and competition including support facilities. This use includes rodeo grounds and facilities (713990).
Recreation, Sport or Amusement Center: Establishments designed and equipped for conducting specific sports, leisure, fitness, and recreation activities or a variety of such activities in one location. This may include indoor and outdoor facilities either open to the public or operated on a membership basis. Such facilities often include one or more of the following: bowling alleys, video arcades, miniature golf, golf driving ranges, batting cages, go-cart tracks, carnival rides, swimming pools, ballfields, etc. (713990).
Shooting Range, Indoor: Indoor establishments for firearms and archery instruction, practice, and competition designed with separate firing positions for individuals or groups of shooters (713990).
Shooting Range, Outdoor: Outdoor establishments for firearms and archery instruction, practice, and competition designed with separate firing positions for individuals or groups of shooters (713990).
Commercial Service Land Uses
Automotive & Equipment Services
Automotive Maintenance Shop: Establishments, not including tire shops, that provide only minor routine automotive maintenance services for passenger vehicle, such as oil & filter changes. Such businesses are not equipped to conduct minor or major repairs (811191, 811198).
Automotive Repair Shop: Establishments, including tire shops, that provide minor or major automotive repair services for passenger vehicles (811111 - 811122, 811198).
Car Wash: Facilities used for cleaning, washing, waxing, or detailing of passenger vehicles (811192).
Commercial or Industrial Equipment Repair Shop: Establishments that repair or maintain commercial and industrial machinery/equipment, including sharpening or installing blades and saws or minor welding repairs (811310).
Construction & Heavy Equipment Repair Shop: Establishments that repair or maintain construction and heavy equipment, such as forklifts, backhoes, construction equipment, and mining machinery, dump trucks, and semi-trucks/trailers (811310).
Garden Equipment & Small Engine Repair Shop: Establishments that repair or maintain home and garden equipment, such as lawnmowers, trimmers, hand-held power tools, snow blowers, and similar equipment with small engines (811411).
Recreational Vehicle, Camper & Trailer Repair Shop: Establishments that repair or maintain recreational vehicles, campers, and trailers (811111, 811121, 811490).
Semi-Truck/Trailer Wash: Establishments that wash semi-trucks/trailers or washout tank trailers (811192).
Tractor & Farm Implement Repair Shop: Establishments that repair or maintain farm tractors, combines, and similar agricultural machinery and equipment (811310).
Business Support Services
Business Service Center: Establishments that provide mailbox rental and other postal and mailing services (except direct mail advertising); photocopying, duplicating, blueprinting, and other document copying services (but not bulk commercial printing services); and office support services, such as facsimile services, word processing services, on-site personal computer rental services, and office supply sales (561431, 561439, 561410).
Call Center or Telemarketing Agency: Establishments that conduct business, either for themselves or others, solely over the telephone on an incoming or outgoing basis including: call answering services; telemarketing; taking client orders; servicing customer accounts; soliciting contributions; providing information for products or services; and conducting surveys or polls (561421, 561422, 454110).
Credit Bureau or Collection Agency: Establishments that compile information on individuals or businesses, such as credit and employment histories, and provide that information to financial institutions, retailers, and others who evaluate creditworthiness; collecting payments for claims and remitting collected payments to clients (561440, 561450, 561491).
Data Processing Center: Establishments that provide infrastructure for data processing/distribution services including web hosting, streaming services or application hosting, application service provisioning, mainframe facilities, automated data processing, and data entry services (518210).
Office Equipment Repair & Maintenance: Establishments that repair and maintain office electronics including computers, printers, copiers, and other similar equipment (811212, 811213).
Personal Care Services
Barber Shop or Beauty Salon: Establishments that provide hair care services including cutting, trimming, styling, shampooing, coloring, or waving hair or shaving and trimming mens beards; providing facials; or applying makeup, not including permanent makeup (812111, 812112).
Day Spa: Establishments that provide health, beauty, and relaxation services; therapeutic or holistic treatments; any combination of personal care services (812199).
Massage Therapy: Establishments that provide body massage services offered by individuals with appropriate documented education and credentials; and duly authorized by the  Butler County Health Department to practice massage therapy (812199).
Nail Salon: Establishments that provide nail care services such as manicures, pedicures, painting, polishing, trimming, and similar services (812113).
Tanning Salon: Establishments that provide body tanning services and UV or spray equipment (812199).
Personal & Household Services
Coin-Operated Laundry: Establishments that provide coin-operated or similar self-service laundry equipment for customer use on the premises (812310).
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Service: Establishments that provide dry-cleaning, laundry, or other textile or garment cleaning services, typically with drop-off and pickup operations (812320).
Household Items or Furnishings Repair & Maintenance: Establishments that provide repair and service of household-type goods without retailing new goods (811420, 811490).
Locksmith Shop: Establishments that sell and service mechanical or electronic locking devices, safes, and security vaults including installation, repair, rebuilding, or adjusting services (561622).
Personal Goods Repair & Maintenance: Establishments that repair and service small personal goods not included in other personal and household services definitions, without retailing new goods (811490).
Picture Framing Shop: Establishments that provide cutting, assembling, and crafting  of picture frames or providing picture framing services for customers (442299).
Tailor or Dressmaker: Establishments that create custom-made clothing and apparel from patterns by cutting and sewing fabric; and make alterations to clothing and apparel owned by others (811490).
Video Rental: Establishments that rent prerecorded video media to individuals to view elsewhere (532282).
Transient Lodging
Bed & Breakfast Inn: Establishments that provide short-term (daily or weekly) lodging in a private home or accessory structure, typically located in a residential zoning district. Owners of the principal structure may or may not occupy the premises at the same time as guests. Meals may be included in the room rate. This includes using Airbnb, VRBO and similar services for rental/booking arrangements (721191).
Campground or Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park: Establishments that operating sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, including tents, tent trailers, and recreational vehicles; and includes recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds and recreational and vacation camps (721211).
Extended Stay Hotel: Establishments that provide lodging for a fee on a per night, per week, or per month basis. Individual units are not intended for permanent residency, but may have kitchens/kitchenettes and separate living and sleeping areas (721110).
Group Shelter: Establishments that provide temporary or emergency shelter for individuals or families, in either private rooms or shared common spaces intended for temporary occupancy. This may include incidental social services, such as meals or counseling, provided to temporary occupants (624221).
Hotel or Motel: Establishments that provide short-term (daily or weekly) lodging in facilities known as hotels, motor hotels, resort hotels, and motels (721110).
Misc. Commercial Services
Auction House: Establishments that sell used merchandise by auction, not including vehicle and equipment auctions (453998, 561990).
Bail Bond Service: Establishments that provide bail bonding or bondsperson services (812990).
Banking Service: Establishments that accept deposits, lend funds from said deposits, provide extensions of credit, and the custody, loan, or exchange of money. Includes only establishments chartered by the State of Kansas or federal government as a bank, credit union, or similar financial institution (522110 - 522310).
Boarding Kennel: Establishments that provide temporary short-term lodging for house pets owned by others and limited pet care services as allowed by City Code (812910).
Day Care Center: Commercial day care establishments for adults or children that are appropriately licensed by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) that provide care for up to twelve (12) hours per day and which are not home-based businesses (624120, 624410).
Event Center: Establishments that provide facilities on a rental basis for hosting private events, such as weddings, birthdays, and social gatherings. Such establishments may serve, or allow to be served by patrons, cereal malt or alcoholic beverages when appropriately licensed, subject to applicable provisions of state and federal law, City Code, and these regulations (531120, 722320).
Funeral Home or Mortuary: Establishments that prepare the dead for burial/interment and conduct funerals (812210).
Non-Banking Financial Service: Establishments that provide banking-type services or other financial services, but do not hold deposits and are not chartered by the State of Kansas or federal government. Typical services include check cashing, payday loans, car title loans, and money wiring (522298, 522320, 522390).
Pet Grooming Service: Establishments that provide pet grooming services (812910).
Taxidermy Studio: Establishments that provide taxidermy services (711510).
Retail Land Uses
Automotive & Equipment Sales, Rental or Leasing			
Auto Rental Office: Establishments that provide short-term vehicle rental/leasing without drivers, including passenger cars, motorcycles, scooters and pick-up trucks (532111, 532112).
Auto & Personal Vehicle Sales: Establishments that provide sales of new and used automobiles, motorcycles, light trucks, passenger and cargo vans, boats (441110, 441120, 441222, 441228).
Construction & Heavy Equipment Sales/Rental: Establishments that provide sales, rentals, and leasing of new and used construction equipment and other heavy equipment (532412).
Lawn & Garden Equipment Sales: Establishments that provide sales and/or rentals of new and used lawn and garden equipment and supplies (444210, 532310, 532490).
Tool or Equipment Rental: Establishments that provide short-term rental of home and garden, construction, and similar equipment such as hand tools, power tools, and lawn care equipment (532289, 532310).
Tractor & Farm Implement Sales/Rental: Establishments that provide sales, rentals, and leasing of new and used tractors and farm implements and machinery (423820, 423860, 532310, 532490).
Truck, Trailer or Recreational Vehicle Sales/Rental: Establishments that provide sales, rentals, and leasing of heavy trucks, truck trailers, semi-trailers, utility trailers, campers or recreational vehicles (441210, 441228, 532120).
Vehicle or Equipment Auction: Establishments that provide auction services for vehicles and other equipment that are typically owned by others (423110).
Building Material & Supply Sales
Electrical, Heating or Plumbing Contractor Supply: Establishments that provide sales of specialized lines of new electrical, heating, and plumbing appliances, equipment, and materials (423610, 423720, 444190).
Flooring, Paint or Home Decor Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of paint, wallpaper, building flooring materials, home decor items, and related supplies (444120, 444190).
Hardware & Tool Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of new hardware items, such as tools, fasteners, and builders’ hardware. These may offer the incidental retail sale of general merchandise, construction materials, home, lawn and garden supplies. This may include temporary or permanent outdoor storage and display of goods for immediate sale (444130).
Home & Garden Center: Establishments, typically associated with a national “big-box” retail chain, that provide retail sales of a variety of home, lawn, and garden supplies; landscaping materials; plants; brick; lumber; and other similar materials. This use may include permanent outdoor storage and display of goods for immediate sale (444110, 444220).
Lumber Yard: Establishments that provide sales of lumber, which may be stored indoors or outdoors (423310, 444190).
General & Specialty Retail
Adult Retail Store: A sexually oriented establishment considered an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store as defined in K.S.A. 12-770, et seq. (N/A).
Antique Shop: Establishments that provide retail sales of used goods known as antiques, which were made earlier than the present period of time and have value because of considerable age (453310).
Book or Music Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of new or used books and other reading material or music recordings (443142, 451211, 451212).
Cable or Satellite TV or Telecommunication Retail Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of cable, satellite, or telecommunication services and associated merchandise (5171, 5174, 5179).
Cigar or Tobacco Product Shop: Establishments that provide retail sales of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, pipes, e-cigarettes and other supplies for smoking or nicotine delivery (453991, 453998).
Clothing, Shoe or Apparel Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of new clothing, clothing accessories, shoes, or apparel; including formal wear and costume rental (448110 - 448210, 532281).
Cosmetics or Beauty Supply Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of cosmetics, perfumes, toiletries, and personal grooming products (446120).
Farm & Home Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of new building materials and supplies, new lawn and garden equipment, or new general farm equipment, not including heavy machinery. This may include the outdoor storage and display of goods for immediate sale (444220).
Florist: Establishments that offer retail or wholesale sales of cut flowers, floral arrangements, and potted plants. May include sales of plants purchased from others or grown inside greenhouses or hoop houses located on-site (453110, 453998).
Furniture or Home Appliance Store: Establishments that provide sales and/or rental of furniture, home furnishings, household appliances, televisions, stereo equipment, and home electronics (442299, 443141, 443142, 532289).
General Merchandise or Department Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of new general merchandise, with a wide variety of goods available and no single line of merchandise line being predominant (452210, 452319).
Gift, Novelty or Souvenir Shop: Establishments that provide retail sales of new gifts, novelty merchandise, souvenirs, greeting cards, seasonal and holiday decorations, or curios (453220).
Health Care or Medical Equipment Store: Establishments that provide retail sales and/or rental of health, personal, and medical equipment (446199, 532283).
Hobby Supply Shop: Establishments that provide retail sales of new toys, games, hobby and craft supplies and materials (451120).
Musical Instrument Store: Establishments that provide retail sales and/or rental of new and used musical instruments, sheet music, and related supplies (451140, 532289).
Office Supply or Stationary Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of new stationary, school supplies, office supplies, office equipment, office furniture, or office supplies (453210).
Pawnshop: Establishments that provide retail sales of general items and providing non-depository credit, pawn brokering, lending money upon personal property, pawns of pledges, or purchasing items at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase (522298).
Pet or Pet Supply Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of pets, pet food, and pet supplies (453910).
Pharmacy or Drug Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of prescription and non-prescription drugs and medicines (446110).
Resale or Thrift Shop: Establishments, not including antique shops or pawnshops, that provide retail sales of a variety of used items, clothing or small household goods. Consignment sales may be offered. These may be operated by non-profit organizations, which gather, sort, and sell donated items on-site (453310).
Sporting or Recreational Goods Store: Establishments that provide retail sales and/or rental of new or used sporting goods, recreational equipment and fitness equipment (451110, 532284).
Supercenter or Warehouse Club: Establishments, typically associated with a national “big-box” retail chain, that provide retail sales of a general line of groceries in combinations with general lines of new merchandise (452311).
Grocery, Food & Beverage Sales
Bakery or Pastry Shops: Establishments that provide retail sales of bread and other baked goods made on the premises. May offer items intended for consumption on- and off-premise (311811, 445291, 722515).
Beer, Wine or Liquor Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of packaged alcoholic beverages (445310).
Convenience Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of a limited line of goods that generally includes milk, bread, soda, and snacks (445120, 447110).
Grocery Store or Supermarket: Establishments that provide retail sales of a general line of food products and miscellaneous general merchandise (445110).
Health Food or Supplement Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of food supplement products such as vitamins, nutrition supplements, and body enhancing supplements (446191).
Specialty Food Market: Establishments that provide retail sales of specialized lines of food (445210, 445220, 445230, 445292, 445299).
Restaurants & Drinking Establishments
Bars or Tavern: Establishments that generate fifty percent (50%) or more of its income from preparing and serving cereal malt or alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption; or classified as a Class A or Class B club per K.S.A. 41-2601, et seq. Such establishments may sell prepared food items when appropriately licensed, subject to applicable provisions of state and federal law, City Code, and these regulations (722410).
Brewpub: Establishments that generate fifty percent (50%) or more of its income from cereal malt or alcoholic beverages brewed on-premise; or classified as a Class B club under K.S.A. 41-2601, et seq. Such establishments may sell prepared food items when appropriately licensed, subject to applicable provisions of state and federal law, City Code, and these regulations (722410, 722511).
Cafeteria or Buffet: Establishments primarily engaged in preparing and serving meals for immediate consumption using cafeteria-style or buffet serving equipment, such as steam tables, refrigerated areas, display grills, and self-service nonalcoholic beverage dispensing equipment (722514).
Drive-In Restaurant: Establishments primarily engaged in providing food services where patrons generally order or select items and pay before eating and which provides primary service to people parked in their vehicles. Such establishments shall not sell cereal malt or alcoholic beverages (722513).
Full Service Restaurant: Establishments that generate at least fifty percent (50%) of their income from food prepared on-premise, which is served to patrons who order while seated and pay after eating. Such establishments may sell cereal malt or alcoholic beverages when appropriately licensed, subject to applicable provisions of state and federal law, City Code, and these regulations (722511).
Limited Service Restaurant: Establishments that generate at least seventy-five percent (75%) of their income from food prepared on-premise, which is ordered and served to patrons who must pay before eating. Such establishments may sell cereal malt or alcoholic beverages when appropriately licensed, subject to applicable provisions of state and federal law, City Code, and these regulations (722513).
Misc. Retail Sales
Grain & Feed Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of farm supplies, such as crop seed, livestock supplies, and animal (non-pet) feed (444220).
Manufactured Home Dealer: Establishments that provide retail sales of new or used manufactured homes, parts, and equipment (453930).
Multi-Tenant Lifestyle Center: Specialized shopping centers with a compatible mix of national chain specialty stores, dining, entertainment, and smaller retail, service, and office uses. Individual tenant units may be adjoined or detached, with entrances and circulation between units provided along the exterior of buildings (531120, 531312).
Multi-Tenant Shopping Mall: Specialized shopping centers with a compatible mix of national chain specialty stores, dining, entertainment, and smaller retail, service, and office uses. Structures have interior common space providing circulation and direct access to individual tenant units (531120, 531312).
Multi-Tenant Strip Center: Shopping centers with street frontage having multiple tenants set side-by-side with adjoining walls and circulation between units provided along the exterior of the building. These typically include a compatible mix of retail, dining, entertainment, service, and office uses (531120, 531312).
Outdoor Market: Outdoor establishments that provide retail sales of a variety of merchandise and products. Some typical examples include farmer’s markets and flea markets (453310, 454390, 531190).
Swimming Pool Supply Store: Establishments that provide retail sales of swimming pool supplies, accessories, and chemicals (453998).
Truck Stop: Establishments that support the trucking industry, limited to on-premise fuel, accessory and convenience item sales; truck repair and washes; and restaurants (447110, 447190).
Vehicle Fueling Station: Establishments primarily engaged in retail sales of automotive fuels (447110, 447190).
Industrial Land Uses
Industrial Scale Non-Manufacturing
Commercial Laundry Operation: Establishments that supply, on a rental or contract basis, laundered industrial work uniforms and related work clothing, treated mops, rugs, mats, dust tool covers, cloths, and shop or wiping towels; or laundering services for such items (812320, 812331, 812332).
Commercial Printing Operation: Establishments that offer printing on apparel and textile products, paper, metal, glass, plastics, and other materials (323111, 323113, 323117, 323120).
Concrete or Asphalt Pavement Mixing Plant: Establishments that measure, combine, and mix materials to create concrete or asphalt, but do not provide finished concrete or asphalt products (327310, 327320, 324121).
Liquid Waste Processing or Recycling: Establishments that collect, treat, and dispose of liquid waste materials; operate materials recovery facilities; provide remediation services;  and provide septic pumping and other miscellaneous waste management services (325998, 423930, 562112, 562211, 562219, 562998).
Mulching & Composting Operation: Establishments that collect, store, and manage mulching and composting operations (325314, 562119).
Solid Recyclables Sorting & Processing: Establishments that operate facilities for separating and sorting nonhazardous recyclable materials or operating facilities where commingled recyclable materials, such as paper, plastics, used beverage cans, and metals, are sorted into distinct categories (423930, 562111 - 562920).
General Manufacturing & Assembly
Aviation & Related Component Assembly: Establishments that manufacture or assemble aviation instruments, equipment, and related components (334220, 334511, 336320, 336412, 336413).
Brewery, Winery or Distillery: Establishments that brew beer, ale, malt liquors, and nonalcoholic beer;  manufacture or blend wines and brandies; or distill, blend, or mix potable liquors, spirits, and other alcoholic beverages. Such are typically produced for wholesale distribution with limited retail sales allowed on-premise (312120, 312130, 312140).
Clothing or Apparel Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble clothing, shoes and other apparel from fibers, woven materials, leathers, furs, etc. (315110 - 315990, 316210 - 316998).
Computer, Appliance or Electronics Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble products that generate, distribute, or use electrical power. These include lighting; electrical appliances and parts; electric motors and components; electric generators and storage devices; computers; computer peripherals; communications equipment; and similar electronic products (333316, 333318, 334111 - 335921, 335999).
Concrete, Clay or Glass Products Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble products using concrete, clay, glass, or similar products (327110 - 327215, 327331 - 327390, 333314).
Food Product or Non-Alcoholic Beverage Production: Establishments that transform livestock and agricultural products into products for intermediate or final consumption or the manufacturing of soft drinks, juices, or other nonalcoholic beverages (311211 - 311520, 311812 - 312112).
Furnishings Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble furniture from mass produced materials. Does not include craft workshops that produce custom furniture or refurbishing one piece at a time (337110 - 337920).
Household or Personal Goods Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble household goods, excluding furniture and electronics, or personal goods (339910, 339940, 339992 - 339999).
Ice Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture ice for wholesale distribution (312113).
Mechanical Component Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble miscellaneous equipment and end products that apply mechanical force to perform work (333318 - 333415, 333611 - 333999).
Medical Equipment & Supplies Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble medical, dental, and surgical equipment, supplies, instruments, and appliances (339112 - 339116).
Metal Products Assembly: Establishments that treat metal products or assemble them into intermediate or end products from metals fabricated elsewhere (332114 - 332992, 335929 - 335991).
Metal Working, Tool & Dye or Welding Shop: Establishments that fabricate metal products, tool and dye items, or weld metals into intermediate or end products (333514 - 333519).
Plastic or Rubber Products Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble new or spent plastics resins; or process natural, synthetic, or reclaimed rubber materials into intermediate or final products (326111 - 326299, 339991).
Sign Fabrication & Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture signs and related displays of all materials, except paper signs (339950).
Toy, Recreation or Sporting Goods Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture items such as dolls, doll parts, doll clothes, action figures, toys, games, hobby kits, children’s vehicles, sporting and athletic goods. This category does not include the manufacture of metal bicycles and tricycles or athletic apparel and footwear (339920, 339930).
Wood Product Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture or assemble wood products, such as lumber, plywood, veneers, wood containers, wood flooring, wood trusses, manufactured homes, and prefabricated wood buildings (32114 - 321999).
Heavy Industries & Raw Materials Processing
Chemical or Explosives Manufacturing: Establishments that produce basic chemicals or gases, creating products by chemical processes, or manufacturing explosives (325120 - 325199, 325311 - 325320, 325510 - 325998, 332992, 332993).
Concrete or Gypsum Manufacturing: Establishments that produce concrete building block, brick, and all types of precast and prefab concrete products; stone cutting, grinding or polishing. Also includes lime manufacturing, and the manufacture of gypsum products, such as plasterboard (327331 - 327999).
Motor Vehicle or Heavy Equipment Manufacturing: Establishments that produce equipment for transporting people and goods or heavy-duty vehicles or other equipment designed for executing agricultural, construction, grading or mining tasks (333111 - 333132, 336111 - 336999).
Paper or Paper Products Manufacturing: Establishments that produce wood pulp, paper, paperboard, or converted paper products (322110 - 322299).
Petroleum or Natural Gas Extraction: Resource extraction establishments primarily engaged in the removal of petroleum and natural gas from the earth for economic use (211120, 211130, 213111, 213112).
Petroleum, Coal or Asphalt Products Manufacturing: Establishments that transform crude petroleum and coal into usable products; manufacture asphalt and tar paving mixtures; produce roofing cements and coatings from asphaltic materials; or saturate mats and felts with asphalt or tar (324110 - 325110).
Pharmaceutical or Medicine Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture biological and medicinal products; process botanical drugs and herbs; isolate active medicinal principals from botanical drugs and herbs; or manufacture pharmaceutical products intended for consumption/use (325411 - 325414).
Plastic or Rubber Manufacturing: Establishments that process new or spent plastics or rubbers into intermediate or final products (325211 - 325220).
Quarry or Mine: Resource extraction establishments engaged in mining, developing mines, or exploring for metallic minerals (ores) or coal and nonmetallic minerals (except fuels) for economic use (212211 - 212299, 212324 - 212399, 213114, 213115).
Sand, Rock or Mineral Extraction Pit: Resource extraction establishments engaged in surface mining for the removal of sand, rock, and naturally occurring minerals from the earth for economic use (212311 - 212322, 213115).
Sawmill: Establishments engaged in storage, sales, and milling of forest products, not including the cutting of firewood (321113).
Slaughterhouse or Animal Products Processing: Establishments that slaughter animals; prepare processed meats and meat byproducts; or render or refine animal fat, bones, and meat scraps (311111, 311119, 311225, 311611 - 311710).
Textile or Carpet Mill: Establishments that transform basic fibers into products that are further manufactured into usable textile products, not including clothing or apparel (313110 - 314999).
Wholesale Trade
Importing, Exporting or Wholesale Trade: Establishments that import or export wholesale products; sell merchandise to retailers, industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, professional business users, or other wholesalers; or act as agents or brokers in buying or selling merchandise for others (423110 - 425120).
Wholesale Trade with Showroom: Establishments that import wholesale products; and sell imported wholesale merchandise to others directly or acting as agents; and offer a showroom for displaying or selling products (423110 - 425120).
Vending Machine Supply or Distributor: Establishments that supply or distribute machines that mechanically dispense consumer items; or supply or distribute items sold by vending machines (454210, 713120, 812990).
Warehousing & Storage
Agricultural Product or Fertilizer Warehousing/Storage: Establishments that store products, materials, or chemicals that used in livestock or agricultural production (424510, 493130).
Bulk Chemical, Explosives or Petroleum Storage: Establishments that store chemicals, explosives, petroleum products or similar components (424710, 424720, 454310, 493190, 562211).
Cold Storage or Refrigerated Warehousing: Establishments that store commercial goods and materials requiring refrigeration or temperature control (493120).
Commercial Livestock Feedlot: Establishments that raise livestock or feed livestock for fattening (11212).
Construction Contractor Yard: Establishments that provide general contracting or subcontracting in the building construction trades. These include administrative offices, workshops and the indoor or outdoor storage of tools, equipment, materials, and vehicles (236115 - 238990).
General Indoor Warehousing: Establishments that store general commercial goods and materials inside of a building (493110).
General Outdoor Storage: Establishments that store general commercial goods and materials outside of a building (493110, 493190).
Junk, Scrap or Salvage Yard: Establishments that store, recycle, dismantle, or sell cast-off, used, scrap, or salvage materials, metals, automobiles, or similar items (423140, 423930).
Livestock Auction Barn: Establishments that consign livestock for auction, which is open to public bidding or sold on a commission basis (424520, 424590).
Self-Storage, Commercial: Establishments that rent/lease, separate secured units to individuals who self-store and retrieve personal items (531130).
Vehicle or Equipment Storage Yard: Establishments that store vehicles and other equipment for a fee, within a secured area enclosed and screened by a fence (493190).
Transportation & Freight Uses
Airstrip, Airport or Heliport: Establishments that provide landing and take-off facilities for aircraft, with related support facilities and buildings (481111 - 481219, 488111 - 488190).
Commercial Parking Lot or Garage: Establishments that provide off-street parking stalls for motor vehicles, usually on an hourly, daily, or monthly basis, and may offer valet parking services. (812930).
Courier, Messenger or Local Delivery Service: Establishments that provide intercity, local, or international delivery of parcels, documents, furnishing and bulk items (including express delivery services) without operating under a universal service obligation (484210, 491110, 492110, 492210).
Motor Vehicle Towing or Wrecker Service: Establishments that provide towing services for light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance. These establishments may provide incidental services, such as storage and emergency road repair services (488410).
Public Transit or Charter Bus Terminal: Establishments primarily used as terminals or major hubs for operating passenger ground transportation service, including fixed route service and on-demand service, for profit or by a public agency (485111 - 485210, 485410 - 485999).
Rail & Intermodal Freight or Transfer Yard: Establishments used to transfer goods between different freight modes including trains and trucks, ships, or aircraft (482111, 482112, 488210).
Taxi, Limousine or Shuttle Service: Establishments that provide passenger transportation by automobile, van, limousine, or shuttle bus, which are not operated over regular routes and on regular schedules (485310, 485320, 485999).
Trucking & Freight Terminal: Establishments used to transfer freight from trucks or trains on a broad distribution network to vehicles that deliver directly to the final recipients (484110 - 484122, 484220, 484230).
Communication & Utility Land Uses
Broadcast Tower: A freestanding monopole, lattice framework or guyed structure with equipment that transmits/receives radio, television, satellite, microwave, radar or other communication signals. Does not include personal wireless services, facilities or communications as defined in 47 USC § 332 (c) - (d) (515111, 515112, 515120, 517410).
Natural Gas or Petroleum Distribution: Infrastructure, tanks, and aboveground equipment that support the underground transportation or delivery of natural gas or petroleum products  (221210, 486110 - 486990).
Radio or Television Broadcasting Station: Establishments that operate broadcast studios and facilities for over-the-air or satellite delivery of radio and television programs (515111, 515112, 515120).
Utility Support Facility or Substation: Infrastructure, equipment, structures or land owned by a public agency or private utility that support the provision of organizational services or utilities, except managerial/administrative functions; or facilities that connect utility transmission infrastructure to the distribution or collection network of a specific service area within the utility system. These are the primary use of a zoning lot. Does not include wireless communications as defined in  Section 03.03 (221111 - 221330, 515210, 515311).
Wind Energy Conversion System: Establishments primarily engaged in operating wind electric power generation facilities (221115)
Wireless Communications Tower: Freestanding monopoles, self-supported structures or guyed structures capable of supporting transmission equipment for personal wireless communications, such as cellular voice/data or other similar services as defined in 47 USC § 332 (c) - (d). This shall include collocated wireless facilities requiring substantial modification of the existing structure prior to installation. See definitions in Section 03.03 (517312).
Public & Institutional Land Uses
Arena or Stadium: Facilities primarily for spectator-oriented gatherings including sporting events, attractions, performing arts, or similar assemblies. Includes stadiums, coliseums, arenas, field houses, race tracks (auto and animals), motorcycle racing and drag strips, and other sports considered commercial (711211, 711212, 711219).
Cemetery or Mausoleum: Interment establishments that subdivide property into lots and offer burial plots for sale. Includes animal cemeteries; cemetery, mausoleum, and related facilities; and funeral parlors accessory to a cemetery or mausoleum (812220).
Civic, Religious or Organizational Meeting Place: Permanent venues designed for hosting gatherings or meetings of groups, congregations, institutions, or organizations (813110 - 813990).
Correctional Institution: Facilities generally designed and operated for the confinement, correction, and rehabilitation of adult or juvenile offenders sentenced by a court (922140).
Crematory: Establishments that operate facilities where the dead are cremated (812220).
Hospital: Establishments that provide medical, diagnostic, and treatment services that include physician, nursing, and other health services provided on an inpatient basis; and the specialized accommodation services required by inpatients (622110, 622210, 622310).
Outpatient Surgery or Treatment Center: Establishments that provide general and specialized outpatient services and care related to a treatment of a variety of medical and mental health issues including disorders, substance abuse, family planning, and HMOs (621410 - 621498).
Park/Open Space: An area of land or water dedicated for recreation purposes, sports activities or preservation of natural resources. Some typical examples include parks, playgrounds, open common areas, greenways and nature preserves.
School or Educational Campus: Individual buildings or groups of structures used to deliver educational services. Includes preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, secondary schools, junior colleges, colleges, universities, professional schools, and military academies (611110 - 611310).
Technical School or Job Training Center: Establishments that provide vocational and technical training in a variety of technical subjects and trades (611410 - 611699).
05.03.	
Table of Primary Uses by Zoning District


Table Legend
 

“A”
 ALLOWED by-right in zoning district.
 “X”
 NO APPLICABLE specific use standards.
 
`C”
 Permitted by CONDITIONAL USE in zoning district. 
 p. #
 Page number where the use definition or applicable specific use standards are found.
 
“--”
 Use NOT ALLOWED in zoning district.
 




Defined Primary Uses
 Definition 
 Zoning District
 Specific Use

 
A-1
 R-R
 R-1
 R-2
 R-3
 C-1
 C-2
 C-3
 I-1
 

Agricultural Land Uses
 
General Agricultural Uses
 
Animal or Livestock Production
 p. 21
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Crop Production
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Breeding Kennel
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Greenhouse or Hoop House
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Nursery or Orchard
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Undefined Agricultural Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Residential Land Uses
 
Single-Family Dwellings
 
Duplex (SF Attached)
 p. 21
 C
 C
 C
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 p. 89
 
Earth Sheltered Home (SF Detached)
 A
 A
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 
Garden Home (SF Attached)
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Manufactured or Mobile Home (SF Detached)
 p. 22
 C
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Modular Home (Construction Method)
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Patio Home (SF Detached)
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Residential-design Manufactured Home (SF Detached)
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Site-Built Home (Construction Method)
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Multi-Family Dwellings
 
Apartment
 p. 22
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 C
 C
 --
 --
 X
 
Boarding House
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 C
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Group Home
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Townhome
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Triplex or Quadplex
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Nursing & Residential Care Facilities
 
Assisted Living Facility
 p. 22
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Continuing Care Facility
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Nursing Care Facility
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Residential Mixed Uses
 
Live/Work Office or Studio
 p. 23
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Loft or Apartment in Commercial Building
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Undefined Residential Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Office Land Uses
 
Administration & Management Offices
 
Business or Corporate Office
 p. 23
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Governmental or Institutional Office
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Medical & Health Offices
 
Medical or Diagnostic Laboratory
 p. 23
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Medical Clinic
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Medical Office
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Professional & Technical Offices
 
Accounting, Finance or Investment Service
 p. 23
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Attorney or Law Office
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Business Support or Consulting Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Design or Technical Profession
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Information Technology
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Insurance or Real Estate
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Travel Agency
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 

Defined Primary Uses
 Definition 
 Zoning District
 Specific Use

 
A-1
 R-R
 R-1
 R-2
 R-3
 C-1
 C-2
 C-3
 I-1
 

Other Office-Based Uses
 
Corporate, Scientific or Government Campus
 p. 23
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 
Multi-Tenant Office Building
 p. 24
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Research & Development Laboratory
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 
Veterinary Clinic (house pets)
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Veterinary Clinic (large animal/livestock)
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Undefined Office Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Arts, Culture & Recreation Land Uses
 
Arts & Culture Uses
 
Arts & Crafts Studio or Gallery
 p. 24
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Library
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Motion Picture Studio
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Museum
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Sound Recording Studio
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Tattoo or Body Piercing Studio
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 p. 89
 
Theater, Motion Picture
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Theater, Performing Arts
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Recreation & Sports Uses
 
Amusement Arcade
 p. 24
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Fitness Center or Health Club
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Golf Course or Country Club
 A
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 p. 89
 
Horse Riding Stable
 A
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Recreation, Sport or Amusement Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 A
 p. 90
 
Shooting Range, Indoor
 p. 25
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 
Shooting Range, Outdoor
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 
Undefined Arts, Culture & Recreation Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Commercial Service Land Uses
 
Automotive & Equipment Services
 
Automotive Maintenance Shop
 p. 25
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 p. 90
 
Automotive Repair Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 p. 90
 
Car Wash
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 p. 91
 
Commercial or Industrial Equipment Repair Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 X
 
Construction & Heavy Equipment Repair Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Garden Equipment & Small Engine Repair Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 A
 A
 X
 
Recreational Vehicle, Camper & Trailer Repair Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Semi-Truck/Trailer Wash
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Tractor & Farm Implement Repair Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Business Support Services
 
Business Service Center
 p. 25
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Call Center or Telemarketing Agency
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 --
 X
 
Credit Bureau or Collection Agency
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 --
 X
 
Data Processing Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Office Equipment Repair & Maintenance
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Personal Care Services
 
Barber Shop or Beauty Salon
 p. 26
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Day Spa
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Massage Therapy
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Nail Salons
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Tanning Salons
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Personal & Household Services
 
Coin-Operated Laundry
 p. 26
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Household Items or Furnishings Repair & Maintenance
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Locksmith Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Personal Goods Repair & Maintenance
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Picture Framing Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Tailor or Dressmaker
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Video Rental
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 

Defined Primary Uses
 Definition 
 Zoning District
 Specific Use

 
A-1
 R-R
 R-1
 R-2
 R-3
 C-1
 C-2
 C-3
 I-1
 

Transient Lodging
 
Bed & Breakfast Inn
 p. 26
 C
 C
 C
 --
 A
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Extended Stay Hotel
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Group Shelter
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 --
 X
 
Hotel or Motel
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Misc. Commercial Services
 
Auction House
 p. 27
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 
Bail Bond Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Banking Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Boarding Kennel
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 p. 91
 
Day Care Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Event Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Funeral Home or Mortuary
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Non-Banking Financial Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Pet Grooming Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Taxidermy Studio
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Undefined Commercial Services
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Retail Land Uses
 
Automotive & Equipment Sales, Rental or Leasing
 
Auto Rental Office
 p. 27
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 p. 91
 
Auto & Personal Vehicle Sales
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 
Construction & Heavy Equipment Sales/Rental
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 
Lawn & Garden Equipment Sales
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 
Tool or Equipment Rental
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 
Tractor & Farm Implement Sales/Rental
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 
Truck, Trailer or Recreational Vehicle Sales/Rental
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 
Vehicle or Equipment Auction
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 
Building Material & Supply Sales
 
Electrical, Heating or Plumbing Contractor Supply
 p. 28
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 
Flooring, Paint or Home Decor Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Hardware & Tool Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Home & Garden Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 p. 91
 
Lumber Yard
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 
General & Specialty Retail Sales
 
Adult Retail Store
 p. 28
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 p. 92
 
Antique Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Book or Music Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Cable or Satellite TV or Telecommunication Retail Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Cigar or Tobacco Product Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Clothing, Shoe or Apparel Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Cosmetics or Beauty Supply Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Farm & Home Store
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 
Florist
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Furniture or Home Appliance Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 X
 
General Merchandise or Department Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 --
 X
 
Gift, Novelty or Souvenir Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Health Care or Medical Equipment Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Hobby Supply Shop
 p. 29
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Musical Instrument Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Office Supply or Stationary Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Pawnshop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 
Pet or Pet Supply Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Pharmacy or Drug Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Resale or Thrift Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Sporting or Recreational Goods Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Supercenter or Warehouse Club
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 X
 

Defined Primary Uses
 Definition 
 Zoning District
 Specific Use

 
A-1
 R-R
 R-1
 R-2
 R-3
 C-1
 C-2
 C-3
 I-1
 

Grocery, Food & Beverage Sales
 
Bakery or Pastry Shop
 p. 29
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Beer, Wine or Liquor Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Convenience Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Grocery Store or Supermarket
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Health Food or Supplement Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Specialty Food Market
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Restaurants & Drinking Establishments
 
Bar or Tavern
 p. 29
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 p. 92
 
Brewpub
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 
Cafeteria or Buffet
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Drive-In Restaurant 
 p. 30
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 --
 X
 
Full Service Restaurant
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Limited Service Restaurant
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Misc. Retail Uses
 
Grain & Feed Store
 p. 30
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 X
 
Manufactured Home Dealer
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 p. 91
 
Multi-Tenant Lifestyle Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 p. 92
 
Multi-Tenant Shopping Mall
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 
Multi-Tenant Strip Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 
Outdoor Market
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 A
 p. 93
 
Swimming Pool Supply Store
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Truck Stop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 p. 93
 
Vehicle Fueling Station
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 p. 94
 
Undefined Retail Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Industrial Land Uses
 
Industrial Scale Non-Manufacturing
 
Commercial Laundry Operation
 p. 30
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Commercial Printing Operation
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Concrete or Asphalt Pavement Mixing Plant
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 p. 99
 
Liquid Waste Processing or Recycling
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Mulching & Composting Operation
 p. 31
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Solid Recyclables Sorting & Processing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
General Manufacturing & Assembly
 
Aviation & Related Component Assembly
 p. 31
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Brewery, Winery or Distillery
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Clothing or Apparel Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Computer, Appliance or Electronics Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Concrete, Clay & Glass Products
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Food Product or Non-Alcoholic Beverage Production
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Furnishings Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Household or Personal Goods Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Ice Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Mechanical Component Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Medical Equipment & Supplies Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Metal Products Assembly
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Metal Working, Tool & Dye or Welding Shop
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Plastic or Rubber Products Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Sign Fabrication & Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Toy, Recreation or Sporting Goods Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Wood Product Manufacturing
 p. 32
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Heavy Industries & Raw Materials Processing
 
Chemical or Explosives Manufacturing
 p. 32
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Concrete or Gypsum Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Motor Vehicle or Heavy Equipment Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Paper or Paper Products Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Petroleum or Natural Gas Extraction
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 p. 95
 
Petroleum, Coal or Asphalt Products Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 

Defined Primary Uses
 Definition 
 Zoning District
 Specific Use

 
A-1
 R-R
 R-1
 R-2
 R-3
 C-1
 C-2
 C-3
 I-1
 

Heavy Industries & Raw Materials Processing (continued)
 
Pharmaceutical or Medicine Manufacturing
 p. 32
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Plastic or Rubber Manufacturing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Quarry or Mine
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 p. 95
 
Sand, Rock or Mineral Extraction Pit
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 
Sawmill
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 p. 96
 
Slaughterhouse or Animal Products Processing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Textile or Carpet Mill
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Wholesale Trade
 
Importing, Exporting or Wholesale Trade
 p. 32
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Wholesale Trade with Showroom
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 X
 
Vending Machine Supply or Distributor
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 X
 
Warehousing & Storage
 
Agricultural Product or Fertilizer Warehousing/Storage
 p. 33
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Bulk Chemical, Explosives or Petroleum Storage
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Cold Storage or Refrigerated Warehousing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Commercial Livestock Feedlot
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Construction Contractor Yard
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 X
 
General Indoor Warehousing
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
General Outdoor Storage
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Junk, Scrap or Salvage Yard
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 p. 96
 
Livestock Auction Barn
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Self-Storage, Commercial
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 p. 97
 
Vehicle or Equipment Storage Yard
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 p. 96
 
Transportation & Freight Uses
 
Airstrip, Airport or Heliport
 p. 33
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Commercial Parking Lot or Garage
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
Courier, Messenger or Local Delivery Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 A
 X
 
Motor Vehicle Towing or Wrecker Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Public Transit or Charter Bus Terminal
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 X
 
Rail & Intermodal Freight or Transfer Yard
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Taxi, Limousine or Shuttle Service
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 X
 
Trucking or Freight Terminal
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Undefined Industrial Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Communication & Utility Land Uses
 
Broadcast Tower
 p. 34
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 A
 p. 97
 
Natural Gas or Petroleum Distribution
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 X
 
Radio or Television Broadcasting Station
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 X
 
Utility Support Facility or Substation
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 A
 p. 105
 
Wireless Communication Tower
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 A
 p. 97
 
Undefined Communication & Utility Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 
Public & Institutional Land Uses
 
Arena or Stadium
 p. 34
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 p. 98
 
Cemetery or Mausoleum
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Civic, Religious or Organizational Meeting Place
 C
 C
 C
 --
 C
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Correctional Institution
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 X
 
Crematory
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 A
 X
 
Hospital
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 --
 X
 
Outpatient Surgery or Treatment Center
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 --
 X
 
Park/Open Space
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
School or Educational Campus
 C
 C
 C
 --
 C
 --
 A
 A
 --
 p. 98
 
Technical School or Job Training Center
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 
Undefined Public & Institutional Uses
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 



05.04.	
Secondary Land Uses


This section defines specific uses and structures, which are considered secondary uses as defined in Section 03.03. Wireless facilities are regulated as secondary uses when located on a lot with a different primary use or within the public right-of-way. A table identifying allowed secondary land uses in each zoning district is provided as Section 05.05 following these definitions.
Accessory Apartment or Dwelling: A residential unit that is accessory to a single-family residential primary use on the same lot. An accessory apartment is constructed inside or attached to the primary structure or a secondary structure. An accessory dwelling exists independently and is detached from all other structures. 
Accessory Use: Any use or structure defined as an accessory use per Section 03.03 and allowed per Section 04.06 that is not otherwise specifically defined in this section.
Adult Entertainment: Any sexually oriented business activity defined per K.S.A. 12-770, which occurs in a motion picture theater, bar, tavern, or full service restaurant as defined in Section 05.02. Such an establishment wherein a sexually oriented activity occurs shall be regulated as an adult entertainment use according to Section 05.05 and subject to all applicable requirements. No sexually oriented business activity defined per K.S.A. 12-770 shall be allowed in conjunction with any use not defined herein. 
Broadcast Tower: A freestanding monopole, lattice framework or guyed structure with equipment that transmits/receives radio, television, satellite, microwave, radar or other communication signals. Does not include personal wireless services, facilities or communications as defined in 47 USC § 332 (c) and (d).
Car Wash: A structure used for cleaning or detailing motor vehicles, whether self-service or automated, where the car wash is not the primary use on the zoning lot.
Collocated Wireless Facility: A wireless facility installed on or attached to an existing structure as defined in Section 03.03.
Concrete or Asphalt Pavement Mixing Plant: A temporary structure at a construction site used for the mixing of concrete or asphalt, which is intended to be used at the site.
Construction Administration Trailer: A temporary structure located at a construction site for the administration of activities associated with the construction activities at the site.
Detached Residential Carports or Garage: A structure considered either a carport or garage as defined in Section 03.03 that is unattached to a principal residential structure.
Detached Structure for Home Occupation: A detached structure used for conducting business activities associated with a home occupation.
Distributed Antenna System: An infrastructure network that distributes radio frequency signals from transceivers at a central hub site to remote antenna nodes deployed throughout a specific coverage area to personal wireless communication devices.
Drive-Thru Banking Service or ATM: A facility that is part of a banking-type establishment, which is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles when obtaining service from the establishment, or a machine that provides banking-type transaction services in or outside of a building.
Drive-Thru Window, Services or Retail Sales: A facility that is part of a retail or service establishment, not including a restaurant, which is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles when obtaining services or goods from the establishment.
Drive-Thru Window, Restaurants: A facility that is part of a restaurant, which is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles when obtaining services or goods from a restaurant.
Fuel Pump: A structure where automotive fuel is dispensed for retail sale, which is not the primary use on a zoning lot.
Garbage Dumpster or Liquid Waste Container: A dumpsters or container for the temporary storage of solid or liquid waste, or recyclable materials.
Guard or Security Booth: A structure that is used for operations related to controlling access to a property or development, or which houses persons who control access to the site.
Guest Home or Pool House: An accessory structure that supplements the living space of a primary single-family residence. May contain temporary living and sleeping spaces, including bathrooms, but shall not contain kitchens (rooms for preparing and cooking meals with ranges, stoves, ovens). Such a structure shall not be rented separately from the main building or otherwise used for permanent residential purposes.
Institutional Day Care: Any day care appropriately licensed by KDHE located on the campus of a legally recognized educational institution or religious organization, which is operated by that same organization.
Neighborhood Clubhouse or Swimming Pool: A structure or swimming pool that is provided, owned, and maintained by an organization of the residents of subdivision or group of subdivisions; and is solely for the recreational use of organization members and their guests.
Non-Commercial Farm Animal Keeping: Raising or keeping of farm animals for personal use, which are for personal use and not intended to be commercially sold or distributed.
Non-Commercial Greenhouse or Hoop House: A structure wherein crops, trees, flowers, or other vegetation are grown for personal use and not intended to be commercially sold or distributed.
On-site Wind Energy Conversion System: Equipment having a turbine or rotor that converts wind into usable electric energy distributed non-commercially to structures within the same lot or subdivision.
Outdoor Display of Retail Merchandise for Sale: The display of goods ready for immediate sale, typically arranged in an orderly and attractive manner to induce purchase. Does not include yard or garage sales.
Outdoor Festival, Carnival or Gathering: A temporary festival, carnival, social gathering, or similar activity, which takes place outside of an enclosed structure.
Outdoor Kennel Run or Play Yard: A fenced or enclosed outdoor area accessory to a separate primary use, which provides space for animal exercise and play. A run is typically attached to an indoor space housing an individual animal, whereas a play yard is typically unattached and encloses an area large enough for multiple animals.
Outdoor Market: The temporary retail sale of goods from a location outside of an enclosed structure.
Outdoor Storage of Retail Merchandise Stock: The temporary or seasonal on-premise storage of retail stock that is not displayed or intended for immediate sale.
Shared or Off-Premise Parking: An off-street parking facility located on a zoning lot other than the primary use it serves.  Shared or off-premise parking shall only be allowed as provided in Article 07.
Small Cell Facility: A wireless facility having: (A) an antenna that occupy no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, whether enclosed or exposed to the elements, and (B) having a primary equipment enclosure no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume or a larger enclosure excluded from such limitations pursuant to 54 USC § 306108. Accessory equipment as defined in Section 03.03 may be located outside of a primary equipment enclosure and shall be excluded from the from the size limit calculation.
Storage Shed or Structure: A permanent or temporary structure used for general storage of personal items, not including vehicle storage.
Unattended Donation Box: A box or container used to collect donated clothing and household goods, which do not require on-premise human operation.
Utility Support Facility: A structure that shelters equipment or infrastructure associated with a public or private utility, which is not the primary use of a zoning lot. Does not include wireless communications as defined in  Section 03.03. 
Vehicle Maintenance or Repair Garage: A structure used for the maintenance or repair of motor vehicles.
Wind Energy Conversion System: A structure and/or equipment used for the conversion of wind energy to electrical power.
Wireless Communication Tower: A freestanding monopole, self-supported structure or guyed structure capable of supporting transmission equipment for personal wireless communications, such as cellular voice/data or other similar services as defined per 47 USC § 332 (c) - (d). This shall include collocated wireless facilities requiring substantial modification of the existing structure prior to installation. See definitions in Section 03.03.
05.05.	
Table of Secondary Uses & Structures by Zoning District


Table Legend
 

“A”
 Use/structure ALLOWED by-right in zoning district.
 “X”
 NO APPLICABLE specific use standards.
 
“C”
 Use/structure permitted by CONDITIONAL USE in zoning district.
 p. #
 Page number where the use/structure definition or applicable specific use standards are found.
 
“--”
 Use/structure is NOT ALLOWED in zoning district. 
 
“T”
 May be permitted as a TEMPORARY use/structure in zoning district. 
 




Defined Secondary Uses/Structures
 Definition 
 Zoning District
 Specific Use

 
A-1
 R-R
 R-1
 R-2
 R-3
 C-1
 C-2
 C-3
 I-1
 

Adult Entertainment
 p. 40
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 p. 99
 
T
 Accessory Apartment or Dwelling
 C
 C
 C
 C
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 p. 102
 
Accessory Use (not otherwise listed)
 p. 5
 As defined in Section 03.03 and allowed per Section 05.07
 X
 
Broadcast Tower
 p. 40
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 C
 p. 97
 
Car Wash
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 A
 p. 91
 
Collocated Wireless Facility
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 X
 
T
 Concrete or Asphalt Pavement Mixing Plant
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 p. 99
 
T
 Construction Administration Trailer
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 X
 
Detached Residential Carport or Garage
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 p. 100
 
Detached Structure for Home Occupation
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 --
 --
 --
 
Distributed Antenna System
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 
Drive-Thru Banking Service or ATM
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 p. 101
 
Drive-Thru Window, Services & Retail Sales
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 
Drive-Thru Window, Restaurants
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 --
 
Fuel Pump
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 p. 94
 
Garbage Dumpster or Liquid Waste Container
 C
 C
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 p. 101
 
T
 Guard or Security Booth
 --
 C
 C
 C
 C
 --
 --
 A
 A
 
Guest Home or Pool House
 p. 41
 C
 C
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 p. 102
 
Institutional Day Care
 C
 C
 C
 --
 C
 --
 A
 A
 --
 X
 
Neighborhood Clubhouse or Swimming Pool
 --
 C
 C
 C
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 p. 102
 
Non-Commercial Farm Animal Keeping
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 X
 
Non-Commercial Greenhouse or Hoop House
 A
 A
 C
 --
 C
 C
 --
 --
 --
 p. 102
 
On-site Wind Energy Conversion System
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 
T
 Outdoor Display of Retail Merchandise for Sale
 A(1)
 A(1)
 A(1)
 A(1)
 A(1)
 A
 A
 A
 A
 p. 103
 
T
 Outdoor Festival, Carnival or Gathering
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 p. 104
 
Outdoor Kennel Run or Play Yard
 A
 A
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 
T
 Outdoor Market
 C
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 C
 C
 p. 93
 
T
 Outdoor Storage of Retail Merchandise Stock
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 p. 104
 
Shared or Off-Premise Parking(2)
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 C
 C
 C
 X
 
Small Cell Facility
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 p. 100
 
T
 Storage Shed or Structure
 A
 A
 A
 A
 --
 C
 C
 C
 A
 p. 105
 
T
 Unattended Donation Box
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 A
 A
 A
 
Utility Support Facility
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 A
 
Vehicle Maintenance or Repair Garage
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 C
 A
 A
 p. 90
 
Wireless Communication Towers
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 C
 p. 97
 
Undefined Secondary Uses/Structures
 Zoning Administrator written determination per Section 04.06.G.2
 



(1)  Limited to lots with legal non-residential primary uses allowed by-right or approved by conditional use, subject to the indicated specific use standards.
(2)  Applicable standards are defined in Article 07 Off-street Parking & Loading. Shared and off-premise parking may be approved by conditional use or allowed in conjunction with an approved PDO zoning district. See pages 58 - 59.
05.06.	
Requirements for Secondary Uses & Structures
A.	
A Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be required prior to establishing any secondary use or structure allowed by-right. If such use or structure is not shown on the original Site Plan of the lot on which it is proposed, a Zoning Site Plan shall also be submitted with the Zoning Compliance Certificate application.

B.	
When a conditional use is required for a secondary use or structure, a Zoning Site Plan shall be submitted with the application.  

C.	
When a Building Permit is required for a secondary structure, Development Site Plan approval shall be required.



05.07.	
Accessory Uses & Structures
A.	
The following are allowable accessory uses/structures, subject to the provisions below, setback requirements, and as otherwise provided in these regulations, as applicable.
1.	
Above- and in-ground swimming pools, jetted spas

2.	
Arbors, trellises, yard art, BBQ grills, outdoor furnishings

3.	
Attached garages and carports

4.	
Awnings, other attached window/entrance canopies

5.	
Basketball goals, play equipment, swing sets, slides 

6.	
Bay windows, eaves, gutters, chimneys, window wells, wing walls

7.	
Clotheslines, flagpoles 

8.	
Cupolas, steeples, elevator/stairway enclosures, skylights, solar panels, similar rooftop features

9.	
Fences, decks, patios, porches

10.	
Fire escapes, stairways, steps, wheelchair ramps for primary or secondary access

11.	
HVAC components, telephone, utility service connections

12.	
Play houses, storm shelters

13.	
Radio antennas, satellite TV dishes, collocated small cell and wireless communication facilities 

14.	
Required compatibility buffers (per Article 09)

15.	
Off-street parking and loading (per Article 07)

16.	
Signs 

17.	
Storage shed or structure



B.	
General Provisions for Accessory Structures
1.	
Minimum setback requirements shall apply to all accessory uses and structures, except those listed as permitted obstructions in Section 04.06.J.

2.	
Accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from rear lot lines. Detached garages and carports with direct access to an alley shall require a rear setback of twenty (20) feet.

3.	
No accessory structure shall be located within ten (10) feet of a principal structure or within five (5) feet of another accessory structure.

4.	
Zoning district bulk regulations shall apply to all accessory structures. However, accessory structures in R-R, R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet.

5.	
No accessory structure shall be constructed on or otherwise occupy a lot that has no principal structure. 

6.	
No accessory structure shall be located in any easement.



C.	
Off-street Parking
1.	
Uncovered and unenclosed off-street parking stalls may be located in any required yard, except within the sight triangle and where not permitted as an obstruction.

2.	
Attached garages and carports containing off-street parking stalls shall meet the setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located.

3.	
Detached garages and carports shall be subject to all minimum setback requirements.



D.	
Fences
1.	
An approved fence permit shall be required prior to the construction of any fence or wall, even those that are not required as a visual buffer, and shall be subject to applicable Building Code provisions.

2.	
When not required as a visual buffer, fences/walls used for decoration, privacy, security, or safety shall be allowed and regulated as follows.
a.	
Open fences (chain link, picket, wrought iron, etc. = 75% open space on vertical face) 
i.	
Up to six (6) feet in height allowed in all yards of lots having any use.

ii.	
Over six (6) feet in height allowed only by conditional use.



b.	
Closed fences/walls (privacy, masonry, etc. < 75% open space on vertical face) 
i.	
Up to four (4) feet in height allowed in all yards having any use.

ii.	
Up to six (6) feet in height allowed in rear and side yards of lots with single-family residential uses.

iii.	
Over six (6) feet in height allowed only by conditional use.







E.	
Recreational Vehicle/Utility Trailer Parking & Storage




Temporary parking and permanent or semi-permanent storage of recreational vehicles or utility trailers shall be allowed for single-family residential primary uses as follows.
1.	
Such vehicles shall not be used as permanent living quarters. Temporary lodging shall be allowed for periods up to fifteen (15) consecutive days, not to exceed a total of thirty (30) days in a calendar year.

2.	
Temporary parking for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall be allowed on a public street adjacent to the vehicle owner’s residence, subject to other applicable City codes.

3.	
No more than two (2) such vehicles per lot shall be parked or stored outside of an enclosed structure.

4.	
Any such vehicle shall be parked or stored only on a lot owned or occupied by the vehicle’s owner or person granted legal possession by way of lease or loan.

5.	
Such vehicles shall be parked or stored at least five (5) feet from all property lines in a legal off-street parking stall located and designed in compliance with these regulations. In addition, the following shall apply.
a.	
Such a stall may be located in any required yard.

b.	
Such a stall located in a front yard shall be limited to the driveway or located adjacent, parallel and connected to the driveway.

c.	
Paving requirements and exemptions per Section 07.06 shall apply to such stalls.




Article 06	
Zoning District Regulations

06.01.	
Purpose


The purpose of this article is to describe the applicable regulations and requirements for property development within each zoning district, allowed by-right or permitted by conditional use, as specified in Section 05.03 Table of Primary Uses by Zoning District and Section 05.05 Table of Secondary Uses & Structures by Zoning District.
06.02.	
“A-1” Agricultural District


It is the intent of this district to protect existing farmsteads and agricultural land uses while preserving opportunities for future growth.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area
a.	
Within City Limits: Ten (10) acres

b.	
Within Growth Area: Twenty (20) acres



2.	
Minimum Lot Frontage
a.	
Within City Limits: One-hundred twenty-five (125) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Four-hundred (400) feet



3.	
Minimum Lot Depth
a.	
Within City Limits: One-hundred seventy-five (175) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Four-hundred (400) feet





D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Thirty (30) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Seventy-five (75) feet



2.	
Minimum Side Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Twenty (20) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Fifty (50) feet



3.	
Minimum Rear Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Thirty (30) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Fifty (50) feet





E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: Thirty percent (30%)

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Fifty (50) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitation: No outdoor storage shall be allowed, except as provided in these regulations for agricultural uses.

H.	
Supplemental Provisions
1.	
A-1, A-2, and R-6D zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be designated A-1 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
No new A-1 districts shall be created after the effective date of these regulations. 

3.	
Existing lots zoned A-1 may be altered in size and configuration, subject to the provisions of these regulations.




06.03.	
“R-R” Single-Family Rural Residential District


It is the intent of this district to protect existing farmsteads while preserving opportunities for low-density single-family residential land uses within the unincorporated Growth Area.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Lot Area
a.	
Within City Limits: Lots shall be at least one (1) acre, but less than ten (10) acres.

b.	
Within Growth Area: Lots shall be at least one (1) acre, but less than twenty (20) acres.



2.	
Minimum Lot Frontage
a.	
Within City Limits: One-hundred twenty-five (125) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: One-hundred fifty (150) feet



3.	
Minimum Lot Depth
a.	
Within City Limits: One-hundred seventy-five (175) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Three-hundred (300) feet





D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Thirty (30) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Seventy-five (75) feet



2.	
Minimum Side Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Twenty-five (25) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Fifty (50) feet



3.	
Minimum Rear Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Twenty-five (25) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area: Fifty (50) feet





E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: Thirty percent (30%)

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitation: No outdoor storage shall be allowed, except as provided in these regulations for agricultural uses.

H.	
Supplemental Provisions
1.	
R-6A, R-6B, and R-6C zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be designated R-R districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
No new R-R districts shall be created within City Limits after the effective date of these regulations. 

3.	
Existing lots zoned R-R may be altered in size and configuration, subject to the provisions of these regulations.

4.	
Within the Growth Area, driveways shall have a minimum spacing of two-hundred (200) feet.




06.04.	
“R-1” Single-Family Residential District


It is the intent of this district to provide opportunities for attached and detached single-family residential development and protect the character of residential neighborhoods.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 8,400 square feet

2.	
Minimum Lot Width: Seventy (70) feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Depth: One-hundred (100) feet



D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback: Thirty (30) feet 

2.	
Minimum Side Setback: Six (6) feet

3.	
Minimum Rear Setback: Twenty (20) feet except where rear yard abuts a platted reserve that is at least 20 feet wide, then minimum rear yard setback is five (5) feet.



E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: Thirty-five percent (35%)

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitation: No outdoor storage shall be allowed.

H.	
Supplemental Provisions:
1.	
R-1 and R-2 zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be designated R-1districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
R-3 zoning districts with single-family attached or detached residential primary uses shall be designated R-1 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

3.	
Developments zoned R-1 shall not be approved within the Growth Area without executing an annexation agreement with the City. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued prior to annexation.

4.	
No used buildings or structures shall be allowed to be placed or relocated into R-1 zoning districts. 




06.05.	
“R-2” Small Lot/Zero Lot Line (ZLL) Residential District


It is the intent of this district to provide flexible opportunities for small lot and ZLL single-family attached and detached development with the character of traditional residential neighborhoods.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 square feet

2.	
Maximum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Width: Fifty (50) feet

4.	
Minimum Lot Depth: Ninety (90) feet



D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback: Twenty-five (25) feet 

2.	
Minimum Side Setback: Five (5) feet

3.	
Minimum Rear Setback: Fifteen (15) feet



E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: Sixty percent (60%)

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitation: No outdoor storage shall be allowed.

H.	
Supplemental Provisions:
1.	
R-1A and R-2A zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be designated R-2 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
R-3A zoning districts with single-family attached or detached residential primary uses shall be designated R-2 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

3.	
Developments zoned R-2 shall not be approved within the Growth Area without executing an annexation agreement with the City. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued prior to annexation. 

4.	
No used buildings or structures shall be allowed to be placed or relocated into R-2 zoning districts.

5.	
ZLL developments as defined in Section 03.03, shall be subject to the following:
a.	
ZLL lots must be platted in groups containing at least four (4) contiguous lots. Each group must be in a location meeting one or more of the following conditions:
i.	
Around a cul-de-sac.

ii.	
On a local street with R-2 or R-3 zoning on the opposite street frontage.

iii.	
On a street with multi-family or non-residential zoning on the opposite street frontage.



b.	
Restrictive covenants shall be required, which shall guarantee:
i.	
Maintenance provision of fencing/screening materials and common ownership areas.

ii.	
Access provisions for maintenance of closely-spaced structures.

iii.	
Other restrictions necessary to implement the overall design concept.



c.	
No doors, windows or other openings shall be allowed on the wall of the building facing the yard with the least depth. Such walls shall have the same exterior construction materials as the other exterior walls.

d.	
The Planning Commission may initiate a rezoning application if construction has not commenced as authorized within two (2) years of the zoning approval. The public hearing shall allow the property owner an opportunity to justify the delay, which Planning Commission shall consider in making their recommendation.






06.06.	
“R-3” Multi-Family Residential District


It is the intent of this district to provide for various types of multi-family housing and promote opportunities for affordable moderate density residential development.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 square feet, with a minimum of 2,000 square feet required per dwelling unit

2.	
Minimum Lot Width: Fifty (50) feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Depth: One-hundred (100) feet



D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback: Twenty-five (25) feet 

2.	
Minimum Side Setback: Five (5) feet

3.	
Minimum Rear Setback: Fifteen (15) feet



E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: Sixty percent (60%)

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Forty-five (45) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitations: No outdoor storage shall be allowed.

H.	
Supplemental Provisions:
1.	
R-3 and R-3A zoning districts with multi-family residential uses existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be designated R-3 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
Developments zoned R-3 shall not be approved within the Growth Area without executing an annexation agreement with the City. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued prior to annexation. 

3.	
No used buildings or structures shall be allowed to be placed or relocated into R-3 zoning districts.




06.07.	
“R-4” Manufactured Home Park District


It is the intent of this district to provide opportunities for affordable manufactured housing within contiguous developments of one or more parcels, which are developed into individual lots offered for lease or sale. 
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Minimum Park Size: Five (5) acres

D.	
Individual Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 square feet

2.	
Minimum Lot Width: Fifty (50) feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Depth: One-hundred (100) feet



E.	
Individual Lot Yard Requirements
1.	
Front Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet

2.	
Street Yard: Fifteen (15) feet 

3.	
Side Yard: Five (5) feet

4.	
Rear Yard: Five (5) feet



F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Thirty (30) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Supplemental Provisions:
1.	
R-4 zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be continue to be designated R-4 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
No new R-4 districts shall be created within City Limits after the effective date of these regulations. 

3.	
No used buildings, structures, manufactured homes or mobile homes shall be allowed to be placed or relocated into existing R-4 zoning districts within City Limits.

4.	
Lots shall be occupied only by manufactured homes as defined in Section 05.02, except for mobile homes occupying lots prior to the effective date of these regulations. Under no circumstances shall individual lots be leased or sold for the occupancy of recreational vehicles.

5.	
One of the following means of providing accessory storage structures and carports or garages shall be allowed:
a.	
Communal Structures: Storage structures or parking structures divided into individual units, which are limited to a number of units equal to the number of developed lots.

b.	
Communal Areas: Areas where individual storage sheds, carports or garages for the use of residents are aggregated in a contiguous grouping.

c.	
Per Lot Basis: Individual lots shall be limited to one (1) accessory storage shed and one (1) detached carport or garage, which shall have direct access to an adjacent street.



6.	
If provided, outdoor storage areas must be developed per Article 10 and must remain under the ownership and control of the park developer/owner or a property owners association.

7.	
A manufactured home permit shall be required for the placement of a manufactured home on an individual lot.
a.	
The park developer/owner shall provide a permit information packet to the renter or purchaser of an individual lot at the time of lease or sale.

b.	
The manufactured home owner shall obtain a permit from the City.



8.	
No utility connection shall be allowed without first being inspected and approved by the City.




06.08.	
“C-1” Main Street District


It is the intent of this district to preserve the integrity of the existing Main St. commercial district while providing opportunities within Augusta’s core area for a vibrant mix of land uses developed at a walkable scale and density.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 3,125 square feet

2.	
Minimum Lot Width: Twenty-five (25) feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Depth: One-hundred twenty-five (125) feet



D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback: Zero (0) feet 

2.	
Minimum Side Setback: Zero (0) feet

3.	
Minimum Rear Setback: Twenty (20) feet



E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: One-hundred percent (100%), minus applicable yard and off-street parking requirements and requirements as provided in Section 06.07.H.

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: To be determined by the Building Code, except as these regulations allow for height exemption or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitations: No outdoor storage shall be allowed, except as approved in accordance with these regulations.

H.	
Supplemental Provisions
1.	
M Main Street zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be designated C-1 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
The boundaries of the C-1 district shall be limited to:




North Boundary: Old railroad right-of-way south of U.S. 54 Highway
South Boundary: Second Ave.
West Boundary: North-south alley between Walnut St. and State St.
East Boundary: School St.
3.	
Lots with residential uses shall provide off-street parking.

4.	
Residential dwelling units shall be allowed in upper floors only.

5.	
Sidewalks adjacent to restaurants may be used for outdoor dining, provided:
a.	
A minimum clear path of six (6) feet shall be maintained.

b.	
Tables, chairs, etc. shall be removed at the close of business.



6.	
Curb cuts shall be specifically approved by the Governing Body and shall comply with the following:
a.	
Existing approaches that remain unused for their intended purpose for a continuous period of one (1) year shall be removed and replaced with standard curbing.

b.	
The property owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with removal and replacement of any curb cut.




06.09.	
“C-2” Central Commercial District


It is the intent of this district to preserve opportunities for commercial uses having a localized market area in the central corridors along Seventh Ave. and Walnut St.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet

2.	
Minimum Lot Width: One-hundred (100) feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Depth: One-hundred (100) feet



D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback: Twenty-five (25) feet 

2.	
Minimum Side Setback: Five (5) feet

3.	
Minimum Rear Setback: Fifteen (15) feet



E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: One-hundred percent (100%), minus applicable yard and off-street parking requirements.

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Maximum Structure Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use adjustment, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitations: All business activities, displays, and storage shall occur within fully enclosed structures or screened areas, except as otherwise allowed or approved in accordance with these regulations.

H.	
Supplemental Provisions
1.	
CC Central Commercial zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be designated C-2 districts upon the effective date of these regulations.

2.	
The boundaries of the C-2 district shall be limited to lots within City Limits having street frontage on Seventh Ave. or on Walnut St.; or immediately adjacent to such a lot and addressed to either street.




06.10.	
“C-3” General Commercial District


It is the intent of this district to provide ample opportunities for moderate to heavy intensity commercial land uses and businesses having a regional market area.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet

2.	
Minimum Lot Width: One-hundred (100) feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Depth: One-hundred (100) feet



D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Twenty-five (25) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area:  Per Article 16



2.	
Minimum Side Setback 
a.	
Within City Limits: Five (5) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area:  Per Article 16



3.	
Minimum Rear Setback
a.	
Within City Limits: Fifteen (15) feet

b.	
Within Growth Area:  Per Article 16





E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: Forty percent (40%)

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Forty (40) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use adjustment, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitations: All business activities, displays, and storage shall occur within fully enclosed structures or screened areas, except as otherwise allowed or approved in accordance with these regulations.


06.11.	
“I-1” Industrial District


It is the intent of this district to provide opportunities primarily for small to moderate scale manufacturing, assembly, warehousing and freight businesses that are compatible with Augusta’s character and its capacity to provide adequate municipal services.
A.	
Primary Land Uses: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.03.

B.	
Secondary Uses & Structures: As allowed by-right and permitted by conditional use per Section 05.05.

C.	
Lot Size Requirements
1.	
Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet

2.	
Minimum Lot Width: One-hundred (100) feet

3.	
Minimum Lot Depth: One-hundred (100) feet



D.	
Setback Requirements
1.	
Minimum Front Setback: Twenty-five (25) feet 

2.	
Minimum Side Setback: Five (5) feet

3.	
Minimum Rear Setback: Fifteen (15) feet



E.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)

F.	
Maximum Structure Height: Forty-five (45) feet, except as these regulations allow for taller structures by exemption, conditional use adjustment, or specific use standard per Article 10.

G.	
Use Limitations:
1.	
No individual shall permanently reside on-premise.

2.	
Outdoor activities, storage or sales occurring on-premise must be associated with a legal primary or secondary use.

3.	
No dust, noise, odor, vibration or other environmental impacts generated by any use shall be detectable off-premise.




06.12.	
“PDO” Planned Development Overlay District


This “floating” district is intended to offer flexibility in tailoring land uses, site design and aesthetic controls when other zoning districts may not provide adequate means to regulate mixed use developments, develop properties with atypical characteristics, maximize compatibility between adjacent land uses, or preserve the character and integrity of unified developments and special areas.
A.	
Allowable PDO Utilization


PDO zoning shall be allowed for single lot or multiple lot developments of any size, which meet applicable minimum requirements, when the applicant wishes to implement a particular development vision that another zoning district cannot accommodate. This may include:
1.	
Encouraging a specific combination of mixed land uses.

2.	
Implementing a specific design aesthetic.

3.	
Improving compatibility with adjacent properties.

4.	
Developing properties with atypical physical characteristics.

5.	
Preserving land use and design compatibility within unified developments, corridors, districts, and special areas with historical significance or environmental sensitivity.


B.	
PDO District Provisions
1.	
As an overlay district, PDO zoning shall be used in conjunction with an underlying zoning district, referred to as the base zoning district. 
a.	
PDO zoning may be used in conjunction with any base zoning district, except A-1 and R-R.

b.	
Requirements of the approved PDO zoning shall be in addition to the base district requirements, except as modified by the PDO zoning.



2.	
PDO zoning may allow for land uses that differ from the base district, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
PDO zoning shall not allow any use prohibited within the base district. The base district shall be that which allows by-right or by conditional use, the highest intensity use allowed within the PDO district.  

b.	
PDO zoning may prohibit any use allowed by-right or by conditional use within the base district.

c.	
PDO zoning may allow by-right any conditional use of the base district, subject to adequate provisions for land use compatibility between the PDO district and adjacent properties, as approved by City Council.

d.	
A PDO district shall provide only for such uses allowed by-right within the PDO district. There shall be no provisions for uses requiring subsequent conditional use approval. 



3.	
Lot Size Requirements: PDO zoning may modify base district lot size requirements as follows.
a.	
In no case shall the minimum lot size be reduced below 2,500 square feet; or the maximum lot size be increased to more than one-hundred and fifty percent (150%) of base district requirements.

b.	
In no case shall the minimum lot width be reduced below twenty-five (25) feet.

c.	
PDO zoning shall maintain the approximate minimum lot width to depth ratio of the base district. 



4.	
Bulk Regulations: The following shall apply:
a.	
Maximum Structure Height: PDO zoning may modify base district requirements for maximum height, provided increases shall not exceed an additional fifteen (15) feet of structure height.

b.	
Minimum Yard Requirements: PDO zoning may modify base district setback and yard requirements, subject to the following provisions.
i.	
PDO zoning shall not require setbacks in excess of base district requirements, except in conjunction with C-2, C-3 or I-1 base zoning for business, governmental, institutional, or educational campuses; business, office, or industrial parks; and when otherwise provided by these regulations.

ii.	
Front Yard Setbacks: May be reduced to zero, provided minimum requirements are consistent for all lots within the PDO district that share the same street frontage.

iii.	
Side and Rear Yard Setbacks: Shall not be reduced below base district requirements for any lot that shares a side or rear lot line with a lot located outside of the PDO district.





5.	
Maximum Lot Coverage: PDO zoning shall not increase lot coverage requirements above the base district maximum requirement, but the maximum coverage requirement may be decreased.

6.	
Access & Circulation: The following shall apply.
a.	
Applicants may be required to submit a traffic study to identify possible traffic impacts, subject to review and acceptance by the Zoning Administrator or designated official.

b.	
Proposed streets shall be designed and laid out consistent with the principles of functional classification hierarchy; and shall meet applicable City design standards.

c.	
Proposed streets, sidewalks, and pathways shall connect to the City’s transportation network.

d.	
Offsite transportation improvements may be required as a condition of approval, but only in direct relationship to anticipated impacts of the proposed development.



7.	
Off-street Parking: The following shall apply.
a.	
PDO zoning shall not reduce minimum off-street parking below Article 07 requirements.

b.	
PDO zoning may allow shared or off-premise parking in accordance with Article 07, subject to the following provisions.
i.	
No required off-street parking shall be provided on lots outside of the PDO district.

ii.	
Shared parking agreements or deed restrictions shall not be required as specified in Article 07. In such cases, there shall be no revisions or adjustments to an approved PDO district without sufficient off-street parking to meet minimum requirements.

iii.	
As applicable, execution of shared parking agreements or deed restrictions shall be required prior to the dissolution of any PDO district, if sufficient off-street parking to meet minimum requirements cannot otherwise be provided on any lot affected by such dissolution. 





8.	
Compatibility Buffers: Required compatibility buffers per Article 09 shall apply only to the side and rear yards of lots having a side or rear lot line shared with a lot located outside of the PDO district.

9.	
Specific Use Standards: PDO zoning shall not provide any land use or structure with an exemption or reduction from applicable specific use standards as found in Article 10.



C.	
PDO Zoning Approval


Applications for the establishment, revision/adjustment, or dissolution of a PDO zoning district shall be reviewed and approved by the same process as other zoning applications, subject to the following provisions.
1.	
No PDO application shall be accepted as complete without the appropriate filing fee, Zoning Site Plan, and other required documentation.

2.	
When a PDO district is proposed in conjunction with a base district rezoning, both requests may be considered jointly during the approval process. However, each shall require a separate application and each shall be approved by separate motion and vote of the Planning Commission and City Council.    

3.	
In additional to typical considerations, enhanced standards shall be utilized in the review of PDO zoning applications. In no case, shall PDO zoning be approved without the Planning Commission and City Council finding that:
a.	
The proposed PDO district is consistent with the community vision and desired character as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan.

b.	
The proposed PDO district, in consideration of the allowable land uses, regulations, limitations, and applicable design requirements, will not adversely affect the value or utility of adjacent properties.



4.	
No application for the revision/adjustment or dissolution of a PDO district shall be approved without each individual lot affected by the action being made compliant with all applicable provisions of these regulations.

5.	
Time Limits: The following time limits shall apply to PDO approvals, subject to applicable time extensions granted in accordance with these regulations.
a.	
A PDO district zoning approval shall automatically expire twelve (12) months after the approval date unless all conditions have been met and a Development Site Plan has been approved within that time.

b.	
A PDO Development Site Plan approval shall automatically expire twelve (12) months after the approval date unless a Building Permit has been issued within that time.




06.13.	
Dissolution & Redesignation of Previous Zoning Districts


In addition to the redesignation of properties and zoning districts as specified in Section 06.02 - Section 06.11, all Public and Private Recreational (PR) zoning districts and Assembly (A) zoning districts existing prior to the adoption of these regulations are hereby dissolved and on the effective date of these regulations shall be redesignated as follows:
A.	
Public and Private Recreational PR-1, PR-2 and PR-3 zoning districts within the Growth Area shall be redesignated as A-1 zoning districts.

B.	
Public and Private Recreational PR-1, PR-2 and PR-3 zoning districts within City Limits shall be redesignated as R-1 zoning districts.

C.	
Assembly A zoning districts shall be redesignated based on location as follows:
1.	
Those within the area encompassed by the boundaries below shall be redesignated as C-1 zoning districts.




North Boundary: Old railroad right-of-way south of U.S. 54 Highway
South Boundary: Second Ave.
West Boundary: North-south alley between Walnut St. and State St.
East Boundary: School St.
2.	
Those within City Limits having street frontage on Seventh Ave. or on Walnut St. shall be redesignated as C-2 zoning districts.

3.	
Those in all other locations shall be redesignated as C-3 zoning districts.


Page Intentionally Left Blank 
Article 07	
Off-street Parking & Loading

07.01.	
Applicability 


The minimum off-street parking and loading space provisions of this article shall be required as follows.
A.	
All lots and structures occupied or designed for occupancy.

B.	
Approval or establishment of new land uses.

C.	
Modifications to existing land uses including:
1.	
Changing to a higher intensity land use type or zoning district.

2.	
Increasing the density of development or number of units on a site.

3.	
Enlarging the size or area of a land use.  



D.	
Approval or construction of new structures.

E.	
Changes or alterations to existing structures including:
1.	
Interior reconfigurations that:
a.	
Add rooms or units without increasing the existing gross floor area.

b.	
Expand the size of existing rooms or units without adding gross floor area.

c.	
Increase occupancy or seating capacity of existing rooms or units.



2.	
Adding gross floor area by:
a.	
Expanding existing rooms or units.

b.	
Constructing new rooms or units.

c.	
Constructing new stories (floors) or other vertical additions.





F.	
Off-street loading areas shall be required for all primary, secondary, and accessory uses according to these regulations, except for agricultural uses, residential uses, or as otherwise exempted.


07.02.	
General Parking Provisions
A.	
Off-street parking is considered an accessory use and shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use for which it is required, except as otherwise provided in this article.

B.	
Off-street parking facilities shall be used only by the owners, residents, guests, occupants, patrons, service providers, vendors, and employees of the uses for which they are required.

C.	
Except as otherwise allowed by these regulations, off-street parking facilities shall not be used for:
1.	
Motor vehicle repairs or maintenance work.

2.	
Storage of non-operational motor vehicles.

3.	
Storage of recreational vehicles, boats, or utility trailers 

4.	
Display of vehicles or trailers for sale, except:
a.	
Incidental parking on a zoning lot where the vehicle owner is visiting or conducting business. 

b.	
Temporary display when parked on the zoning lot where the vehicle owner resides.



5.	
Commercial vehicles below 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating, except:
a.	
Temporary parking on the zoning lot where an employee of the business to which the vehicle is registered resides.

b.	
Temporary parking on a zoning lot where an employee of the business to which the vehicle is registered is performing related job duties.



6.	
Trucks with gross vehicle weight rating of 26,000 pounds or greater on property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 with residential primary uses. 



D.	
Applicants may be required to submit a parking study that demonstrates proposed off-street parking facilities provide sufficient capacity for the proposed use. Such parking studies shall be conducted at the applicant’s expense by a qualified traffic engineer or transportation planner selected by the applicant. All required parking studies shall be subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator or designated official.

E.	
Off-street parking shall be required for secondary/accessory uses in addition to that required for the primary use, as applicable.

F.	
Minimum off-street parking requirements for a zoning lot shall be calculated as follows.
1.	
Identify all primary and secondary/accessory uses on the zoning lot, as defined in Article 05.

2.	
Identify the baseline parking requirement formula for each applicable use per the Table of Required Off-street Parking by Land Use found in Section 07.03. 

3.	
Determine the zoning lot’s actual quantity of the unit of measure listed in the baseline parking requirement formula for each applicable land use. Some formulas may contain multi-part calculations. 

4.	
Calculate the minimum parking requirement for each land use by multiplying the actual unit quantity by the corresponding required number of parking stalls and sum the resulting totals of each part of multi-part formulas. Calculate the sum of all individual land use minimum parking requirement totals.  

5.	
Calculations that result in a fractional stall requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

6.	
Existing off-street parking stalls may be counted toward minimum parking requirements, if applicable. However, in such cases, parking shall not be reduced below the number of existing stalls.






Example Minimum Off-street Parking Requirement Calculation
Scenario: Zoning lot occupied by a 4,000 square foot (SF) convenience store with 8 fuel pumps.
(A) Primary Use Parking Requirement: Grocery, Food, & Beverage Sales - 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
	4,000 SF ÷ 300 SF = 13.33; 1 stall X 13.33 = 13.33 stalls
(B) Secondary Use Parking Requirement: Fuel Pumps - 2 stalls per fuel pump
	8 fuel pumps X 2 stalls per fuel pump = 16 stalls
(C) 13.33 stalls + 16 stalls = 29.33 stalls; round up; Minimum off-street parking requirement = 30 stalls
G.	
Shared Parking
1.	
One or more adjacent zoning lots may share off-street parking facilities to meet parking requirements, subject to the following provisions:
a.	
Shall be allowed by conditional use on lots zoned C-1, C-2, or C-3 with non-residential primary uses; and lots zoned I-1 with office, commercial service, retail, or public/institutional primary uses.

b.	
Shall be allowed in approved PDO zoning districts.

c.	
Upon request of the Zoning Administrator or designated official, a parking study may be required to demonstrate sufficient off-street parking is made available.



2.	
The minimum number of shared parking stalls provided shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of the total amount otherwise required for each use individually. In no case shall shared parking be approved if, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator or designated official, there would be insufficient capacity to meet the peak parking demand of all uses for which it is provided.

3.	
All shared parking stalls shall be located within three-hundred (300) feet of each use for which it is provided, as measured between the nearest points of the stall and the farthest building entrance used for public access.

4.	
Shared off-street parking facilities must meet all applicable provisions of this article, including configuration and design requirements. In addition:
a.	
Seamless vehicular access shall be provided across lot lines with no physical barriers delineating ownership boundaries.

b.	
Shared parking facilities approved by conditional use or PDO shall not be exempted from or adjusted below the minimum requirements for applicable uses and zoning districts.  



5.	
A shared parking agreement shall be executed and filed with the Butler County Register of Deeds for all affected parcels. This shall apply to all shared off-street parking facilities approved in accordance with these regulations.
a.	
Such agreements shall:
i.	
Be signed by the owner(s) of all affected parcels.

ii.	
Run with the land and be legally binding without regard to future ownership.

iii.	
Guarantee access in perpetuity to all parcels served by the shared parking facilities, including all uses and structures located upon the parcels.

iv.	
Provide for the dissolution of the shared parking agreement upon termination of either the served uses or the minimum off-street parking requirements.

v.	
Guarantee that the shared parking facilities will be maintained in accordance with these regulations and other City codes.

vi.	
Stipulate how costs shall be distributed between property owners for the upkeep, cleaning, maintenance, repair, and replacement of shared parking facilities.



b.	
Within forty-five (45) days of approval, the Zoning Administrator shall be provided a copy of the agreement.





H.	
Off-Premise Parking
1.	
In cases where the minimum off-street parking requirements cannot be met on-premise, required parking may be provided off-premise on a separate zoning lot owned by the applicant, subject to the following provisions:
a.	
Shall be allowed by conditional use for property zoned C-1, C-2, or C-3 with non-residential primary uses; and property zoned I-1with office, commercial service, retail, or public/institutional primary uses.

b.	
Shall be allowed in approved PDO zoning districts.



2.	
All off-premise parking stalls shall be located within three-hundred (300) feet of each use for which it is provided, as measured between the nearest points of the stall and the farthest building entrance used for public access.

3.	
Off-premise parking facilities must be configured and designed according to the provisions of this article. In addition, off-premise parking facilities approved by conditional use or PDO shall not be exempted from or adjusted below the minimum requirements for applicable uses and zoning districts.  

4.	
A deed restriction or separate legal instrument shall be executed and filed with the Butler County Register of Deeds for the affected parcels. This shall apply to all off-premise parking facilities approved in accordance with these regulations.
a.	
Such agreements shall:
i.	
Be signed by the owner(s) of all affected parcels.

ii.	
Run with the land and be legally binding without regard to future ownership.

iii.	
Restrict the use of the property bounded by the facilities to off-premise parking for the zoning lot where the served use is located; and guarantee such access in perpetuity.

iv.	
Provide for the dissolution of the deed restriction upon termination of either the served use(s) or the minimum off-street parking requirements.



b.	
Within forty-five (45) days of approval, the Zoning Administrator shall be provided a copy of the deed restriction.  





I.	
Additional Parking Requirements
1.	
Additional parking requirements are set forth in Section 14-220 of the City Code.




07.03.	
Table of Required Off-street Parking by Land Use


Table Legend
 
General Note
 Major land use category headings are shaded in dark gray. Land use sub-category headings are shaded in light gray. Individual land 
 

“Defined Land Uses”
 Refers to the major land use categories, sub-categories, and individual uses upon which off-street parking requirements are based.
 
“Baseline Parking Requirements”
 The formula used to calculate minimum off-street parking requirements for a specific land use, typically expressed as a number of stalls per unit of measure (i.e. area occupied by a use/structure, area occupied by a type of room, quantity of rooms or seats, etc.). 
 
“SF”
 Means SQUARE FEET (indoor areas = gross floor area, outdoor areas = occupied surface area or lot area)
 



Defined Land Uses
 Baseline Parking Requirements
 

Agricultural Land Uses
 
General Agricultural Uses
 No minimum requirement, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Indoor Sales Areas
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
 
Residential Land Uses
 
Single-Family Dwellings (all uses)
 2 stalls per dwelling unit, which are EXEMPTED from stall marking/bumper requirement
 
Multi-Family Dwellings
 1½ stalls per dwelling unit, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Boarding House
 1½ stalls per bedroom/sleeping room
 
Group Home
 2 stalls per group home PLUS 1 stall per 2 bedrooms/sleeping rooms
 
Nursing & Residential Care Facilities
 Minimum requirements for individual uses as follows:
 
Assisted Living Facility
 1 stall per 2 dwelling units/patient rooms
 
Continuing Care Facility
 1 stall per 3 patient/resident beds, based on maximum design capacity
 
Nursing Care Facility
 1 stall per 2½ patient/resident beds, based on maximum design capacity
 
Residential Mixed Uses (all uses)
 1½ stalls per dwelling unit ADDED TO minimum parking per other uses in the same structure
 
Office Land Uses
 
Administration & Management Offices (all uses)
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area MINUS conference/meeting room areas
 
Medical & Health Offices
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Medical or Diagnostic Laboratory
 1 stall per 500 SF lab & storage areas PLUS 1 stall per 300 SF other indoor areas 
 
Professional & Technical Offices (all uses)
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area MINUS conference/meeting room areas
 
Other Office-Based Uses (all uses)
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
 
Arts, Culture & Recreation Land Uses
 
Arts & Culture Uses
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Arts & Crafts Studio or Gallery
 1 stall per 300 SF gallery/display areas PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF other indoor areas
 
Library
 1 stall per 400 SF gross floor area
 
Theater, Motion Picture
 1 stall per 3 theater seats, based on maximum design capacity
 
Theater, Performing Arts
 1 stall per 3 theater seats, based on maximum design capacity
 
Recreation & Sports Uses
 1 stall per150 SF gross floor area and occupied outdoor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Golf Course or Country Club
 4 stalls per golf hole & sports court PLUS 1 stall per driving range position PLUS 1 stall per 400 SF gross floor area
 
Horse Riding Stable
 Per approved parking study
 
Recreation, Sport or Amusement Center
 Per approved parking study
 
Shooting Range, Indoor
 1 stall per 2 shooting positions PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF non-shooting areas
 
Shooting Range, Outdoor
 1 stall per 2 shooting positions PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF indoor and outdoor non-shooting areas
 
Commercial Service Land Uses
 
Automotive & Equipment Services
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 2 service bays, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Car Wash
 1 stall per self-service wash bay PLUS 5 stalls per automated wash bay PLUS 1 stall per vacuum station
 
Business Support Services (all uses)
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area MINUS conference/meeting room area
 
Personal Care Services (all uses)
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
 
Personal & Household Services (all uses)
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
 

Defined Land Uses
 Baseline Parking Requirements
 

Transient Lodging
 1 stall per guest room PLUS 1stall per 300 SF non-guest room areas, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Bed & Breakfast Inn
 2 stalls per bed & breakfast inn PLUS 1 stall per bedroom/sleeping room
 
Campgrounds or Recreational Vehicle Park
 1 stall per camping space PLUS10 stalls per acre of open camping area PLUS 1 stall per 300 SF indoor retail sales areas
 
Group Shelter
 1 stall per 500 SF non-sleeping areas PLUS 1 stall per 2 bedrooms/sleeping rooms PLUS 1 stall per 3 beds in open sleeping areas, based on maximum design capacity
 
Misc. Commercial Services
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Boarding Kennel
 1 stall per 5 runs/pens
 
Day Care Center
 5 stalls PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area
 
Event Center
 1 stall per 50 SF event venue areas PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF non-event venue areas
 
Funeral Home or Mortuary
 5 stalls PLUS 1 stall per 4 seats, based on maximum design capacity
 
Taxidermy Studio
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area
 
Retail Land Uses
 
Automotive/Equipment Sales, Rental, Leasing (all uses)
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 3,000 SF outdoor area
 
Building Material & Supply Sales
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF outdoor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Lumber Yard
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 3,000 SF outdoor area
 
General & Specialty Retail Sales
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Farm & Home Store
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF outdoor retail display area
 
Furniture or Home Appliance Store
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area
 
Supercenter or Warehouse Club
 1 stall per 300 SF for the first 200,000 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 250 SF for area over 200,000 SF gross floor area
 
Grocery, Food & Beverage Sales (all uses)
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
 
Restaurants & Drinking Establishments
 1 stall per 2½ seats, based on maximum design capacity, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Drive-In Restaurant
 Per above seat-based requirement (subject to10 stall minimum) PLUS 1 stall per ordering station
 
Misc. Retail Uses
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Manufactured Home Dealer
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 3,000 SF outdoor area
 
Multi-Tenant Lifestyle Center
 1 stall per 200 SF gross floor area
 
Multi-Tenant Shopping Mall
 1 stall per 500 SF indoor common area PLUS 1 stall per 200 SF retail area
 
Multi-Tenant Strip Center
 1 stall per 200 SF gross floor area
 
Outdoor Market
 1 stall per 500 SF outdoor market area
 
Truck Stop
 1 stall per 300 SF retail area PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF non-retail area PLUS 2 stalls per fuel pump
 
Vehicle Fueling Station
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area PLUS 2 stalls per fuel pump
 
Industrial Land Uses
 
Industrial Scale Non-Manufacturing
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Concrete or Asphalt Pavement Mixing Plant
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 5,000 SF outdoor area
 
Liquid Waste Processing or Recycling
 Per approved parking study
 
Mulching & Composting Operation
 Per approved parking study
 
Solid Recyclables Sorting & Processing
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 5,000 SF outdoor area
 
General Manufacturing & Assembly (all uses)
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area
 
Heavy Industries & Raw Materials Processing
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 500 SF non-office area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Petroleum or Natural Gas Extraction
 No minimum requirement
 
Quarry or Mine
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area PLUS 1stall per acre outdoor area
 
Sand, Rock or Mineral Extraction Pit
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area PLUS 1stall per acre outdoor area
 
Sawmill
 Per approved parking study
 
Wholesale Trade
 1 stall per 2,500 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Wholesale Trade with Showroom
 1 stall per 2,500 SF warehouse area PLUS 1 stall per 300 SF retail area
 
Warehousing & Storage
 1 stall per 2,500 SF gross floor area, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Bulk Chemical, Explosives or Petroleum Storage
 Per approved parking study
 
Commercial Livestock Feedlot
 Per approved parking study
 
Construction Contractor Yard
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 2,000 SF non-office area PLUS 1 stall per 10,000 SF outdoor storage area
 

Defined Land Uses
 Baseline Parking Requirements
 

Warehousing & Storage
 Requirements by use continued from previous page:
 
General Outdoor Storage
 1 stall per 10,000 SF outdoor storage area
 
Junk, Scrap or Salvage Yard
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 2,000 SF non-office areas PLUS 1 stall per
acre of outdoor storage area
 
Livestock Auction Barn
 Per parking study approved by Zoning Administrator or designated official
 
Self-Storage, Commercial
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 4 storage units (subject to 5 stall minimum)
 
Vehicle or Equipment Storage Yard
 1 stall per 10,000 SF outdoor storage area
 
Transportation & Freight Uses
 Per approved parking study, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Commercial Parking Lot or Garage
 No minimum requirement
 
Courier, Messenger or Local Delivery Service
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 2,500 SF non-office area
 
Motor Vehicle Towing or Wrecker Service
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 2,500 SF non-office area
 
Trucking or Freight Transfer Terminal
 1 stall per 300 SF office area PLUS 1 stall per 2,500 SF non-office area
 
Communication & Utility Land Uses
 
Communication & Utility Land Uses
 No minimum requirement, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Radio or Television Broadcasting Station
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
 
Utility Support Facility or Substation
 1 stall per 2,500 SF gross floor area (subject to 2 stall minimum)
 
Public & Institutional Land Uses
 
Public & Institutional Land Uses
 Per approved parking study, all uses EXCEPT:
 
Civic, Religious or Organizational Meeting Place
 1 stall per 3 seats in designated primary assembly rooms, based on maximum design capacity
 
Crematory
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area
 
Hospital
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area MINUS patient rooms PLUS 1 stall per 2 patient beds, based on maximum design capacity
 
Outpatient Surgery or Treatment Center
 1 stall per 500 SF gross floor area MINUS patient rooms PLUS 1 stall per 2 patient beds, based on maximum design capacity
 
Park (public and private ownership)
 3 stalls PLUS 3 stalls per acre PLUS 8 stalls per acre of sport fields/courts
 
Accessory & Secondary Uses
 
Accessory & Secondary Uses (all uses)
 Combined minimum parking for all accessory/secondary uses ADDED TO minimum parking per primary use. Minimum requirements for previously unlisted accessory/secondary uses shall be:
 
Accessory Apartment or Dwelling
 1 stall per dwelling unit
 
Adult Entertainment
 No minimum requirement
 
Construction Administration Trailer
 1 stall per 300 SF gross floor area
 
Detached Structure for Home Occupation
 No minimum requirement
 
Fuel Pumps
 2 stalls per fuel pump
 
Guard or Security Booth
 2 stalls per booth structure
 
Home Occupation
 Per listed use corresponding with the home occupation (also see Article 11)
 
Neighborhood Clubhouse or Swimming Pool
 1 stall per 200 SF gross floor area PLUS 1 stall per 110 SF pool and deck area
 
Outdoor Festival, Carnival or Gathering
 1 stall per 50 SF performance/assembly area PLUS 1 stall per 300 SF display/concession/gaming/carnival ride area
 
Unattended Donation Box
 2 stalls per donation box
 
Vehicle Maintenance or Repair Garage
 2 stalls per service bay
 



07.04.	
Required Off-street Parking for Persons with Disabilities
A.	
Off-street parking for persons with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 and guidance published by the U.S. Department of Justice in the 2004 ADA Accessibility Guidelines (36 CFR part 1191) and the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design (28 CFR part 36). The requirements of this article shall:
1.	
Be superseded by any federal laws, Kansas statutes, or related regulations enacted after the effective date of these regulations, which are more restrictive than these provisions.

2.	
Apply to all land uses defined in Article 05, except for single-family dwellings and uses with no minimum parking requirement per Section 07.03.

3.	
Apply to all properties that are subject or become subject to ADA requirements. Property owners shall be solely responsible for ADA compliance, subject to inspection by a designated City official as applicable.



B.	
Minimum off-street parking requirements for persons with disabilities shall be calculated as follows.
1.	
In the Table of Required Off-street Parking for Persons with Disabilities found in Section 07.05 below, locate the cell in Column A that corresponds with the total number of stalls provided in the parking facility.

2.	
The Column B cell in the same row indicates the number of ADA accessible stalls required to be provided in the total stall count of the parking facility.

3.	
The Column C cell in the same row indicates the minimum number of van-accessible stalls required to be provided from the total number of required ADA accessible stalls. Van-accessible stalls are defined as having a minimum access aisle width of ninety-six (96) inches.

4.	
After accounting for the required minimum number of van-accessible stalls, the balance of required ADA accessible stalls shall be car-accessible stalls. Car-accessible stalls are defined as having a minimum access aisle width of sixty (60) inches.

5.	
Calculations that result in a fractional stall requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole number.






Example Calculation of Minimum Off-street Parking Requirement for Persons with Disabilities
Scenario: Off-street parking facility with 270 stalls.
(A)  Locate Column A cell that corresponds with 270 stalls - Row 7: Column A = 201 to 300 stalls  
(B)	Locate Column B cell - Row 7: Column B = 7 ADA accessible stalls required
(C)	Locate Column C cell - Row 7: Column C = 1 van-accessible stall required
	270 total stalls = 263 standard stalls maximum + 7  ADA accessible stalls minimum
	7 ADA accessible stalls = 1 van-accessible stall minimum +  6 car-accessible stalls maximum
07.05.	
Table of Required Off-street Parking for Persons with Disabilities


Row
#
 COLUMN A
Number of Stalls in Off-street Parking Facility
 COLUMN B
Minimum ADA Accessible Stalls Required 1
 COLUMN C
Minimum Van-accessible Stalls Required 2, 3
 
Row 1
 1 to 25 stalls
 1
 1
 
Row 2
 26 to 50 stalls
 2
 1
 
Row 3
 51 to 75 stalls
 3
 1
 
Row 4
 76 to 100 stalls
 4
 1
 
Row 5
 101 to 150 stalls
 5
 1
 
Row 6
 151 to 200 stalls
 6
 1
 
Row 7
 201 to 300 stalls
 7
 1
 
Row 8
 301 to 400 stalls
 8
 1
 
Row 9
 401 to 500 stalls
 9
 2
 
Row 10
 500 to 1,000 stalls
 2% of parking facility total stall count
 ¹/8 of calculated total for Column B
 
Row 11
 Over 1,000 stalls
 20 accessible stalls for first 1,000 stalls in parking facility PLUS 1% of total additional stalls
 ¹/8 of calculated total for Column B
 
(1) 
(2)
(3)
 Minimum requirement to be included in the total number of stalls provided, not in addition to the total stall count.
Indicates the minimum number of ADA accessible stalls required to be van-accessible. The balance must be car-accessible stalls.
ADA standards require minimum access aisle width of 96 inches for van-accessible stalls and 60 inches for car-accessible stalls.
 
Source: 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design
 



07.06.	
Off-street Parking & Loading General Design Provisions 
A.	
All off-street parking and loading facilities shall meet applicable design and engineering standards for curb cuts, curb length, curb return/turning radii, parking stall depth, driveway/drive aisle width, island dimensions, and parking barriers/bumper blocks.

B.	
Locational Provisions
1.	
Parking Stalls & Facilities
a.	
All parking stalls must be provided in designated locations that are readily distinguished as areas intended for parking.

b.	
Such designated parking areas may be enclosed in a garage, located under a canopy or carport, or on an unenclosed parking lot or other open surface, subject to applicable setback provisions of these regulations.



2.	
Loading Areas & Facilities
a.	
Required off-street loading shall be provided on the same zoning lot as the use for which it is required and located in a clearly marked area designated and utilized for loading/unloading.
i.	
This shall not be construed to prohibit routine mail and small parcel deliveries or the temporary parking of such delivery vehicles in undesignated areas.

ii.	
Properties zoned C-1 are exempted, except when required by the Planning Commission or City Council for conditional use or PDO zoning approval. 



b.	
Loading areas shall not be located along any side of a structure that faces street frontage, except along alleys; on corner lots having insufficient space elsewhere; and for uses established and structures built prior to the enactment of these regulations.

c.	
Loading areas shall not be allowed along the front façade of a structure, described herein as meeting one or more of these conditions:
i.	
Facing the street to which the lot or structure is addressed.

ii.	
Facing the street with the higher functional classification or traffic volume.

iii.	
Containing the primary building entrance.      







C.	
Access & Circulation Standards
1.	
Parking Stalls & Facilities
a.	
All off-street parking stalls shall have direct access to a driveway or parking lot drive aisle. No parking stall shall have direct access to a public street or right-of-way, except as otherwise provided in these regulations.

b.	
Site circulation shall provide access to all parking stalls without entering a public right-of-way.

c.	
Driveways and entrances shall meet all applicable spacing/quantity requirements; driveways shall be provided in the minimum amount necessary for adequate access and circulation.



2.	
Loading Areas & Facilities
a.	
Driveways shall be located and designed to avoid conflicts with motor vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic using transportation facilities within public rights-of-way.   

b.	
To the extent practical, loading facilities shall include an apron area to allow safe and efficient vehicle maneuvers.

c.	
Dedicated access shall be provided to loading areas for all retail, industrial, and public/institutional land uses that are zoned C-3 or I-1; or zoned C-2 with sufficient street frontage to meet applicable driveway spacing/quantity requirements.

d.	
For undefined circumstances not that do not allow for dedicated loading access, one driveway shall be clearly marked as the designated delivery/service entrance. Sites shall be designed to minimize the mixing of delivery/service traffic and routine traffic with a combination of the following techniques.    
i.	
Install signs and pavement markings that identify the designated delivery/service route, which is the most direct path from the designated entrance to loading facilities.

ii.	
Provide one driveway with direct, straight-line access to loading facilities, which is designated as the delivery/service entrance.

iii.	
Provide one driveway near a side lot line that offers perimeter access to loading facilities, which is designated as the delivery/service entrance.

iv.	
Separate driveways by the maximum spacing achievable along available street frontage.

v.	
Avoid open access between off-street parking and the designated delivery/service route. Instead, connect a few drive aisles that are separated with landscaped islands.

vi.	
Avoid designating a delivery/service route that travels through an off-street parking facility.







D.	
Paving & Surfacing Provisions
1.	
All off-street parking and loading facilities, including driveways and drive aisles, shall be graded for appropriate drainage and surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or comparable hard pavement.
a.	
Design, construction, materials, etc. must meet minimum applicable City of Augusta engineering standards and specifications.

b.	
Hard surfaces must be installed on a compacted subgrade.

c.	
Driveway approaches, curbs, gutters, and loading bay surfaces shall be constructed of concrete.

d.	
As approved by the Zoning Administrator or designated official, pervious/permeable pavement, porous blocks/pavers, or similar paving systems may be used in lieu of asphalt or concrete surfacing.

e.	
Design and construction shall include all storm drainage infrastructure and similar appurtenances as required by the Zoning Administrator or designated official.



2.	
Exemptions to the hard surface paving requirement shall be allowed as follows:
a.	
Off-street parking areas and driveways for agricultural and residential uses zoned A-1 or R-R.

b.	
Off-street parking areas and loading facility access drives for industrial uses zoned I-1. 

c.	
Legal nonconforming off-street parking areas that existed legally prior to enactment of these regulations, which are being repaired, modified, or expanded.

d.	
Required off-street parking and loading facilities exempted from the hard surfacing requirement shall be constructed and maintained with a dust-free gravel, aggregate, or other rock surface.
i.	
Design, construction, materials, etc. must meet minimum applicable City of Augusta engineering standards and specifications.

ii.	
In no case shall required parking or loading facilities be allowed on grass or dirt surfaces, except as may be approved in conjunction with a temporary use. 



e.	
 The following shall be constructed of concrete, except as specifically exempted:
i.	
Driveway approaches to paved streets.

ii.	
ADA-required accessible parking stalls, access aisles, and other such facilities.

iii.	
Loading apron and bay surfaces.  







E.	
Lighting Provisions
1.	
Adequate lighting shall be provided for all off-street parking facilities required for all uses except agricultural and single-family residential.

2.	
Lighting shall be designed to minimize “light trespass” onto adjacent properties and roadways by incorporating best practices such as:
a.	
Using light standards no taller than adjacent buildings. 

b.	
Placing fixtures in locations where good lighting is most needed, such as pedestrian walkways and doorways.

c.	
Locating fixtures no closer to the property line than four (4) times the fixture height.

d.	
Installing “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures that direct light downward.

e.	
Utilizing shut off controls such as sensors, timers, or motion detectors turn lights off when not needed.





F.	
Landscape & Screening Provisions: As applicable, off-street parking and loading areas shall be screened and landscaped per Article 09.

G.	
Maintenance Provisions: Required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be maintained in safe, operable, and fully functional condition that poses no threat to the public health, safety or welfare. This shall include:
1.	
Paved Parking Areas: Shall be maintained free of potholes, significant cracks, sediment accumulation, trash, and debris. Stall markings shall remain clearly visible. Bumper blocks shall be securely anchored at all times. ADA compliance shall be maintained for accessible stalls, access aisles, and pedestrian access routes.

2.	
Unpaved Parking Areas: Shall be maintained free potholes, ruts, weeds, trash, and debris. Surfaces shall be maintain with a predominantly smooth driving surface and sufficient depth of allowable dust-free materials to fully cover the underlying base or soil. Bumper blocks shall be securely anchored at all times.





07.07.	
Off-street Parking & Loading Minimum Design Standards
A.	
Standard Parking Stalls: Eight feet six inches wide by nineteen feet long (8’ 6” X 19’). All stalls on paved parking areas must be delineated with four-inch wide (4”) solid white or yellow painted stripes, unless otherwise exempted.

B.	
ADA Accessible Parking Stalls: Eleven feet wide by nineteen feet long (11” X 19’). 
1.	
Access Aisles: Must be provided in addition to the minimum stall width.
a.	
Car-accessible Stalls: Sixty inches wide (60”).

b.	
Van-accessible Stalls: Ninety-six inches wide (96”).

c.	
Access aisles may be shared by two adjacent stalls.



2.	
Vertical Clearance: Ninety-eight inches (98”) for van accessible parking stalls and access aisles.

3.	
Pedestrian Access Width: Thirty-six inches (36”) for paved routes from parking to buildings.

4.	
Required Markings: Stalls must be delineated with four-inch wide (4”) solid white or yellow painted stripes. A painted universal handicap symbol must be centered in each stall; Universal handicap sign (MUTCD Sign # R7-8) installed three feet (3’) off the front stripe or bumper block, centered between side stripes.



C.	
Bumper Block Requirements: Six feet long by four inches wide by four inches tall (6’ X 4” X 4”) installed within one foot (1’) of the front stripe, centered between side stripes. Required for:
a.	
Standard parking stalls located adjacent to public property and rights-of-way.

b.	
All ADA accessible parking stalls, except where a curb is present in front. 

c.	
All standard stalls located on unpaved surfaces. Shall be colored yellow and securely anchored.



D.	
Driveway Approaches & Drive Aisles: Approach widths do not include return radii.
1.	
Minimum Width: Thirteen feet (13’) for one-way; twenty-six feet (26’) for two-way.

2.	
Maximum Approach Width: Thirty feet (30’).

3.	
Markings: One-way signs shall be installed at all one-way entrances/exits; painted arrows shall be provided on one-way drive aisles to indicate the direction of traffic flow.



E.	
Loading/Unloading Facilities
1.	
Loading Bays: Twelve feet wide by one-hundred feet long (12’ X 100’); minimum vertical clearance of fourteen feet (14’).

2.	
Paved Aprons: Shall be provided for multiple-dock loading facilities zoned C-3 or I-1; and any facility zoned C-2 that lacks a dedicated entrance and driveway.
a.	
Apron Length: One-hundred and twenty feet (120’) in addition to loading bays.

b.	
Apron Width: Equal to the combined width of all loading bays.  







Article 08	
Sign Regulations

08.01.	
Intent and Purpose
A.	
It is the intent of these sign regulations to define the allowable uses of signs within the zoning jurisdiction and to regulate the time, place, and manner of signs without regulating speech or content.

B.	
This Article is to ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected.

C.	
The purpose of regulating signs is to protect public health, safety, and general welfare as well as:
1.	
Guide pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle traffic

2.	
Identify and minimize safety hazards to drivers, bicyclists, and pedestrians

3.	
Eliminate excessive and confusing signs

4.	
Prevent blight and clutter

5.	
Encourage context-sensitive signs

6.	
Protect public and private investments

7.	
Support the desired quality aesthetics and development patterns in various zoning districts

8.	
Provide, maintain, and enhance the aesthetics, safety, and welfare of neighborhoods and the community

9.	
Provide adequate opportunity for signs

10.	
Protect free speech





08.02.	
Applicability
A.	
No sign shall be erected or altered until a sign permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator, except as explicitly allowed by these regulations.

B.	
All signs shall be considered accessory structures by definition. No land, personal property, object, or structure shall be used for sign purposes except as specified in this article.

C.	
Adherence to the regulations and provisions of this article are the responsibility of the property owner.

D.	
The regulations and requirements of this article apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or adjacent property, or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of private property, except as otherwise exempt under this article.

E.	
The Zoning Administrator is responsible for administering and enforcing all provisions of this article, other than those specifically reserved and assigned to other designated officials or other entities.

F.	
The Zoning Administrator is responsible for determining the appropriate sign category or sign type based upon professional judgment and interpretation of the definitions provided herein.

G.	
The boundaries and locations of all zoning districts referenced in this article are illustrated on the City’s Official Zoning Map.

H.	
Sign regulations are based upon the land use and zoning district of a zoning lot as described in Article 05 and Article 06.

I.	
Regulations based upon zoning districts are intended as supplemental standards to the general provisions and district regulations.

J.	
Proposed signs for which the code is silent or where rules of this article do not provide a clear basis for concluding that the sign is allowed, shall be prohibited.

K.	
If the regulations, descriptions, and examples do not provide adequate guidance to clearly address a specific situation, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the stated intent of the regulation and its relationship to other regulations and situations and determine applicability based on the most comparable means of regulation provided herein.



08.03.	
Substitutions Clause


The owner of any authorized or legal nonconforming sign may substitute sign copy in lieu of any other sign copy. Such changes affecting the copy only may be made at any time without additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. This clause shall not be construed to include structural alterations, changes to required dimensions or other modifications. 
08.04.	
General Sign Definitions


Abandoned Sign Structure: A sign structure on which no sign has been installed for a continuous period of at least one-hundred and eighty (180) days.
Aggregate Sign Area: The combined total area of all sign faces on a single zoning lot.
Awning: A covered framework attached to a building that projects over a door or window to provide protection from the weather or sun, which may a sign placed on its exterior surface..
Beacon: An artificial light source that projects a concentrated beam of light intended to attract or divert attention to its location. Such devices regulated by this article are not intended to apply to those required by applicable safety regulations.
Decorative Cap: An element of the sign structure that plugs the open end of a sign post to keep water from entering the post, which also has aesthetic appeal.
Dilapidated Sign: A sign that is structurally unsound, unsafe, defective, or is in need of maintenance.
Incidental Sign: A small sign, emblem or decal with an area of two (2) square feet or less that provides specific information to individuals viewing it from within the site and engaged in an activity or use occurring on the zoning lot.
Marquee: A permanent canopy structure attached to a building over an entrance that offers protection from the weather, which is common in theater architecture to support a marquee sign.
Off-Premise Sign: A sign that is not directly related to a use, structure or activity found on the zoning lot where it is displayed.
On-Premise Sign: A sign that is directly related to a use, structure or activity found on the zoning lot where it is displayed.
Parapet Wall: A portion of an exterior building wall that extends higher than the main wall.
Permanent Sign: A sign designed for perpetual display and constructed of durable materials, which may be issued a permanent sign permit per these regulations or which is specifically exempted from these regulations.
Primary Sign: The largest and most prominent permanent on-premise sign installed on a zoning lot.
Prohibited Sign: A sign that does not conform to or is not allowed by these regulations, excluding legal nonconforming signs.
Roof Line: A line that follows the upper-most edge of a building, including the roof, parapets, and any taller projections.
Secondary Sign: All signs not deemed to be primary signs, excluding incidental signs.
Sign: A medium of visual communication that conveys a message, portrays an image, provides information, or attracts attention.
Sign Base: The portion of a freestanding sign structure that supports the sign body and contacts the ground or foundation.
Sign Body: The cabinet, frame or portion of a sign structure that displays the sign face, excluding the base or decorative cap.
Sign Classification: The means identifying the characteristics by which signs are regulated per this article. Signs are classified according to structural and display characteristics, both of which comprise the specific classification of an individual sign. 
Sign Copy: The words, letters or graphic elements on a sign that convey a its message, idea or purpose.
Sign Face: The surface of a sign upon which the sign copy is placed or attached.
Sign Foundation: The component of a freestanding sign made of concrete or similar material to which the base or support structure is anchored, and which extends below the ground surface to provide lateral and vertical stability.
Sign Panel: An individual portion of a sign face that is clearly distinguished from other portions by its design and construction.
Sign Permit: A written certificate issued by a designated official of the City of Augusta, which certifies that a proposed sign conforms to these regulations, has permission to be installed, and is authorized for display as stipulated by the permit so long as it remains in conformance. Sign permits may be issued for permanent installation or temporary display.
Sign Setback: The minimum required distance between a sign and the exterior boundary of the zoning lot where it is installed.
Sign Support Structure: The structural support and bracing elements for a sign, including posts and poles.
Structural Alteration: The modification of a sign or sign structure that affects the size, shape, height, or sign location; changes in structural materials; or replacement of electrical components with other than comparable materials. Structural alteration does not include ordinary maintenance or repair, repainting an existing sign surface, including changes of message or image, exchanging painted and pasted or glued materials on painted wall signs, or exchanging display panels of a sign through release and closing of clips or other brackets.
Temporary Sign: A sign designed to be displayed for a limited time period, which may be issued a temporary sign permit per these regulations or which is specifically exempted from these regulations.
08.05.	
Sign Structural Classification


The three (3) structural sign categories are Portability, Installation, and Structure Type. Classification uses one class from each structural category. An example classification is Fixed; Freestanding; Monument.
A.	
Portability. Describes the ability to be moved between locations. Portability classes are:
1.	
Fixed - Designed and constructed to remain in one location.

2.	
Portable - Designed and constructed to be easily moved between locations. 



B.	
Installation. Describes the method by which a sign is mounted to or displayed from a structure, object, or surface. Installation classes are:
1.	
Building - Describes a support structure that is securely anchored to a building; or a sign that is fastened or applied directly to an exterior building surface.

2.	
Freestanding - Describes an independent support structure anchored to a foundation that is solely intended to support a sign.

3.	
Ground - Describes a support structure placed directly in or on the ground, but not anchored to a foundation.

4.	
Tethered - Describes a sign secured to a fixed object or structure by strap, chain, tape, etc.

5.	
Vehicle - Describes a sign that is mounted on or applied directly to a portable support structure, such as a motor vehicle or trailer.  



C.	
Structure Type. Indicates the physical characteristics or location of a sign support structure.
1.	
Air-Activated - A non-rigid sign expanded and supported by wind or forced air blown onto the surface or through the body. Classified as Portable; Tethered; Air-Activated.

2.	
Awning - An awning that serves as a support structure for a sign attached or applied to the exterior surface. Classified as Fixed; Building; Awning.

3.	
Canopy - A canopy that serves as the support structure for a sign mounted on or applied to the vertical face. Classified as Fixed; Building; Canopy.

4.	
Column - A support structure upon which a sign is elevated on one or more vertical supports each having a width more than ten percent (10%) of the sign body’s width. Classified as Fixed; Freestanding; Column.

5.	
Inflatable - A non-rigid sign expanded and supported by air or gas filling the interior of the body without freely passing through. Classified as Portable; Tethered; Inflatable. 

6.	
Marquee - A marquee that serves as the support structure of a sign mounted on the vertical face. Classified as Fixed; Building; Marquee.

7.	
Monument - A support structure with an integrated body and base having the same general width from bottom to top. Classified as Fixed; Freestanding; Monument.

8.	
Pole - A support structure upon which a sign is elevated on one or more vertical supports each having a width less than ten percent (10%) of the sign body’s width. Classified as Fixed; Freestanding; Pole.

9.	
Projecting - A support structure mounted to a building wall with the sign face oriented perpendicular to the wall surface. Classified as Fixed; Building; Projecting.

10.	
Roof - A support structure mounted to a building roof. Classified as Fixed; Building; Roof.

11.	
Secured Attachment - The fixed object or structure to which a tethered sign, other than Air-Activated or Inflatable, is attached. Classified as Portable; Tethered; Secured Attachment.

12.	
Sidewalk - A rigid sign displayed on a pedestrian walkway that is held in place by its own weight or by being weighted down. Classified as Portable; Ground; Sidewalk.

13.	
Wall - A support structure mounted to a building wall with the sign face oriented parallel to the wall surface. Classified as Fixed; Building; Wall.

14.	
Window - A sign painted on or applied to a window pane, installed in a window, or installed such that it can be seen from outside the window, which has a sign face oriented and intended to be viewed from outside of the building. Classified as Fixed; Building; Window.

15.	
Yard - A sign displayed in a lot’s yard area that held in place by weight, sleeve insertion, ground insertion, or being placed in a back-filled hole. Classified as Portable; Ground; Yard.




08.06.	
Sign Display Classification


The four (4) sign display categories are: Panel Quantity, Panel Type, Movement, and Lighting. Classification uses one class from each category. An example display classification for a sign with one panel is One-Panel; Full Frame; Static; Non-Illuminated.
Signs having multiple panels use the number of panels for Panel Quantity with Panel Type, Movement, and Lighting indicated for each panel. Individual panels are listed in top to bottom order and lettered beginning with (A) for the top-most panel. An example display classification for a sign with three panels is Three-Panel; (A) Full Frame; Static; Non-Illuminated; (B) Full Frame; Static; Internal Illumination; (C) Electronic Message; Dynamic; Internal Illumination. Regulations shall apply to multiple-panel signs according all applicable sign panel types. 
A.	
Panel Quantity. Indicates the number of panels that make up the sign face. Panel Quantity is classified using the number of sign panels. For example, a sign with one panel is One-Panel, a sign with two panels is Two-Panels, and so forth.

B.	
Panel Type. Indicates panel characteristics such as message location, framing, or medium. 
1.	
Air Motion - A sign panel structurally classified as Portable; Tethered; Air-Activated, having forced air blown through the body to create motion. May only be used as a One-Panel sign. Display is classified as Dynamic; Non-Illuminated

2.	
Balloon - A sign panel structurally classified as Portable; Tethered; Inflatable, which may float in the air or be secured in contact with the ground or a fixed object. May only be used as a One-Panel sign. Display is classified as Static; Non-Illuminated.

3.	
Banner - A sign panel structurally classified as Portable; Tethered; Secured Attachment, which has no rigid frame and is mounted to hang flush against a surface or suspend between tethering points. May be used only as a One-Panel sign.  Display is classified as Static; Non-Illuminated.

4.	
Blade - A non-rigid sign face attached to a flexible pole with one or more unsecured sides allowing movement in the wind. Structurally classified as Portable; Ground; Yard. May only be used as a One-Panel sign. Display is classified as Dynamic; Non-Illuminated.

5.	
Changeable Copy - A sign panel that allows manual changes to the message, content, position or display of its copy, which has no video display or mechanical means of changing copy. May be used with any structural classification that does not have Tethered installation. May be used in multi-panel signs. Display is classified as Dynamic; External Illumination, Internal Illumination or Non-Illuminated. 

6.	
Digital Video - An electronic sign panel with capable of displaying enhanced textual and graphic effects, animation, or full-motion video. Structurally classified as Fixed; Building or Freestanding, with any applicable Structure Type. May be used in multi-panel signs. Display is classified as Dynamic; Internal Illumination.

7.	
Electronic Message - An electronic sign panel that can be programmed to change copy automatically, but does not have full-motion video display capabilities. May be used with any structural classification that does not have Tethered installation. May be used in multi-panel signs. Display is classified as Dynamic; Internal Illumination.

8.	
Flag - A sign panel made of fabric that may be attached to a pole on one side allowing it to move in the wind or hung from a structure or fixed object. Structurally classified as Portable; Tethered; Air-Activated. Display is classified as Dynamic; External Illumination or Non-Illuminated.

9.	
Free-Form - A sign panel that takes the shape of copy elements with no visually discernible frame, which is attached to a freestanding support structure, mounted to a building, or applied directly to a building wall or canopy. Structurally classified as Fixed; Building or Freestanding, with any applicable Structure Type. May be used in multi-panel signs. Display is classified as Static; External Illumination, Internal Illumination or Non-Illuminated.

10.	
Full Body - A sign panel that fully covers the entire sign body width and height without cutouts or spatial voids. Structurally classified as Fixed; Building or Freestanding; with any applicable Structure Type. May be used in multi-panel signs. Display is classified as Static; External Illumination, Internal Illumination or Non-Illuminated.

11.	
Mechanical Movement  - A sign panel with no video display that is designed to mechanically change the message, content, position or display of its copy or physically move portions of the sign body. Structurally classified as Fixed; Freestanding; Column or Pole. May only be used as a One-Panel sign. Display is classified as Dynamic; External Illumination or Non-Illuminated.

12.	
Partial Body - A framed sign panel that partially covers the sign body width or height leaving spatial voids. Structurally classified as Fixed; Building or Freestanding; with any applicable Structure Type. May be used in multi-panel signs. Display is classified as Static; External Illumination, Internal Illumination or Non-Illuminated.



C.	
Movement. Indicates if a sign face or panel moves, has moving external components, visually portrays motion, or allows copy changes.
1.	
Dynamic - A sign face or panel having any portion designed to move, create the appearance of motion, or change copy. Actual movement may occur by wind/air action or mechanical means. The appearance of motion may be portrayed by blinking, flashing, changing images, or video display. Copy changes may be made digitally, mechanically, or manually

2.	
Static - A sign face or panel that is not designed to move, portray motion, or change copy.



D.	
Lighting. Indicates if a sign face or panel is illuminated by an artificial light source.
1.	
External Illumination - A sign face or panel illuminated by an artificial light source located outside of the body and aimed toward the sign.

2.	
Internal Illumination - A sign face or panel with an artificial light source illuminating the sign from within, having a video screen, or having copy that is comprised of an artificial light source such as neon tubes or light-emitting diodes (LED).

3.	
Non-Illuminated - A sign face or panel with no means of illumination by an artificial light source.




08.07.	
Measurements and Calculations
A.	
Primary Building Elevation
1.	
The primary building elevation is the side of a building with the main entrance that typically faces the street frontage to which the lot is addressed.

2.	
The wall area of the primary building elevation shall be determined as follows:
a.	
When scaled architectural elevations are provided to depict the elevation of the structure, the vertical wall area of the elevation shall be the wall surface of the building elevation exclusive of roofs, parapets and false fascia, except that a parapet on the primary building elevation, that is part of a parapet of a uniform height and building material on three sides of a structure may be included in the elevation area, but decorative parapet extensions of irregular height on one or two sides of a structure are excluded from the calculation.

b.	
When architectural plans are not provided, it shall be assumed that the height of the elevation of the first floor is twelve (12) feet and that the height of the elevation of all floors above the first floor is ten (10) feet per floor. The area of the elevation is then calculated based on the formula: 








((building width) X (12 feet)) + ((building width) X (number of additional floors) X (10 feet))
B.	
Setbacks for Fixed;Freestanding signs shall be measured as the distance between the property line and the nearest point on the sign or sign structure.

C.	
Street frontage shall be measured parallel to the centerline of the public street. Where a zoning lot has more than one public street frontage, street frontage shall be the combined linear street frontage.

D.	
Sign clearance shall be measured from the highest point of the ground directly below the sign to the lowest point of the sign structure.

E.	
Total Sign Height (also referred to as sign height)
1.	
The total sign height of freestanding signs shall be measured from the ground elevation at the base of the sign structure to the highest element of the sign structure. For signs that may vary in height, such as Inflatable signs, the total sign height shall be measured from the ground elevation at the base of the sign structure to the highest element of the sign structure at its peak elevation.

2.	
For building signs, the total sign height shall equal the sign face height.



F.	
Sign Area
1.	
The sign area shall include the entire area of the sign face. The area of a sign face shall be calculated by multiplying the sign face width by the sign face height using a rectangular shape that completely encloses the sign face.

2.	
The sign area of a Free-Form sign panel shall include the entire area within a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of the sign copy and other graphic element used to portray the sign’s message.

3.	
The sign area of Digital Video and Electronic Message displays shall include the entire panel area plus the surrounding frame or body.

4.	
A sign designed to be viewed from two (2) or more directions shall be considered one (1) sign, provided that the sign faces are parallel or form an angle of no more than ten (10) degrees. If one sign face is larger, the larger of the two sign faces shall be used to determine the sign area.

5.	
For cylindrical sign structures, the sign area shall be area of the largest flat plane rectangle that would bisect the sign structure and be completely contained within the outer bounds of the sign structure.

6.	
The aggregate sign area shall be the sum of all sign area for signs on a zoning lot, not including incidental signs.




08.08.	
Signs Exempt from Regulation
A.	
Signs placed by or at the direction of the City of Augusta or other government agency with such authority, within the right-of-way or on a lot owned by a unit of government.

B.	
Signs required by federal, state, or local statute.

C.	
Signs identifying historic events, buildings, or other aspects of Augusta and authorized by the City.

D.	
Signs not visible and distinguishable beyond the zoning lot where the sign is located.

E.	
Incidental signs as defined per Section 08.04 and other signs directly related to a use or activity occurring on the same zoning lot that display specific information intended solely for individuals engaged in said use or activity, and not intended as general public information.

F.	
Flag signs, subject to the following provisions.
1.	
Up to three (3) Flag signs with a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet, subject to zoning district maximum height restrictions and applicable Building Code requirements.

2.	
Such signs with a sign area not exceeding forty (48) square feet, provided the aggregate area of all flag signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed seventy-eight (78) square feet.

3.	
Exempted Flag signs shall not count towards the allowable aggregate sign area for signs on a zoning lot.



G.	
Antique or collectible signs displayed as a personal or museum exhibit, painted on a wall or architectural element of a historic building or displayed outdoors as merchandise for sale in a manner consistent with these regulations. 

H.	
A display of goods in a window.

I.	
Signs carried by a person.

J.	
Scoreboards and off-premise signs on athletic fields which are oriented towards the field of play.

K.	
Signs affixed to or incorporated into machines or equipment by the manufacturer or distributor.

L.	
Vehicle signs on vehicles used for deliveries, service calls, or other routine business purposes, provided the vehicle on which the sign is displayed shall be:
1.	
Legally licensed and registered.

2.	
Operable and used for a purpose specifically related to the sign’s message.

3.	
Parked in a lawful and authorized location.



M.	
Portable signs exempted per Section 08.12.



08.09.	
Prohibited Signs
A.	
Signs that are not in full compliance with this article, other than legal nonconforming signs.

B.	
Signs which by location, color, illumination level, or design element conflict with traffic control signs or traffic signals or that may interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.

C.	
Privately owned signs on or above public right-of-way or other government-owned property, except as approved, allowed, or required by the owning agency pursuant to a government contract or franchise.

D.	
Vehicle signs visible from the public right-of-way that are not otherwise exempt.

E.	
New signs located on property without the permission of the property owner except those authorized or required by federal, state, or local government.

F.	
Signs incorporating beacon lighting or strobe lights.

G.	
Signs which emit smoke, particulate matter, sound, odor, or other visible vapors.

H.	
Signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape.

I.	
Abandoned sign structures.



08.10.	
General Sign Standards
A.	
Construction Materials
1.	
Permanently installed sign structures for signs structurally classified as Fixed; Freestanding shall be constructed of non-combustible materials, except for wood or other materials capable of providing sufficient structural strength that are allowed by the Building Code.

2.	
Signs structurally classified as Fixed shall be constructed of durable all-weather materials.



B.	
Sign Placement
1.	
Signs shall not be placed on or otherwise attached to any tree, utility pole, light pole, or traffic control sign.

2.	
Signs and sign structures shall not block or interfere with pedestrian access on sidewalks, building entrances or exits, wheelchair ramps, or otherwise violate the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

3.	
Signs and sign structures shall not obstruct vehicular access of a driveway, alley, parking area, or other designated vehicular access area.

4.	
Signs shall not be placed in or extend into public rights-of-way, except as specifically allowed per this article. When allowed, such signs may be required by the City to be temporarily or permanently modified or removed due to construction or other official purpose. Modification or removal will be at the expense of the owner. In cases of temporary modifications and removals, legal nonconforming signs may be reinstalled without being brought into conformance.

5.	
Setbacks and Sight Triangles
a.	
Permanent freestanding signs shall be setback at least five (5) feet from the property line or ten (10) feet from the edge of the street pavement, whichever distance is greater.

b.	
Signs placed in a sight triangle shall not exceed three (3) feet in total sign height. Sight triangle is defined in Section 03.03, with further guidance provided in Section 04.04.L.





C.	
Aggregate Sign Area
1.	
Maximum aggregate sign area for a lot with a multi-tenant commercial principal structure (i.e. shopping center, office building) in a C-1, C-2, C-3 or I-1 zoning district may be divided between the number of individual units in the structure upon the discretion of the property owner and subject to permit approval.

2.	
Maximum aggregate sign area for a zoning lot shall not be exceeded. Exceptions shall not be allowed by variance, conditional use, or other adjustment, unless specifically provided herein.



D.	
Portable Signs
1.	
Vehicle signs are subject to applicable regulations for the appropriate vehicular code when in use on public roadways.

2.	
Shall be on-premise signs only and shall be limited to temporary display for a period no longer than ninety (90) consecutive days.

3.	
Portable signs may temporarily replace legal Fixed signs removed by a government agency due to a construction project. The quantity, size, and area of such signs shall be limited to that equal to the removed Fixed signs. The original legally permitted signs shall be reinstalled within ten (10) days of project completion. In such cases, a sign permit shall not be required.



E.	
Building Signs
1.	
Shall be on-premise signs only.

2.	
Awning & Marquee Signs
a.	
Shall not extend taller than the highest point of the awning, canopy, or marquee to which is it affixed.

b.	
May extend into public right-of-way if mounted to a building that is setback no more than six (6) feet from the property line. 



3.	
Projecting Signs
a.	
Shall only be affixed to a building and shall not extend vertically beyond the highest point of the building.

b.	
The edge of the sign body nearest the wall shall be no more than twelve (12) inches from such wall.

c.	
May extend horizontally up to six (6) feet into public right-of-way only if mounted to a building that is setback no more than six (6) feet from the property line. In no case shall such signs extend to within two (2) feet of the curb face or street pavement edge, where no curb is provided.

d.	
No more than thirty (30) square feet of the sign face area may extend into the right-of-way.

e.	
There shall be a minimum sign clearance of eight (8) feet, except that signs projecting into a sight triangle shall have a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet.



4.	
Roof Signs
a.	
Shall not extend vertically beyond the highest point of the building to which it is affixed or extend horizontally more than twelve (12) inches beyond the face of the nearest building wall.

b.	
If mounted on a pitched roof, the sign face shall be oriented parallel to the nearest building wall.

c.	
Support structures shall not extend above the sign.



5.	
Canopy & Wall Signs
a.	
Shall not extend vertically beyond the highest point of the wall or structure to which it is affixed or extend horizontally more than twelve (12) inches from the building to which it is affixed.

b.	
May extend into public right-of-way if mounted to a building that is setback no more than twelve (12) inches from the property line.



6.	
Window Signs
a.	
The aggregate sign area of all window signs displayed on/in/through a window shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the said window’s total surface area.





F.	
Fixed Freestanding Signs
1.	
Shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of another sign structurally classified as Fixed; Freestanding.

2.	
Shall have a landscape planting area installed if the zoning lot on which it will be installed meets the Supplemental Landscape Buffer Requirement criteria of Section 09.05. 
a.	
The planting area shall be defined by permanent edging or curbing that extends at least three (3) feet from the base of the sign around the entire perimeter.

b.	
At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the defined planting area shall be covered with some combination of ornamental deciduous trees, evergreen trees, shrubbery, ground cover, perennials, or bulbs.





G.	
Illuminated Displays & Signs with Electrical Components
1.	
Shall conform to all applicable provisions of the current City of Augusta Building and Electrical Codes.

2.	
Signs with Internal Illumination displays shall provide the minimum level of illumination necessary for night-time display, without producing unreasonable glare beyond the zoning lot boundaries.

3.	
Signs with External Illumination displays shall have the light source aimed directly at the sign face. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded to minimize light trespass onto other properties and public rights-of-way.

4.	
All electrical wiring to shall be concealed from public view. If the sign is Fixed;Freestanding, electrical wiring to the sign shall be placed underground.

5.	
Wiring diagrams and technical lighting specifications demonstrating conformance to these regulations shall be attached to the sign permit application.



H.	
Digital Video & Electronic Message Displays
1.	
Shall conform to all applicable provisions of the current City of Augusta Building and Electrical Codes.

2.	
Shall be equipped with a working light detector, photocell, or timer that automatically decrease the illumination level for night-time display. If used, timers shall account for seasonal changes in daylight hours.

3.	
Displays shall be programmed or equipped to turn off or show a full black image in the event of a malfunction that affects more than fifty percent (50%) of the sign face. 





08.11.	
Fixed Sign Regulations by Zoning District & Land Use


Signs that are structurally classified as Fixed shall only be allowed with an approved permanent sign permit, subject to the following provisions and conditions, except as specifically exempted per Section 08.08.
A.	
A-1, R-R, R-1 & R-2 Zoning Districts
1.	
Lots with single-family residential primary uses shall be allowed one (1) on-premise sign only in association with a legal conforming home occupation per Article 11, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Maximum sign area shall be four (4) square feet.

b.	
Structural classification shall be limited to Fixed; Building; Wall.

c.	
Display classification shall be limited to One-Panel; Full Body; Static; Non-Illuminated.



2.	
Residential subdivisions with active homeowners associations and mobile home parks with R-4 zoning shall be allowed one (1) on-premise sign per vehicular subdivision entrance along a public street, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Minimum spacing between signs shall be two-hundred (200) feet.

b.	
Maximum sign area shall be thirty-two (32) square feet and maximum sign height shall be six (6) feet.

c.	
Structural classification shall be limited to Fixed; Freestanding; Monument.

d.	
Display classification shall be limited to One-Panel, Free-Form, Full Body or Partial Body, Static; External Illumination or Non-Illuminated.



3.	
Lots with primary uses other than single-family residential shall be allowed one (1) on-premise sign per public street frontage, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Maximum aggregate sign area shall be one (1) square foot per two (2) linear feet of street frontage or twenty-four (24) square feet, whichever is greater.

b.	
Maximum sign area shall be twenty-four (24) square feet. Freestanding signs shall have a maximum sign height of six (6) feet.

c.	
Structural classification shall be limited to:
i.	
Fixed; Building; Wall.

ii.	
Fixed; Freestanding; Monument.



d.	
Display classification shall be limited as follows:
i.	
No more than one (1) sign shall have an illuminated display (External or Internal Illumination).

ii.	
Wall signs shall be limited to One-Panel; Free-Form, Full Body or Partial Body; Static; External Illumination or Non-Illuminated.

iii.	
Monument signs shall be limited to One-Panel or Two-Panel; Electronic Message, Full Body or Partial Body; Dynamic or Static; External Illumination, Internal Illumination or Non-Illuminated. 







B.	
R-3, R-4, C-1 & C-2 Zoning Districts
1.	
Lots with single-family residential primary uses shall be regulated per Section 08.11.A.1.

2.	
Lots with multi-family residential primary uses shall be regulated per Section 08.11.A.2.

3.	
Lots with non-residential primary uses shall be allowed one (1) on-premise sign per public street frontage, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Maximum aggregate sign area shall be one (1) square foot per two (2) linear feet of street frontage or forty (40) square feet, whichever is greater.

b.	
Signs shall have a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. Signs structurally classified as Fixed; Freestanding shall have a maximum sign height of ten (10) feet.

c.	
Sign classification shall be not be limited, subject to the following sign quantity provisions.
i.	
No more than one (1) sign shall have a structural classification of Fixed; Freestanding.

ii.	
No more than two (2) signs shall have illuminated displays (External or Internal Illumination).







C.	
C-3 & I-1 District Zoning Lots
1.	
Primary Freestanding Signs: Lots shall be allowed one (1) primary on-premise sign that is structurally classified as Fixed; Freestanding, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Signs located along arterial street frontage shall have a maximum sign area of sixty-four (64) square feet and a maximum sign height of twenty (20) feet.

b.	
Signs located along collector street frontage shall have a maximum sign area of thirty-six (36) square feet and a maximum sign height of fifteen (15) feet.

c.	
Signs located along local street frontage shall have a maximum sign area of twenty-four (24) square feet and a maximum sign height of ten (10) feet.

d.	
Sign display classification shall be limited per Section 08.11.C.4.



2.	
Secondary Freestanding Signs: Lots shall be allowed secondary on-premise signs structurally classified as Fixed; Freestanding, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Lots shall be allowed one (1) such sign per public street frontage in locations within twenty (20) feet of a vehicular entrance/exit.
i.	
Maximum sign area shall be sixteen (16) square feet and maximum sign height shall be six (6) feet.

ii.	
Minimum spacing between such signs shall be sixty (60) feet.

iii.	
Sign display classification shall be limited per Section 08.11.C.4.



b.	
Lots shall have no limit on the number of such signs in internal locations at least eighty (80) feet inside of an external lot line, subject to the following provisions.
i.	
Maximum sign area shall be eight (8) square feet and maximum sign height shall be six (6) feet.

ii.	
Maximum aggregate sign area shall be one (1) square foot per four (4) linear feet of street frontage.

iii.	
Minimum spacing between such signs shall be twenty (20) feet.

iv.	
Display classification shall be limited to Static movement displays, subject to the lighting display requirements of Section 08.11.C.4.a.





3.	
Building Signs: Lots shall have no limit on the number of signs structurally classified as Fixed; Building, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Maximum aggregate area shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the principal structure’s front façade wall area.

b.	
Such signs shall be allowed on any exterior wall surface of legal conforming structures.

c.	
Structure type classification shall not be limited.

d.	
Sign display classification shall be limited per Section 08.11.C.4.



4.	
Display Classification Provisions
a.	
Lots shall be limited to four (4) signs with illuminated displays (External or Internal Illumination).

b.	
Dynamic movement displays shall be limited to one (1) Primary Freestanding sign plus one (1) Secondary Freestanding sign plus one (1) Building sign per zoning lot, subject to the following provisions. 
i.	
Maximum sign area shall be thirty-two (32) square feet, provided such displays may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign area of a multiple panel sign.

ii.	
Maximum aggregate sign area shall be forty-eight (48) square feet per lot, which shall be counted toward other applicable aggregate sign area limits.

iii.	
Mechanical Movement displays shall only be allowed on Primary Freestanding signs located along arterial street frontages.

iv.	
These limits shall not apply to Changeable Copy displays.





5.	
Highway Frontage Freestanding Signs: Lots with at least fifty (50) feet of frontage along a designated highway or highway on/off ramp shall be allowed one (1) additional sign structurally classified as Fixed; Freestanding, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Signs may be on-premise or off-premise with no limits on display classification.

b.	
Signs shall be located within one-hundred (100) feet of the highway right-of-way line with the sign face oriented perpendicular to traffic flow on the adjacent highway facility.

c.	
Maximum sign area shall be limited to two-hundred (200) square feet allowed in addition to maximum aggregate sign area limits and maximum sign height shall be thirty (30) feet.

d.	
Minimum spacing between Highway Frontage Freestanding signs shall be one-thousand (1,000) feet.

e.	
Signs shall not be located within one-hundred (100) feet of another sign structurally classified as Fixed;Freestanding.

f.	
Display classification shall not be limited.



6.	
Flag Signs: Permanent displays of Flag signs exceeding the exemptions per Section 08.08.F may be allowed by permanent sign permit approval, subject to the following maximum limits.
a.	
Maximum sign height may be adjusted up to the zoning district maximum allowable height.

b.	
Maximum sign area may be adjusted up to ninety-six (96) square feet with a maximum aggregate sign area of two-hundred sixteen (216) square feet.

c.	
Maximum quantity may be adjusted up to eight (8) Flag signs, provided no individual Flag sign exceeds a sign area of fifteen (15) square feet and aggregate sign area does not exceed one-hundred twenty (120) square feet.






08.12.	
Portable Sign Regulations by Zoning District & Land Use


Signs that are structurally classified as Portable shall be allowed subject to the following provisions and conditions, except as exempted per Section 08.08.
A.	
Lots with single-family residential primary uses within any zoning district shall be allowed Portable signs as follows.
1.	
Structural classification shall be limited to Portable; Ground or Tethered; Air-Activated or Yard.

2.	
Display classification shall be limited to One-Panel; Balloon, Banner, Blade or Flag; Non-Illuminated.

3.	
Up to two (2) Portable signs displayed at any given time shall be exempt from sign permit requirements, provided the aggregate sign area does not exceed twelve (12) square feet and individual signs do not exceed six (6) square feet in sign area or five (5) feet in height.

4.	
Portable signs in excess of the maximum exemptions per Section 08.12.A.3 shall only be allowed by temporary sign permit approval, subject to the following limits.
a.	
Up to one (1) additional sign displayed at any one time; maximum of three (3) signs.

b.	
Up to eight (8) additional square feet aggregate sign area; maximum of twenty (20) square feet.

c.	
Up to one (1) sign may have a maximum sign area of sixteen (16) square feet.

d.	
Maximum sign height shall not be adjusted.





B.	
A-1, R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 & C-1 Zoning Districts: Lots with a primary use other than single-family residential shall be allowed portable signs as follows.
1.	
Structural classification shall be limited to Portable; Ground, Tethered or Vehicle; Air-Activated, Secured Attachment, Sidewalk or Yard.

2.	
Display classification shall be limited to One-Panel; Air Motion, Balloon, Banner, Blade, Changeable Copy or Flag; Non-Illuminated.

3.	
Up to two (2) portable signs displayed at any given time shall be exempt from sign permit requirements, provided the aggregate sign area does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet and individual signs do not exceed eight (8) square feet in sign area or six (6) feet in height.

4.	
Portable signs in excess of the maximum exemptions per Section 08.12.B.3 shall only be allowed by temporary sign permit approval, subject to the following limits.
a.	
Up to one (1) additional sign displayed at any one time; maximum of three (3) signs.

b.	
Up to fourteen (14) additional square feet aggregate sign area; maximum of thirty (30) square feet.

c.	
Up to one (1) sign may have a maximum sign area of twenty (20) square feet.

d.	
Up to one (1) sign may have a maximum height of eight (8) feet.





C.	
C-2, C-3, and I-1 Zoning Districts
1.	
Structural classification shall be limited to Portable; Ground, Tethered or Vehicle; Air-Activated, Secured Attachment, Sidewalk or Yard.

2.	
Display classification shall be limited to One-Panel; Air Motion, Balloon, Banner, Blade, Changeable Copy or Flag; Non-Illuminated.

3.	
Up to three (3) portable signs displayed at any given time shall be exempt from sign permit requirements, provided the aggregate sign area does not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet and individual signs do not exceed eight (8) square feet in sign area or six (6) feet in height.

4.	
Portable signs in excess of the maximum exemptions per Section 08.12.C.3 shall only be allowed by temporary sign permit approval, subject to the following limits.
a.	
Up to three (3) additional signs displayed at any one time; maximum of five (5) signs.

b.	
Up to forty (40) additional square feet aggregate sign area; maximum of sixty-four (64) square feet.

c.	
Up to two (2) signs may have a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet.

d.	
Up to two (2) signs may have a maximum height of ten (10) feet.





D.	
C1, C-2 & C-3 Zoning Districts: Lots with non-residential primary uses shall be allowed to place one (1) Portable sign per business establishment within public right-of-way at any given time, subject to the following provisions.
a.	
Such signs shall be placed immediately adjacent to the subject lot and may be displayed only during the establishment’s operating hours.

b.	
Such signs shall be placed completely outside of the street pavement. If placed on a sidewalk, signs shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and at least three (3) feet of clear sidewalk width shall be maintained at all times.

c.	
Sign area shall be counted against the maximum aggregate sign area of all Portable signs.

d.	
Sign height shall not exceed four (4) feet.




08.13.	
Maintenance Provisions
A.	
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance with applicable provisions of the Building Code and other City codes.  Sign supports and structural components shall be painted, constructed of galvanized or non-ferrous materials, or otherwise treated to prevent rust.

B.	
All signs within the City shall be kept in the same general condition as approved by permit and in a manner that avoids visual detriment to the community at large. This shall include:
1.	
Maintaining a safe structural condition.

2.	
Keeping exposed surfaces free of rust and corrosion.

3.	
Keeping painted surfaces free chips, cracks, flaking, and peeling.

4.	
Replacing broken components made of glass, plastic, or other materials.

5.	
Maintaining all lights and electrical components in a safe and operable condition.

6.	
Maintaining the legibility of textual and graphic sign components.





08.14.	
Nonconforming Signs
A.	
Legally existing permanent signs that do not comply with these regulations may continue to exist as legal nonconforming signs upon the effective date of these regulations.
1.	
Such signs shall be subject to applicable sign maintenance requirements and other provisions for legal nonconforming structures.

2.	
Owners of such signs may request a legal nonconforming use certificate per Section 04.10.D.



B.	
Removal or Modification of Nonconforming Signs
1.	
Existing signs that do not comply with these regulations, regardless of sign type or legal status, shall be removed or modified in compliance with these regulations under any of the following circumstances.
a.	
The nature of the business conducted on the premises changes and the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend.

b.	
The name of the business changes and the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend.

c.	
A principal structure is destroyed or removed due to natural or man-made circumstances, unless a Building Permit has been issued to replace the structure within ninety (90) days.

d.	
The sign is damaged by any means when the cost of restoring it to original condition exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of damage.

e.	
The building or use to which the sign applies is vacated, abandoned, or otherwise dormant for a period of time exceeding twelve (12) months.



2.	
All nonconforming signs required to be removed by these regulations shall be removed within ninety (90) days of notification by the City.





08.15.	
Sign Permitting Process
A.	
No sign permit application shall be accepted without plans and specifications of the proposed sign, which may include relevant drawings with items such as location, dimensions, construction, structural design, electrical design, and illumination specifications.

B.	
A sign permit shall not be issued for a permanent sign encroaching into or over public right-of-way without the installer first providing a certificate of Accident Public Liability Insurance with minimum coverages of $50,000 per person, $100,000 per accident and $25,000 property damage.

C.	
Review and Action
1.	
The Zoning Administrator shall review the sign permit application to determine if the proposed sign complies with all the applicable regulations of this article. Sign permits shall be either approved or denied within fifteen (15) days of the application submittal date. 
a.	
A sign permit shall be approved only if determined fully compliant with applicable regulations.

b.	
If a sign permit is denied, the reasons for denial shall be specified in writing.



2.	
Issued sign permits shall expire if the work authorized by the permit has not commenced within one-hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of issuance or the authorized work is suspended for a period of one-hundred and twenty (120) days at any time after work has begun. If a sign permit expires, work may proceed only upon issuance of a new sign permit.



D.	
No sign permit application shall be accepted without the correct filing fee being paid. Individual applications and permit fees shall be submitted for each such sign or other advertising structure on a zoning lot.  The schedule of fees, which may be revised periodically by City Council, may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.

E.	
All applicable provisions of the Building Code shall be enforced for signs subject to such provisions.

F.	
Once the sign has been erected or installed, the permit holder shall notify the Zoning Administrator. The sign shall then be inspected for compliance with the approved permit by the Zoning Administrator or designated official. As deemed necessary, any sign erected may be periodically inspected to verify continued compliance.

G.	
All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this article or any amendment thereto, are mere licenses revocable at any time by the Zoning Administrator; and all such permits shall contain this provision.

H.	
The Board of Zoning Appeals is authorized to grant variances from the specific terms of this article in specific cases. A variance shall be granted only if all of the following provisions are met.
1.	
It is consistent with purpose and intent of this article.

2.	
It is permissible under Article 15.

3.	
It is not contrary to the public interest.





08.16.	
Implementation and Enforcement
A.	
Authority




The City shall have the authority to implement and enforce these sign regulations as described below.
1.	
The Zoning Administrator or other designated official shall be charged with the responsibility and authority to implement these sign regulations as follows.
a.	
Coordinate with property owners, developers, permit applicants, permit holders, sign designers, and sign installers.

b.	
Review and approve sign permit applications.

c.	
Inspect new and existing signs to ensure compliance with these regulations and issued permits.

d.	
Initiate enforcement actions within the delegated degree of authority.



2.	
The Zoning Administrator or other designated official may inspect any sign whenever there is reasonable cause to believe a violation of these regulations may exist. Upon being presented with proper credentials by the Zoning Administrator or designated official:
a.	
No person may refuse entry or access to the site or property where a sign exists when entry is required for the purpose of conducting an inspection.

b.	
No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such City representatives while in the process of carrying out their official duties.



3.	
The City shall have the authority to order the removal, modification, minor repair, or maintenance of any sign erected or displayed in the City. This shall include signs that the Zoning Administrator or designated official:
a.	
Deems unsafe, insecure, or a menace to the public .

b.	
Finds to be constructed or erected in violation of these regulations or an issued permit, but is not exempt.

c.	
Determines is not being maintained in accordance with these regulations, but is not exempt.




B.	
Enforcement
1.	
If upon inspection the Zoning Administrator or designated official determines the need to order the removal or modification of any sign, the City shall immediately notify the property owner or permit holder in writing.
a.	
Such written notification shall contain:
i.	
The action(s) being ordered.

ii.	
A citation of the specific regulation(s) or code(s) whereby the City has authority to order such action(s).

iii.	
A citation of the specific regulation(s) or code(s) being violated. 

iv.	
A description of the observed conditions or violations that warrant such ordered action(s).

v.	
The deadline of ten (10) days for such conditions or violations to be remedied by the ordered action(s).



b.	
The property owner or permit holder shall notify the Zoning Administrator or designated official upon completing the ordered action(s) by the specified deadline. The Zoning Administrator or designated official shall inspect the subject sign for compliance with the ordered action(s). If the completed action(s) are found to comply with the order, the City shall send the property owner or permit holder a written letter certifying compliance. 

c.	
Should the property owner or permit holder fail to fully complete the ordered action(s) by the specified deadline, the City may either:
i.	
Re-notify the property owner or permit holder according to the same procedures.

ii.	
Initiate the ordered action(s) and assess such costs to the property owner or permit holder. The City shall not issue a letter of certification or a subsequent permit for the subject sign to any property owner or permit holder who refuses to pay the assessed costs.





2.	
If upon inspection the Zoning Administrator or designated official determines the need to order the minor repair or maintenance of a permitted sign, the City shall notify the permit holder in writing of the deficiency and necessary corrective action(s). Should the permit holder fail to prove compliance within thirty (30) days of the date the notification was sent, the City shall cause the owner to be cited for violation of this regulation.




Page Intentionally Left Blank
Article 09	
Compatibility Buffers

09.01.	
Purpose


This article is intended to enhance the compatibility of adjacent land uses, provide an orderly transition between developments of varying intensity, and encourage development consistent with the community’s character. This article establishes minimum buffering requirements and applicable standards. 
09.02.	
Applicability
A.	
The provisions of this article shall apply as follows.
1.	
New land uses and structures approved or established.

2.	
Existing land uses and structures that are altered or modified, and:
a.	
Expand the size of the use or structure.

b.	
Change the type of use or structure.

c.	
Change the intensity or density of the use or structure.





B.	
Specific exemptions from these requirements are:
1.	
Minor repairs and routine maintenance to existing structures or properties. 

2.	
Any alteration, modification, or establishment of a use or structure that is otherwise exempted.



C.	
Visual and aesthetic compatibility between land uses shall be maintained by using an acceptable visual buffer, which shall include screening fences/walls, landscape screen, and earthen berms.

D.	
Visual buffers shall be required based on the scenarios listed below for all structures and uses meeting the above applicability criteria. Each scenario indicates visual buffer requirements for lots meeting specific zoning or primary use conditions that are located adjacent to lots with specific lower intensity uses or zoning.
1.	
Scenario 1 - A visual buffer SHALL NOT BE REQUIRED for lots with:  A) an agricultural primary use; B) a single-family residential primary use; C) C-1 zoning and a legal conforming primary use.

2.	
Scenario 2 - A visual buffer SHALL BE REQUIRED for all lots with: A) a primary use other than single-family residential; B) C-2 zoning; C) C-3 zoning; D) I-1 zoning WHEN LOCATED ADJACENT TO any lot with: A) a single-family residential primary use; B) R-R zoning; C) R-1 zoning; D) R-2 zoning.

3.	
Scenario 3 - A visual buffer SHALL BE REQUIRED for all lots with: A) C-2 zoning; B) C-3 zoning; C) I-1 zoning WHEN LOCATED ADJACENT TO any lot with: A) R-3 zoning.

4.	
Scenario 4 -  A visual buffer SHALL BE REQUIRED for all lots with: A) I-1 zoning WHEN LOCATED ADJACENT TO any lot with: A) C-1 zoning; B) C-2 zoning; C) C-3 zoning.

5.	
Scenario 5 -  When a visual buffer is required, any lot that is five (5) acres in area or larger MAY UTILIZE AN EARTHEN BERM TO SATISFY THE REQUIREMENT, subject to applicable design standards.

6.	
Scenario 6 - For all lots with PDO overlay zoning, VISUAL BUFFER REQUIREMENTS SHALL BE DETERMINED  according to the corresponding base zoning districts and primary uses per Scenarios 1 - 5 (i.e. visual buffers shall apply as if no PDO existed).



E.	
When deemed necessary to enhance land use compatibility, the Planning Commission or City Council may impose a visual buffer requirement as a condition of approval for any zoning action.

F.	
The City Council may defer any visual buffer requirement that is triggered by the zoning district of an adjacent lot when such adjacent lot is vacant at the time of zoning approval. All such deferments shall expire one-hundred and eighty (180) days after a Building Permit is issued on the adjacent vacant lot, within which time the visual buffer shall be constructed. 



09.03.	
General Provisions


The following general provisions shall apply when a visual buffer is required per Section 09.02.D.
A.	
Visual buffers shall only be required along lot lines shared with a lot that triggers such requirement; provided subject lot lines shall be buffered along the full length, not just the shared length.

B.	
Visual buffers shall be required along alley and local street frontages only if the lot with opposite frontage has a triggering use or zoning. They shall not otherwise be required along street frontages. This shall not apply to supplemental landscape buffer requirements per Section 09.05.

C.	
Visual buffers shall not be required along natural barriers that are at least fifty (50) feet wide, such as rivers and wooded areas.

D.	
Visual buffers for off-street parking facilities and outdoor storage areas shall not be required on any side requiring a visual buffer along a perimeter lot line, which would serve the same purpose.

E.	
No visual buffer shall be allowed to cross a driveway or obstruct the sight triangle of a street, alley, or driveway intersection.


09.04.	
Visual Buffer Design Standards
A.	
Screening fences and walls shall meet applicable provisions of the Building Code with regard to design, construction materials and methods, and foundations. In addition, the following shall apply.
1.	
Design and construction shall minimize the visual impact of subject uses and structures from outside of that lot. The vertical faces of each horizontal section between posts/columns shall have a minimum ten percent (10%) open space, with consistent spacing between vertical pickets/slats.

2.	
Construction materials and colors shall complement the architecture of the primary structure on the lot and adjacent structures.
a.	
Fence posts and rails shall be sufficient strength to support the horizontal rails and vertical facing materials. Pickets/slats shall be wood, metal, vinyl/PVC, or composite materials.

b.	
Walls shall be constructed of masonry such as concrete panels, brick, stone, or cinder blocks. Aesthetic finishes such as stucco may be used, as appropriate to the environment.

c.	
Alternate materials may be used provided they are comparably durable and the finished look approximates that of a required material. 



3.	
Along lot lines, shall be between six (6) feet and eight (8) feet in height. Perimeter screening around off-street parking, loading, and outdoor storage areas, when not located on lot line, shall measure between three (3) feet and four (4) feet in height. Height shall be measured from the adjacent ground elevation to the top of the vertical face.

4.	
Reasonable modifications to these standards may be allowed to avoid hazards to animals or people; preserve safe traffic operations; or minimize negative impacts to surrounding properties.



B.	
Landscape screens shall be planted with a variety of trees, bushes, or shrubs, which shall be designed to meet standards within thirty-six (36) months of occupancy. In addition, the following shall apply.
1.	
Shall have a height of at least six (6) feet above grade along the entire length. No six (6) linear foot segment shall contain more than thirty percent (30%) open space or offer a direct view through the screen at any point higher than two (2) feet above grade.

2.	
Shall be provided along subject lot lines within a depth of ten (10) feet. No other uses except approved driveways and signs shall be allowed in a required landscape screening area.

3.	
Plant selection shall consider drought tolerance, species nativity, mature growth, and other such characteristics. Vegetation shall not overhang the public right-of-way such that it obstructs vehicular, pedestrian, or bicycle traffic or restricts access to any property.



C.	
Earthen berms used per Section 09.02.D.5 shall be designed to avoid flooding and other storm water drainage impacts both on- and off-premise. In addition, the following shall apply.
1.	
Shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width at the base and at least four (4) feet in height, as measured perpendicular to grade level at any point along its length.

2.	
Side slopes shall have a gradient no steeper than three to one (3:1) and shall be sodded to prevent erosion. Bank stabilization materials and devices shall be used as necessary.

3.	
The top of berms shall be planted with landscaping meeting the standards of Section 09.04.B, except that the minimum height shall be three (3) feet at mature growth height. 





09.05.	
Supplemental Landscape Buffer Requirements


To encourage compatible aesthetics and character, supplemental landscape provisions shall be provided in addition to other compatibility provisions.
A.	
Perimeter landscaping shall be installed in required yards along street frontages of lots zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3 having a primary use other than single-family residential; and lots zoned C-2, C-3, or I-1 with arterial street frontage. Perimeter landscaping shall be planted in required yards along street frontages as follows.
1.	
This shall not include highway frontages.

2.	
One (1) tree or shrub shall be planted for every forty (40) feet of street frontage. Fractional calculations shall be rounded up. These may be planted in any configuration within fifteen (15) feet of the street line that is not within a sight triangle and at least eight (8) feet from underground utilities and paving. Trees with an expected mature growth height over twenty (20) feet shall not be placed beneath overhead utility lines.

3.	
Tree species shall be selected from the published recommendations of the Kansas Forest Service for south central Kansas. All plants shall be selected in consideration of site conditions and the factors listed in Section 09.04.B.3.  See Appendix A for species lists and additional guidance. 

4.	
Selected trees shall have a maximum expected mature growth height of thirty (30) feet and shall have a minimum caliper diameter of two (2) inches at the time of planting.

5.	
Up to fifty percent (50%) of the planting requirement may consist of shrubs having an expected mature growth height of at least two (2) feet. No more than thirty percent (30%) of the planting requirement shall consist of evergreen tree or shrub species.



B.	
Paved off-street parking areas shall include curbed landscaped islands covering at least ten percent (10%) of the area occupied by required parking stalls, driveways, and drive aisles, subject to the following provisions.
1.	
Be distributed throughout parking areas such that no single island exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the requirement.

2.	
Meet all other provisions applicable to landscape screens, with the exception of Sections 09.04.B.1and 2, which are related to screening height, density, and location.

3.	
Landscaped islands shall not be required for lots with a single-family residential primary use, lots under two (2) acres in area, and lots with C-1 zoning. 




09.06.	
Visual & Landscape Buffer Plans
A.	
A buffer and landscape plan shall be submitted with the Development Site Plan. Such plans shall be designed by an appropriately credentialed professional.
1.	
Screening fences/walls must be designed by a licensed architect or engineer only when required by the Building Code or other applicable regulations.

2.	
All landscaped areas must be designed by a licensed landscape architect or certified landscape designer, including those located on berms.

3.	
Earthen berms shall be designed by a licensed engineer or landscape architect.



B.	
Such plans shall include sufficient detail and information to determine compliance with buffer requirements. At a minimum, this shall include:
1.	
Fences/Walls: Location, type, height, and materials.

2.	
Landscaped Areas: Location, planting specifications and details, mature size, and plant identification (common and botanical names).

3.	
Berms: Location, dimensions, cross-section, and materials (list and quantities).





09.07.	
Buffer & Landscaping Installation & Maintenance
A.	
Installation: All visual buffers and landscaping shall be installed according to the approved Development Site Plan and found in good condition when inspected for occupancy. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for a period of six (6) months from the inspection date if the season or weather conditions are unsuitable for planting. If landscaping is found to be non-compliant or in poor condition at the time of final inspection, the temporary certificate may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector.

B.	
Maintenance: Required visual buffers and landscaping shall be maintained in good condition and in compliance with these regulations and applicable conditions of approval. Any such items determined to be in poor condition, unsafe, or non-compliant by the Zoning Administrator or designated official may be subject to enforcement actions.



09.08.	
Height Compatibility Standards


To enhance height compatibility, the following provisions shall apply to structures exempted from zoning district maximum height restrictions per Section 04.06.M, and any building that exceeds the maximum height its zoning district by virtue of any other allowance provided by these regulations.
A.	
These standards shall not apply to integrated or attached structures per Section 04.06.M.

B.	
All other structures that exceed, or are proposed to exceed applicable maximum height restrictions, shall be subject to the following height compatibility standards. 
1.	
No structure in the I-1 zoning district shall exceed three (3) times the maximum height restriction; no structure in any other zoning district shall exceed two (2) times the maximum height restriction.

2.	
A height compatibility setback adjustment shall be required in order to mitigate the negative aesthetic impacts of substantial height differential between adjacent properties.

3.	
No structure shall be allowed to exceed the applicable zoning district maximum height without also being setback from every lot line the adjusted setback distance for height compatibility. This shall apply regardless of the means by which the height exception is approved or allowed.



C.	
The height compatibility setback shall be calculated as follows:


(A) Proposed structure height
(B) Zoning district maximum height
(C) Height compatibility multiplier = (A) ÷ (B); Round to nearest hundredth, down < 0.05, up = 0.05
Check against exempt restrictions: 3 or less for I-1 zoning; 2 or less for other zoning districts
(D) Zoning district maximum required setback (any yard or use)
(E) Height compatibility setback = (C) X (D); Round to nearest foot, down < 0.5, up = 0.5
Example Height Compatibility Setback Calculation
Scenario: The owner of a property zoned B-1 submits an application for a 50-foot flag pole.
(A) Proposed structure height = 50 feet
(B) Zoning district maximum height = 35 feet (non-residential structures)
(C) 50 ÷ 35 = 1.428; Rounded up, height compatibility multiplier = 1.43
1.43 is less than 2 times the maximum height for B-1 zoning
(D) Zoning district maximum required setback = 35 feet (front yard setback)
(E) 1.43 X 35 = 50.05; Rounded down, height compatibility setback requirement = 50 feet
The flag pole must be built at least 50 feet away from all property lot lines.
Article 10	
Specific Use Standards

10.01.	
Purpose


The purpose of this article is to provide limitations, conditions, adjustments, or design requirements for a limited number of defined uses. Such standards are intended to enhance compatibility between those and other land uses or specify exceptions to minimum/maximum requirements under certain conditions. As provided in this article, specific use standards shall be required either in addition to or in lieu of otherwise applicable requirements. 
10.02.	
Accessory Apartment or Dwelling; Guest Home or Pool House
A.	
Shall be limited to one (1) such structure per lot and allowed only in conjunction with detached single-family residential primary structures.

B.	
Shall be compatible with the immediate neighborhood and constructed with the same or equal siding exterior materials as the principal structure.

C.	
Shall be limited in size to fifty percent (50%) of the principal structure’s gross floor area.

D.	
Shall be subject to applicable lot coverage, setback, and off-street parking requirements.

E.	
Accessory apartments or dwellings:
1.	
May be rented as an independent residential unit and may be served by an independent utility connection, subject to applicable City of Augusta Building Codes.

2.	
Shall be maintained under the same ownership as the principal structure and shall not be subdivided as an individual lot or condominium unit. A deed restriction stating such shall be filed with the Butler County Register of Deeds prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.



F.	
Guest homes and pool houses shall not be utilized on a permanent basis as sleeping or living quarters.



10.03.	
Adult Entertainment


In order to mitigate negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, the following provisions shall apply.
A.	
Shall be located within a freestanding building intended for single-tenant occupancy.

B.	
No merchandise shall be viewable from outside the structure or off-premise.

C.	
Shall not be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any of the following, as measured between the closest points on any property line.
1.	
Religious meeting places.

2.	
Elementary and secondary schools.

3.	
Day care centers and institutional day cares.

4.	
Public parks and libraries.

5.	
Residential land uses and zoning districts (R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3)

6.	
Bars, taverns, night clubs, and liquor stores.

7.	
Other sexually oriented businesses as defined in K.S.A. 12-770.



D.	
Shall not be allowed to play live or recorded sounds on outdoor speakers or project such sounds outside of the primary structure from within.

E.	
Only permanent on-premise signs shall be allowed; signs shall be structurally classified as Fixed; Building as defined in Article 08.

F.	
Shall be buffered along all property lines with a screening fence/wall at least six (6) feet in height, meeting the requirements of Section 09.04, with breaks allowed only for driveways and sight triangles.


10.04.	
Adult Retail Store


In order to mitigate negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, the following provisions shall apply.
A.	
Shall be located within a freestanding building intended for single-tenant occupancy.

B.	
No merchandise shall be viewable from outside the structure or off-premise.

C.	
Shall not be located within five-hundred (500) feet, as measured between the closest points on any property line, of religious meeting places; elementary or secondary schools; day care centers or institutional day cares; public parks or libraries; residential land uses or zoning districts (R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3); bars, taverns, night clubs, or liquor stores; other sexually oriented businesses as defined per K.S.A. 12-770.

D.	
Only permanent on-premise signs shall be allowed; signs shall be structurally classified as Fixed; Building as defined in Article 08.

E.	
Shall be buffered along all property lines with a screening fence/wall at least six (6) feet in height, meeting the requirements of Section 09.04, with breaks allowed only for driveways and sight triangles.


10.05.	
Arena or Stadium
A.	
Shall not be allowed within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any existing or approved residential lot zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3, as measured between the closest points on any property line.

B.	
May be allowed as a secondary use within a school or educational campus developed in conjunction with a PDO zoning district. In such cases, conditional use approval shall not be required.

C.	
Sites shall meet the hard surface paving requirements of Article 07.

D.	
When illuminated with flood lights, such shall be aimed down and inward toward the sports field(s) and shall be equipped with shut off controls that turn lights off during non-operational times.



10.06.	
Automotive Maintenance Shop; Automotive Repair Shop; Vehicle Maintenance or Repair Garage
A.	
Outdoor storage shall not be allowed. This includes inoperable vehicles and vehicle fluid containers that are not stored within a garbage dumpster or liquid waste enclosure.

B.	
Maintenance and repair activities shall only be conducted indoors, except within I-1 zoning districts.

C.	
Service bays shall not face local or collector street frontages.



10.07.	
Automotive or Equipment Sales, Rental or Leasing (all listed uses); Manufactured Home Dealers
A.	
All such areas having outdoor storage or display related to one of these uses shall be located on a lot of at least one (1) acre in area having arterial street frontage.

B.	
Primary ingress/egress shall be provided to the adjacent arterial street. No more than two (2) secondary driveways may access a local or collector street.

C.	
All off-street parking, and outdoor vehicle/equipment storage or display areas shall be subject to hard surface pavement requirements of Article 07, except that sales/storage of the following shall be exempt, subject to other applicable paving requirements: manufactured homes; construction and heavy equipment; tractor and farm implements; truck, trailer and recreational vehicles.



10.08.	
Bar or Tavern; Brewpub
A.	
Shall not be located within two-hundred and fifty (250) feet, as measured between the closest points on any property line, of religious meeting places; elementary or secondary schools; day care centers or institutional day cares; residential land uses or zoning districts (R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3).

B.	
Outdoor seating areas shall be allowed as an accessory use when located in C-2 or C-3 zoning, and as a conditional use when located in C-1 zoning, subject to the following:
1.	
Shall be required as a separate conditional use in C-1 zoning, in cases where the original conditional use approval did not include outdoor seating. 

2.	
Shall have a fence or barrier, which measures at least four (4) feet in height around the entire perimeter, the purpose of which is to delineate the area. Such barriers shall not be subject to screening design provisions of these regulations, but shall be required to meet all applicable provisions of any other federal, state, and local regulations.

3.	
Lighting in such areas shall be “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures equipped with shut off controls to turn off lights during non-operational hours.





10.09.	
Boarding Kennel
A.	
Minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres for any boarding kennel having outdoor runs.

B.	
Outdoor runs, play yards, and open-air enclosures shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any lot line; and shall be located a minimum of two-hundred (200) feet from any off-premise residential dwelling unit.

C.	
Areas developed with a boarding kennel structure, outdoor run, play yard, or open-air enclosure that are located within six-hundred (600) feet of a lot line, as measured from any exterior point of any such facility, shall be:
1.	
Buffered with a screening fence or landscaped screen along a perimeter spaced no further than thirty (30) feet from any such facility, that is consistent with applicable standards of Article 09.

2.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical; and specifically designated on Site Plans. 





10.10.	
Broadcast Tower
A.	
Shall not be allowed within the public right-of-way.

B.	
Shall not be guyed, except as required by applicable regulatory agencies by necessity as determined by a licensed structural engineer.

C.	
Shall be subject with all applicable provisions of Article 09 related to visual buffers and height compatibility, provided that the visual buffer requirements shall apply only to developed areas occupied by tower structures, off-street parking, and outdoor storage. Such areas shall be:
1.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical.

2.	
Platted as a separate lot or lots, or specifically designated on Site Plans.

3.	
Enclosed within a screening fence/wall around the perimeter of such facilities, and meeting the design standards for such found in Article 09. Guy wire anchor points located outside of the enclosed perimeter shall be enclosed by a fence at least six (6) feet in height.



D.	
Shall have no nighttime, strobe, or obstruction lighting, except for aircraft warning lights or similar emergency warning lights required by applicable governmental agencies.

E.	
Outdoor lighting installations shall be allowed only within perimeter enclosures; shall be the minimum lighting necessary for reasonable site security. In addition:
1.	
Lighting fixtures shall be installed at a height no greater than twelve (12) feet.

2.	
Only “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures may be installed.

3.	
Fixtures shall be equipped with motion detector shut off controls.





10.11.	
Car Wash


The following provisions shall apply to all car washes as a primary use or as a secondary use.
A.	
Sites shall meet the hard surface paving requirements of Article 07.

B.	
In addition to off-street parking and loading requirements, all wash bays shall have adjacent paved vehicle queuing lanes, at least the width of the bay openings, as follows:
1.	
Automated Wash Bays: Eighty (80) feet at bay entrances, at least forty (40) feet of which must be provided in straight alignment extending perpendicular from the bay entrance; twenty (20) feet at exits.

2.	
Self-Service Wash Bays: Twenty (20) feet extending perpendicular from entrances and exits. 



C.	
Exterior lighting shall be “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures. As a primary use, sites and facilities that are unattended shall be equipped with motion detector shut off controls, except when entrances are gated to restrict access to facilities that close by 11:00 p.m.

D.	
When adjacent to residential land uses or zoning districts ( R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3), the following shall also apply: 
1.	
Shall provide a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet along lot lines subject to a compatibility buffer.

2.	
Vacuum cleaning apparatus shall not be located within any required setback area. 

3.	
Visual buffers shall meet the requirements of Section 09.04, except that maximum vertical open space for any fence/wall section shall be five percent (5%).




10.12.	
Concrete or Asphalt Pavement Mixing Plant


The following provisions shall apply and shall be incorporated into the conditional use approval process as indicated.
A.	
Exemptions to these standards shall only be allowed when required by state or federal law.

B.	
Shall not be allowed within two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) feet of any existing or approved residential lot zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3, as measured between the closest points on any property line.

C.	
All approvals and permits needed to operate an asphalt or concrete mixing plant in the State of Kansas must be received prior to zoning approval.

D.	
On-premise operations shall be defined in an operational plan, which is attached to and  submitted with the Zoning Site Plan. The operational plan shall include:
1.	
Copies of all approvals and permits referenced in Section 10.30.C.

2.	
Operating times, conditions and procedures. Operations shall be limited to weekdays between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., with no operations allowed to occur on federal holidays.

3.	
Emergency procedures for accidents, injuries, leaks, spills, groundwater contamination, natural disasters, fires, explosions, and similar occurrences requiring emergency or corrective actions.



E.	
Applicable provisions of Article 09 shall apply only to areas utilized for off-street parking; and outdoor storage. Such areas shall be:
1.	
Fully enclosed within a perimeter visual buffer screening fence or wall, with gated openings.

2.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical.



F.	
Off-street parking and outdoor storage areas shall not be used to store any tools, equipment, materials, or vehicles utilized off-premise, except for those driven daily by employees.

G.	
Shall not store contaminated soils on-premise.

H.	
Shall be secured around the entire property perimeter with a security fence at least eight (8) feet in height. Such fences shall utilize chain link fencing to a height of at least six (6) feet and at least three (3) equally-spaced strands of barbed wire making up the remaining two (2) feet of required height. 

I.	
The following shall be required for all such uses conducted on a temporary basis.
1.	
The period of time the facility will be used for such operations shall be set at the time of conditional use approval. Subject to applicable extensions as provided in these operations, all on-premise operations shall cease after that period of time and all associated equipment and materials shall be removed within thirty (30) days.

2.	
The conditional use shall include a reasonable and feasible plan of action for transitioning the site to another viable land use allowed by these regulations. The required plat shall not be approved without being capable of accommodating such transition in land use.

3.	
Upon expiration of the conditional use, the Planning Commission shall initiate an application(s) for vacating the conditional use and rezoning to accommodate the use transition plan.  




10.13.	
Detached Residential Carport or Garage
A.	
Shall be limited to one (1) such structure per lot.

B.	
Shall have exterior siding of a color and visual appearance similar to the principal structure.

C.	
Except as approved by conditional use, maximum gross floor area shall be as follows.
1.	
Lots ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in area or less. Garages: Seven-hundred twenty (720) square feet; Carports: Five-hundred (500) square feet.

2.	
Lots over ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in area, but not more than three (3) acres. Garages: Nine-hundred sixty (960) square feet; Carports: Six-hundred (600) square feet.

3.	
Lots over three (3) acres in area, but not more than five (5) acres. Garages: One-thousand two-hundred fifty (1,250) square feet; Carports: Seven-hundred fifty (750) square feet.

4.	
Lots over five (5) acres in area. Garages and carports are limited to six-thousand (6,000) square feet.



D.	
Detached carports shall be allowed only by conditional use in R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning districts.



10.14.	
Detached Structure for Home Occupation
A.	
Shall be limited to one (1) such structure per lot.

B.	
Shall be utilized only for activities associated with an allowable home occupation.

C.	
Shall have exterior siding materials comparable in quality and appearance to that of the principal structure.

D.	
Gross floor area shall be limited in size to twenty-five percent (25%) of that of the principal structure.

E.	
Shall not be allowed if the structure would cause the lot to exceed maximum coverage requirements.



10.15.	
Distributed Antenna System; Small Cell System
A.	
Such facilities located in the public right-of-way shall only be permitted by conditional use and shall be required to execute a franchise agreement with the City of Augusta; all other locations shall be allowed by-right, subject to applicable permits and other required approvals.

B.	
Conditional use approval for facilities located in the public right-of-way shall:
1.	
Allow the approval of up to twenty-five (25) individual installation locations with a single conditional use application, provided each location shall be reviewed on its individual merits.

2.	
Upon review, all locations deemed appropriate for installation shall be approved, provided in no case shall a conditional use be approved for any location that:
a.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any other street, street improvement, or traffic control device, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

b.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any other public or private utility infrastructure, existing or planned, located in, under, or above the public right-of-way.

c.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of storm water drainage infrastructure, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

d.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any sidewalk, bicycle path, bus stop or other similar facility, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

e.	
Is located within the street’s required clear zone, the sight triangle of any street or driveway intersection, or is otherwise inconsistent with any applicable design criteria or engineering standards.

f.	
Is deemed by the Planning Commission or City Council to pose a reasonable threat to the public interest necessitated by public health, safety, or welfare. 







10.16.	
Drive-Thru Banking Service or ATM; Drive-Thru Window for Services, Retail Sales or Restaurants
A.	
Shall be located on a lot of at least one-half (½) acre in area having arterial street frontage.

B.	
Primary ingress/egress shall be provided to the adjacent arterial street. No more than one (1) secondary driveway may access a local or collector street.

C.	
Shall meet the hard surface paving requirements of Article 07.

D.	
In addition to off-street parking and loading requirements, all drive-thru windows shall have adjacent paved vehicle queuing lanes, at least ten (10) feet in width as follows:
1.	
Banking Service Windows: Eighty (80) feet, at least forty (40) feet of which shall be provided in straight parallel alignment with the service window.

2.	
Freestanding ATMs: Forty (40) feet provided in straight parallel alignment with the ATM face.

3.	
Service & Retail Windows: Forty (40) feet provided in straight parallel alignment with the window opening.

4.	
Restaurant Windows: Eighty (80) feet, at least forty (40) feet of which shall be provided in straight parallel alignment with the window opening.



E.	
Vehicle queuing lanes shall be in addition to drive aisle for off-street parking.

F.	
Where applicable, a pedestrian crosswalk shall be provided, which meets ADA and other applicable design standards. 



10.17.	
Duplex, Single-Family Attached


The following provisions shall apply when permitted by conditional use within single-family subdivisions zoned R-1.
A.	
Shall not be interspersed amongst individual lots occupied by single-family detached dwellings.

B.	
Shall be platted in groups containing at least four (4) contiguous lots. Each group must be in a location meeting one or more of the following conditions:
1.	
Around a cul-de-sac.

2.	
Duplexes, R-2 zoning, or R-3 zoning located on the opposite street frontage.

3.	
Multi-family or non-residential uses or zoning on the opposite street frontage.



C.	
Architectural style and exterior siding materials shall be consistent with single-family detached dwellings in same subdivision or immediate vicinity.


10.18.	
Earth Sheltered Home
A.	
Such shall be fully complete and fully functional residential structures. In no case shall a partially completed structure, foundation or substructure intended to support a completed structure, be considered an earth sheltered home.

B.	
Shall include any single-family structure having fifty percent (50%) or more of the exterior surface area of the building covered with earth, excluding garages and other accessory or attached structures.   Bulk regulations shall be measured from the exterior structure, not the earth covering.

C.	
Architectural style and exterior siding materials of uncovered structure shall be consistent with other single-family detached dwellings in same subdivision or immediate vicinity.



10.19.	
Garbage Dumpster or Liquid Waste Container


For all land uses requiring garbage dumpster or liquid waste (used oil/grease, solvents, etc.) container service, design of such facilities shall be subject to the following standards.
A.	
Except for lots zoned A-1 or R-R, shall be within a paved and enclosed “corral” area, subject to the following minimum standards. 
1.	
Shall be paved in concrete, subject to applicable minimum City standards.

2.	
Shall be screened around the entire perimeter with a screening fence/wall meeting the minimum requirements of Section 09.04.A, in addition to all other required conditions of Article 09. Such fences/walls shall be no less than six (6) feet in height with a maximum of five percent (5%) vertical surface open space allowed along any given section between support posts/columns.

3.	
Gated dumpster/container access shall be provided on one wall. A pedestrian access gate no wider than thirty-six (36) inches may be located on a separate wall. Gates shall meet the same dimensional and screening standards, except that a maximum of six (6) inches may remain open along the bottom.

4.	
Shall be sized to fit all required dumpsters/containers, and oriented to provide direct straight-line access from a street or alley without requiring service trucks to occupy the public right-of-way. 

5.	
Shall not occupy any required off-street parking or loading areas, or vehicle queuing lanes.  




10.20.	
Golf Course or Country Club
A.	
Applicable provisions of Article 09 shall apply only to developed areas occupied by pro shops, club houses, retail/commercial structures, off-street parking or loading, outdoor storage, swimming pools, golf driving ranges, and non-golf sport courts.
1.	
Such areas shall be:
a.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical.

b.	
Platted as a separate lot or lots, or specifically designated on Site Plans. 





B.	
Outdoor lighting installations shall not be located outside of the developed areas, except that minimal lighting may be installed along cart paths and walkways, provided:
1.	
Fixtures are installed at a height no greater than twelve (12) feet.

2.	
Only “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures may be installed.

3.	
Fixtures shall be equipped with motion detector shut off controls.



C.	
All on-premise structures shall be of consistent architectural style and exterior siding materials.



10.21.	
Guard or Security Booth
A.	
Shall not exceed two-hundred and fifty (250) square feet gross floor area.

B.	
Shall not be utilized as sleeping or living quarters.



10.22.	
Home & Garden Center
A.	
Storage of merchandise available for sale shall be allowed outside of the principal structure as a Secondary Use subject to the following standards.
1.	
Shall be immediately adjacent, have direct access, and be attached to the principal structure.

2.	
Shall be enclosed by a screening fence or wall. The covering material may be semi-transparent to allow natural lighting, but must be sufficiently opaque to fully screen the area from view.

3.	
Shall have no more than two (2) openings equipped with gates of similar screening material. Individual openings shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width. 

4.	
Shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the principal structure’s gross floor area and shall comply with all yard requirements as if it were part of the principal structure.

5.	
Shall be counted as part of the principal structure for required off-street parking calculations.



B.	
Additional outdoor display of merchandise for sale is allowed by-right on a temporary basis for seasonal merchandise, such as holiday tree sales. Such areas are subject to the following provisions:
1.	
Shall be limited to four (4) annual display periods, each lasting no longer than thirty (30) days.

2.	
Shall be identified on approved Site Plans.

3.	
Shall not utilize any required amount of off-street parking or loading area.

4.	
Shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the principal structure’s gross floor area.

5.	
No additional outdoor merchandise displays shall be approved by any other means.





10.23.	
Junk, Scrap or Salvage Yard; Vehicle or Equipment Storage Yard
A.	
Shall not be allowed within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any existing or approved residential lot zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3, as measured between the closest points on any property line.

B.	
Shall be located on lots of at least five (5) acres in area, except that vehicle and equipment storage yards shall have a minimum lot size of one (1) acre.

C.	
The site shall be buffered along all perimeter lot lines with screening fence/wall meeting the minimum requirements of Section 09.04.A, in addition to all other required conditions of Article 09. Such fences/walls shall be no less than eight (8) feet in height with a maximum of five percent (5%) vertical open space allowed along any given section between support posts/columns.

D.	
The Planning Commission or City Council may enact reasonable operating hour restrictions as part of the conditional use approval.   



10.24.	
Multi-Tenant Lifestyle Center; Shopping Mall; Strip Center


The following shall only be allowed when developed in conjunction with an approved PDO zoning district.
A.	
Multi-tenant lifestyle centers and multi-tenant shopping malls.

B.	
Multi-tenant strip centers on lots exceeding two (2) acres in area.


10.25.	
Neighborhood Clubhouse or Swimming Pool
A.	
Shall be located on platted lots located within the residential subdivision it serves.

B.	
Applicable provisions of Article 09 shall apply. 

C.	
Outdoor lighting installations shall not be located outside of the developed areas, except that minimal lighting may be installed along cart paths and walkways, provided:
1.	
Fixtures are installed at a height no greater than twelve (12) feet.

2.	
Only “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures may be installed.

3.	
Fixtures shall be equipped with motion detector shut off controls.



D.	
All on-premise structures shall be of compatible architectural style and exterior siding materials as residential structures in the immediate vicinity.



10.26.	
Non-Commercial Greenhouse or Hoop House
A.	
Shall only be allowed to the rear or side of the primary structure, relative to the required front yard.

B.	
Building Permits shall be required only as provided in the Building Code.

C.	
Shall not be used for the storage of hazardous materials.



10.27.	
On-site Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS)
A.	
Freestanding WECS
1.	
Only non-commercial WECS with monopole support structures shall be allowed.

2.	
Shall not be allowed within any required yard setback.

3.	
The lowest point of turbine blades shall be no less than twenty (20) feet above the ground.

4.	
All applicable compatibility buffer provisions of Article 09 shall apply. 
a.	
Visual buffer requirements shall apply only to developed areas occupied by WECS structures, outdoor storage, and related off-street parking. Such areas shall be:
i.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical and either platted as a separate lot or lots, or specifically designated on Site Plans.

ii.	
Enclosed within a screening fence/wall installed only around the perimeter of such facilities, and meeting applicable design standards.



b.	
For the purpose of calculating height compatibility requirements, height shall be measured from the adjacent finished ground elevation to the highest point of turbine blades at the top of rotation. 



5.	
Outdoor lighting installations shall be allowed only within perimeter enclosures; shall be the minimum lighting necessary for reasonable site security. In addition:
a.	
Lighting fixtures shall be installed at a height no greater than twelve (12) feet.

b.	
Only “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures may be installed.

c.	
Fixtures shall be equipped with motion detector shut off controls.



6.	
All support structures shall be unclimbable by design or protected with devices, such a fences least six (6) feet with locking gates, or anti-climbing devices at least twelve (12) vertical feet from base of pole.

7.	
Noise level shall not exceed fifty-five (55) decibels as measured at the nearest lot line.

8.	
Signs shall be prohibited except for manufacturer’s identification on the wind turbine cowling and appropriate warning signs and placards. This shall include a “High Voltage” warning sign on the support structure base, with sign lettering at least six (6) inches tall having a minimum stroke width of three-quarters (3/4) of an inch.



B.	
Roof-mounted WECS
1.	
Shall only be mounted on the structure that is provided power from the unit.

2.	
Shall meet the maximum height requirements of the applicable zoning district, as measured from the nearest adjacent finished ground elevation to the highest point of turbine blades at the top of rotation.

3.	
Shall not have lighting or emit noise that is detectable beyond the nearest lot line.



C.	
Standards Applicable to All WECS
1.	
All WECS shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit blade rotation to a speed  below the designed limits.

2.	
All electrical compartments, storage facilities, wire conduit, electrical connections, structural components, and mounting components shall conform to applicable national and City of Augusta building and electrical codes. 

3.	
No experimental or prototype WECS shall be allowed.  

4.	
All WECS shall be non-reflective and non-obtrusive in color.  

5.	
Shall not generate electromagnetic interference or cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the nearest lot line.

6.	
Any WECS that has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be physically removed within one-hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of discontinued operations.



D.	
Conditional use application submittals shall include:
1.	
Zoning Site Plan showing property lines, natural features, utility lines, easements, setback lines, layout and sizes of all structures on site, and proposed location of the WECS.

2.	
Specifications for the proposed support structures, rotors, and turbines. 

3.	
As applicable, any pertinent permitting information or correspondence from state and federal agencies.





10.28.	
Outdoor Display of Retail Merchandise for Sale
A.	
Such displays shall be allowed to occupy public sidewalks only in conjunction with retail primary uses zoned C-1, limited to one (1) time per month for two (2) consecutive days up to twelve (12) hours per day. Sidewalk displays shall be limited to one-hundred and fifty (150) square feet located directly adjacent to the subject lot. At least three (3) feet of clear sidewalk width shall be maintained and displays shall comply with applicable ADA standards.

B.	
Except for allowable sidewalk displays, such displays shall be restricted to areas depicted on the Zoning Site Plan of an approved rezoning, conditional use, Zoning Compliance Certificate, or temporary use (for one-time displays), whichever is applicable.

C.	
Such displays shall be allowed only as provided for the following primary uses and conditions. 
1.	
Grocery Stores & Supermarkets; Supercenters & Warehouse Clubs: Shall be allowed seasonal displays up to four (4) times per year. Each display period shall be limited to thirty (30) consecutive days of retail sales, plus three (3) days immediately before and after the sales period for setup and tear down.

2.	
Civic, Religious & Organizational Meeting Places: Shall be allowed seasonal fundraising sales displays up to two (2) times per year. Each display period shall be limited to thirty (30) consecutive days of fundraising sales, plus three (3) days immediately before and after the sales period for setup and tear down.

3.	
Hardware & Tool Stores; Farm & Home Stores: Shall be allowed permanent displays not exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal structure’s gross floor area. Displays shall be directly adjacent to the principal structure and may not occupy required parking stalls or loading areas.

4.	
Retail uses not specifically indicated: Shall be allowed permanent displays not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the principal structure’s gross floor area. Displays shall be directly adjacent to the principal structure and may not occupy required parking stalls or loading areas.

5.	
Legally recognized non-profit organizations: Individual off-premise seasonal fundraising displays may be approved on a one-time basis by temporary use approval, and shall not otherwise be allowed. Such displays may be located only on vacant lots zoned C-1, C-2, or C-3. Written proof of permission signed by the lot’s owner shall be provided with the temporary use application. Displays shall be limited to thirty (30) consecutive days of fundraising sales, plus three (3) days immediately before and after the sales period for setup and tear down. 





10.29.	
Outdoor Festival, Carnival or Gathering
A.	
Shall be allowed only as a temporary use, subject to approval of a Site Plan that clearly identifies:
1.	
Approximate boundary locations and dimensions of the area being used.

2.	
Proximity to buildings, parking lots, right-of-ways, ingress/egress, and on-site circulation patterns.

3.	
Locations and descriptions of all signs, lighting, electrical and utility connections, and temporary structures.



B.	
Such a temporary use shall not:
1.	
Occupy required off-street parking stalls for a primary use that is operating concurrent to the temporary event.

2.	
Be permitted any permanent signs, but shall be allowed temporary signs as provided for the applicable zoning district, subject to issuance of a sign permit.

3.	
Install lighting in addition to that approved for the primary uses.



C.	
Permits for carnivals, circuses, musical festivals, annual celebrations or similar events may be approved with conditions by the City. Such uses need not comply with the bulk or lot size requirements; provided, that structures or equipment may not obstruct any site triangle.

D.	
The Planning Commission or City Council may require temporary fencing around gathering areas or any specific activity areas.

E.	
All amusement rides, ride devices, circuses, carnivals, or similar shall not be approved without first receiving all applicable licenses and permits as required by local, state, and federal agencies.



10.30.	
Outdoor Kennel Run or Play Yard
A.	
Outdoor runs or play yards as a secondary use shall not be allowed in conjunction with any primary use located on a lot less than two (2) acres in area.

B.	
Shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any lot line; and shall be located a minimum of two-hundred (200) feet from any off-premise residential dwelling unit.

C.	
Lots shall be buffered with a screening fence or landscaped screen consistent with the standards of Section 09.04 or Section 09.05 respectively.

D.	
Such facilities shall be located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical; and specifically designated on Site Plans. 



10.31.	
Outdoor Market
A.	
Shall not be conducted more frequently than once per week, for a period lasting longer than two (2) consecutive days, for a maximum twelve (12) consecutive hours in a day.

B.	
Shall not conduct activities or install facilities considered to be an amusement ride, ride device, circus, carnival, or similar without receiving the appropriate licenses and permits as required by City Code and other applicable state and federal agencies.

C.	
Shall only be allowed with an approved Site Plan that clearly identifies the following:
1.	
Approximate boundary locations and dimensions of the area being used.

2.	
Proximity to buildings, parking lots, right-of-ways, ingress/egress, and on-site circulation patterns.

3.	
Locations and descriptions of all signs, lighting, electrical and utility connections, and temporary structures or tents.



D.	
Outdoor markets that are secondary uses shall not:
1.	
Occupy any off-street parking stalls that are required for the primary use during peak parking periods.

2.	
Be permitted any permanent signs, but shall be allowed temporary signs as provided for the applicable zoning district, subject to issuance of a sign permit.

3.	
Install lighting in addition to that approved for the primary use.





10.32.	
Outdoor Storage of Retail Merchandise Stock
A.	
Shall only be allowed in conjunction with primary uses defined as Supercenters & Warehouse Clubs in Article 05; and only as an on-premise, temporary, seasonal secondary use.

B.	
Approvals shall be limited to one (1) time per year for a maximum of sixty (60) consecutive days.

C.	
In no case shall such uses be allowed to occupy an area exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal structure’s gross floor area; or occupy any required off-street parking stalls or loading areas.

D.	
Shall not be located so as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian circulation.



10.33.	
Petroleum or Natural Gas Extraction


The following provisions shall apply and shall be incorporated into the conditional use approval process as indicated.
A.	
Exemptions to these standards shall only be allowed when required by state or federal law.

B.	
Shall not be allowed within two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) feet of any existing or approved residential lot zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3, as measured between the closest points on any property line.

C.	
No outdoor lighting shall be allowed.

D.	
On-premise storage or disposal of well stimulation byproducts is prohibited. No fluids, wastewater, or wastewater solids may be stored or disposed of within the City of Augusta.

E.	
All approvals and permits needed to conduct oil and natural gas drilling operations in the State of Kansas must be received prior to zoning approval.

F.	
On-premise extraction operations shall be defined in an operational plan, which is attached to and  submitted with the Zoning Site Plan. The operational plan shall include:
1.	
Copies of all approvals and permits referenced in Section 10.20.E.

2.	
Operating times and conditions.

3.	
Operating procedures.

4.	
Emergency procedures for accidents, injuries, leaks, spills, natural disasters, fires, explosions, and similar occurrences requiring emergency actions. 



G.	
Applicable provisions of Article 09 shall apply only to developed areas occupied by drilling/extraction equipment; off-street parking; and outdoor storage. Such areas shall be:
1.	
Fully enclosed within a perimeter visual buffer screening fence or wall, with gated openings.

2.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical.

3.	
Platted as a separate lot or lots, or specifically designated on Site Plans. 




10.34.	
Quarry or Mine; Sand, Rock or Mineral Extraction Pit


The following provisions shall apply and shall be incorporated into the conditional use approval process as indicated.
A.	
Exemptions to these standards shall only be allowed when required by state or federal law.

B.	
Shall not be allowed within two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) feet of any existing or approved residential lot zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3, as measured between the closest points on any property line.

C.	
All approvals and permits needed to conduct quarrying, mining, and applicable extraction operations in the State of Kansas must be received prior to zoning approval.

D.	
On-premise operations shall be defined in an operational plan, which is attached to and  submitted with the Zoning Site Plan. The operational plan shall include:
1.	
Copies of all approvals and permits referenced in Section 10.21.C.

2.	
Operating times and conditions. Operations shall be limited to weekdays between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., with no operations allowed to occur on federal holidays.

3.	
Operating procedures.

4.	
Emergency procedures for accidents, injuries, leaks, spills, natural disasters, fires, explosions, and similar occurrences requiring emergency actions.



E.	
Applicable provisions of Article 09 shall apply only to areas utilized for off-street parking; and outdoor storage. Such areas shall be:
1.	
Fully enclosed within a perimeter visual buffer screening fence or wall, with gated openings.

2.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical.



F.	
Off-street parking and outdoor storage areas shall not be used to store any tools, equipment, materials, or vehicles utilized off-premise, except for those driven daily by employees.

G.	
Shall be secured around the entire property perimeter with a security fence at least eight (8) feet in height. Such fences shall utilize chain link fencing to a height of at least six (6) feet and at least three (3) equally-spaced strands of barbed wire making up the remaining two (2) feet of required height. 

H.	
Development Site Plans shall depict the storm water drainage facilities necessary to meet all applicable regulations.

I.	
Public access to the site for recreational activities, such as boating, fishing, skiing, etc., shall not be allowed.

J.	
The period of time the facility will be used for such operations shall be set at the time of conditional use approval. Subject to applicable extensions as provided in these operations, the conditional use shall expire after the specified period or upon the abandonment of all on-premise operations, following which time all associated equipment and materials shall be removed within thirty (30) days.

K.	
The conditional use application shall include a reasonable and feasible plan of action for transitioning the site to another viable land use upon the abandonment of on-premise operations.

L.	
Upon expiration of the conditional use, the Planning Commission shall initiate an application(s) for vacating the conditional use and rezoning to accommodate the use transition plan.


10.35.	
Recreation, Sport & Amusement Center
A.	
Shall be located adjacent to and have direct access to an arterial street or highway.

B.	
Shall not be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of property zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3.

C.	
The Planning Commission or City Council may place reasonable limits on operating hours as a condition of approval.

D.	
Applicable compatibility buffer provisions of Article 09 shall apply only to developed areas occupied by retail/commercial structures; outdoor recreation, sport or amusement facilities and equipment; off-street parking or loading; and outdoor storage. Such areas shall be:
1.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical.

2.	
Platted as a separate lot or lots, or specifically designated on Site Plans. 



E.	
Outdoor lighting installations shall not be located outside of the developed areas described in Section 10.06.D. Lighting in such areas shall be “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures. Provided that expansive open areas, such as golf driving ranges, may be illuminated with flood lights:
1.	
Aimed down and inward toward the area.

2.	
Equipped with shut off controls that turn lights off during non-operational hours.  





10.36.	
Sawmill
A.	
Shall not be allowed within two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) feet of any existing or approved residential lot zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3, as measured between the closest points on any property line.

B.	
Shall be located on a lot of at least five (5) acres in area.

C.	
The site shall be buffered along all perimeter lot lines with an earthen berm meeting the minimum requirements of Section 09.04.C, in addition to all other required conditions of Article 09.

D.	
The Planning Commission or City Council may enact reasonable operating hour restrictions as part of the conditional use approval. 



10.37.	
School or Educational Campus; Technical School or Job Training Center
A.	
When more than one (1) structure is dedicated to the primary use, shall be allowed only in conjunction with a PDO zoning district.

B.	
Shall not require conditional use approval when developed in conjunction with PDO zoning. 



10.38.	
Self-Storage, Commercial
A.	
Shall be located on lots of at least one (1) acre in area.

B.	
The site shall be buffered along all perimeter lot lines with screening fence/wall meeting the minimum requirements of Section 09.04.A, in addition to all other required conditions of Article 09. In addition, when adjacent to any lot zoned R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3, such fences/walls shall have a maximum of five percent (5%) vertical open space allowed along any given section between support posts/columns.

C.	
The following activities shall be prohibited on-premise: automotive repair; music practice; human habitation; keeping of live animals; storage of hazardous materials; commercial or hobby metal fabrication or woodworking; business activities not conducted in association with on-premise operations of the self-storage use.

D.	
Exterior lighting shall be “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures equipped with motion detector shut off controls. Lighting fixtures shall not be installed at a height greater than sixteen (16) feet and shall not be located within thirty (30) feet of any property line.

E.	
Prefabricated shipping containers shall not be used as self-storage units.

F.	
Sites shall meet the hard surface paving requirements of Article 07. In addition, drive aisles between individual storage structures shall be a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet.



10.39.	
Shooting Range, Indoor
A.	
Shall be sited, designed, and operated according to applicable provisions of Kansas state law (K.S.A. 58-3221 to 3225) and published industry best practices including, but not limited to noise attenuation.

B.	
Exterior lights shall be shielded to reflect or direct light away from adjacent properties.

C.	
All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved with concrete or asphalt.



10.40.	
Shooting Range, Outdoor
A.	
Shall be sited, designed, and operated according to applicable provisions of Kansas state law (K.S.A. 58-3221 to 3225) and published industry best practices including, but not limited to noise attenuation.

B.	
Shall not be located within two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) feet of property zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3.

C.	
The City Council may place reasonable limits on operating hours as a condition of approval.

D.	
Flood light installations in outdoor shooting range areas shall be aimed down and inward toward the area and equipped with shut off controls that turn lights off during non-operational hours.

E.	
Parking areas shall be exempt from hard surface paving requirements per Section 07.06.D.2.



10.41.	
Storage Shed or Structure
A.	
Shall meet applicable provisions of the Building Code.

B.	
Shall not be utilized on a permanent or temporary basis as sleeping or living quarters.

C.	
Shall have exterior siding of a color and visual appearance similar to the principal structure.

D.	
Except as approved by conditional use, maximum gross floor area shall be as follows.
1.	
Lots ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in area or less: Four-hundred (400) square feet total between no more than two (2) structures.

2.	
Lots over ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in area but not more than three (3) acres: Seven-hundred twenty (720) square feet total between no more than three (3) structures.

3.	
Lots over three (3) acres in area but not more than five (5) acres: One-thousand five-hundred (1,500) square feet total between no more than three (3) structures.

4.	
Lots over five (5) acres in area: Six-thousand (6,000) square feet total with no limit on number of structures.   



E.	
Shipping containers, semi-trailers, rail cars, non-operational trucks, or any similar portable units/vehicles, shall not be utilized as storage sheds on lots with a residential primary use, except as approved on a temporary basis while moving, remodeling, or similar event when items cannot occupy the principal structure.



10.42.	
Tattoo or Body Piercing Studio
A.	
No body art activities (tattooing, body piercings, etc.) shall be viewable from waiting/reception areas or outside the primary structure.

B.	
Shall not be located within two-hundred and fifty (250) feet, as measured between the closest points on any property line, of religious meeting places; elementary or secondary schools; day care centers or institutional day cares; public parks or libraries; bars, taverns, or night clubs.

C.	
These standards shall not apply to establishments that offer only facial tattooing or piercing.



10.43.	
Truck Stop
A.	
Shall be allowed only in conjunction with an approved PDO zoning district.

B.	
Shall be located on a lot of at least five (5) acres in area, which has a minimum of three-hundred (300) feet provided in both depth and width.

C.	
Shall not be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet, as measured between the closest points on any property line, of a lot zoned  R-R, R-1, R-2, or R-3.

D.	
Exterior lighting shall be “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures.

E.	
Sites shall meet the hard surface paving requirements of Article 07, with the exception the required supplemental truck parking area, which may be surfaced in accordance with Section 07.06.D.2.d.

F.	
Storage tanks shall be underground and meet applicable state and federal regulations. In addition:
1.	
One (1) dedicated loading bay shall be provided on-premise adjacent to filling valve equipment in each storage tank area, subject to Article 07 design standards.

2.	
Fuel loading areas shall have pull-through truck access requiring no back-up maneuvers, and shall be arranged such that delivery vehicles do not extend into drive aisles or rights-of-way.  



G.	
All on-premise areas intended only for passenger vehicle traffic shall meet applicable off-street parking  design standards of Article 07 and other applicable provisions of this article. 

H.	
Minimum off-street parking design standards of Article 07 shall be adjusted within all areas intended for heavy truck traffic as follows:
1.	
Truck fuel pump islands shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet along all street frontages in zoning districts with lesser yard requirements. In addition, the following standards shall apply:
a.	
Minimum spacing between truck fuel pump islands, measured between the closest points at finished grade, shall be:
i.	
Thirty-two (32) feet between uncovered pump islands.

ii.	
Thirty-four (34) feet between pump islands under a shared canopy.

iii.	
Thirty-six (36) feet between pump islands under separate canopies.



b.	
Bollard protection shall be provided at the end of each island. Minimum bollard height is six (6) feet above grade. One or more bollards and a minimum width equal to that of the fuel pumps. Bollards shall not be required where canopy support columns offer the same degree of protection.



2.	
Truck fuel pump islands are not required to be located under a canopy; however, where provided, canopies shall be designed to the following standards:
a.	
Minimum Vertical Clearance: Fifteen (15) feet

b.	
Minimum Overhang (underside of canopy perimeter)
i.	
Fifteen (15) feet from the outer edge of pumps on sides parallel to pump islands

ii.	
Two (2) feet from the end of the pump island on sides perpendicular to pump islands







I.	
Allowable secondary/accessory uses are limited to those of the truck stop definition in Section 05.02 and the following, which shall be subject to all applicable standards of this article:
1.	
Passenger vehicle fuel pumps

2.	
One (1) restaurant of any type, which may include a drive-thru window

3.	
One (1) garbage dumpster and liquid waste container enclosure

4.	
One (1) automated car wash bay

5.	
One (1) truck wash facility

6.	
One (1) truck maintenance or repair facility

7.	
Other related uses as may be allowed within the approved PDO zoning district





10.44.	
Unattended Donation Box
A.	
Shall only be allowed on-premise of the primary use.

B.	
Shall not occupy any required off-street parking or loading areas.

C.	
Shall not be located so as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian circulation.



10.45.	
Utility Support Facility


The following provisions shall apply to any such facilities located in City of Augusta public street right-of-way.
A.	
Shall be required to execute a franchise agreement with the City of Augusta, except for Augusta municipal utilities.

B.	
Shall not be approved for any location in the public right-of-way that:
1.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any other street, street improvement, or traffic control device, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

2.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any other public or private utility infrastructure, existing or planned, located in, under, or above the public right-of-way.

3.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of storm water drainage infrastructure, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

4.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any sidewalk, bicycle path, bus stop or other similar facility, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

5.	
Is located within a required clear zone, sight triangle of a street or driveway intersection, or is otherwise inconsistent with any applicable design criteria or engineering standards.

6.	
Is deemed by the Planning Commission or City Council to pose a reasonable threat to the public interest necessitated by public health, safety, or welfare.




10.46.	
Vehicle Fueling Station; Fuel Pump
A.	
Shall be located on a lot of at least one-half (½) acre in area, which has a minimum of one-hundred and fifty (150) feet provided in either depth or width, regardless of zoning district regulations.

B.	
Exterior lighting shall be “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures.

C.	
Sites shall meet the hard surface paving requirements of Article 07. In addition:
1.	
One (1) dedicated loading bay shall be provided adjacent to filling valve equipment, subject to Article 07 design standards.

2.	
Fuel loading areas shall have pull-through truck access requiring no back-up maneuvers, and shall be arranged such that delivery vehicles do not extend into drive aisles or rights-of-way.



D.	
Storage tanks shall be underground and meet applicable state and federal regulations. 

E.	
Minimum off-street parking design standards of Article 07 shall apply, except that the minimum spacing between fuel pump islands, measured between the closest points at finished grade, shall be:
1.	
Twenty-two (22) feet between pump islands under separate canopies.

2.	
Twenty (20) feet between pump islands under a shared canopy.



F.	
Fuel pump islands shall be located under a canopy designed and shall meet the following standards:
1.	
Minimum Vertical Clearance: Thirteen feet six inches (13’6”)

2.	
Minimum Overhang (underside of canopy perimeter)
a.	
Ten (10) feet from the outer edge of pumps on sides parallel to pump islands

b.	
Two (2) feet from the end of the pump island on sides perpendicular to pump islands



3.	
Minimum Pump Island Setback: Thirty-five (35) feet along all street frontages in zoning districts with lesser yard requirements. 

4.	
Bollard protection shall be provided at the end of each island sufficient to protect the entire width of the island. Minimum bollard height is five (5) feet above the adjacent grade. Bollards shall not be required where canopy support columns offer equal protection.

5.	
Drive aisles and vehicle queuing areas provided for fuel pump islands shall not be allowed to satisfy off-street parking requirements.



G.	
Vehicle fueling stations as a primary use shall be limited to the following allowable secondary uses:
1.	
One (1) garbage dumpster and liquid waste container enclosure

2.	
One (1) automated car wash bay



H.	
Fuel pumps as a secondary use, shall also be subject to the following provisions: 
1.	
Shall only be allowed in conjunction with the following primary uses defined in Article 05.
a.	
Automotive Repair Shop

b.	
Supercenter or Warehouse Club

c.	
Convenience Store

d.	
Grocery Store or Supermarket

e.	
Grain & Feed Store 



2.	
Shall not be fully unattended facilities. May be attended from within the primary use or from an attendant kiosk having a gross floor area not to exceed three-hundred (300) square feet. Such kiosks may offer limited retail sales of convenience goods, not to include cereal malt beverages, wine, or liquor.





10.47.	
Wind Energy Generation Structures
A.	
Shall not exceed 45 feet in height, provided that such structure shall not be located in any required setback nor be located closer to any adjacent property than the height of the wind energy generation structure.



10.48.	
Wireless Communication Tower
A.	
Shall have no nighttime, strobe, or obstruction lighting, except for aircraft warning lights or similar emergency warning lights required by applicable governmental agencies.

B.	
Such facilities located in the public right-of-way shall execute a franchise agreement with the City of Augusta. Conditional use approval for facilities located in the public right-of-way shall:
1.	
Allow the approval of no more than one (1) location with a single conditional use application, which shall be reviewed on its individual merits.

2.	
Upon review, any location deemed appropriate for installation shall be approved, provided in no case shall a conditional use be approved for any location in the public right-of-way that:
a.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any other street, street improvement, or traffic control device, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

b.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any other public or private utility infrastructure, existing or planned, located in, under, or above the public right-of-way.

c.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of storm water drainage infrastructure, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

d.	
Disturbs the location of or compromises the function of any sidewalk, bicycle path, bus stop or other similar facility, existing or planned, located within the public right-of-way.

e.	
Is located within a required clear zone, sight triangle of a street or driveway intersection, or is otherwise inconsistent with any applicable design criteria or engineering standards.

f.	
Is deemed by the Planning Commission or City Council to pose a reasonable threat to the public interest necessitated by public health, safety, or welfare.



3.	
Shall not exceed the maximum height restrictions for the applicable zoning district.

4.	
Shall be freestanding monopole structures.



C.	
Such uses located outside of the public right-of-way shall be subject to the following provisions:
1.	
Shall not be guyed, except when required by applicable regulatory agencies or as determined necessary by a licensed structural engineer.

2.	
Shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Article 09 related to visual buffers and height compatibility, provided that the visual buffer requirements shall apply only to developed areas occupied by tower structures, off-street parking, and outdoor storage. Such areas shall be:
a.	
Located in a contiguous grouping, to the extent practical.

b.	
Platted as a separate lot or lots, or specifically designated on Site Plans.

c.	
Enclosed within a screening fence/wall around the perimeter of such facilities, and meeting the design standards for such found in Article 09. Guy wire anchor points located outside of the enclosed perimeter shall be enclosed by a fence at least six (6) feet in height.



3.	
Outdoor lighting installations shall be allowed only within perimeter enclosures; shall be the minimum lighting necessary for reasonable site security. In addition:
a.	
Lighting fixtures shall be installed at a height no greater than twelve (12) feet.

b.	
Only “fully shielded” or “full cutoff” light fixtures may be installed.

c.	
Fixtures shall be equipped with motion detector shut off controls.







Article 11	
Home Occupations

11.01.	
Purpose


The purpose of this article is to allow business activities associated with certain occupations, which are generally compatible with other residential uses, to be carried out within residential principal structures.
11.02.	
Restrictions & Limitations


Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, home occupations shall be restricted as follows.
A.	
Shall be incidental and subordinate to the primary use, which shall be maintained as the principal residence of the business owner.

B.	
Shall not occupy more than 25 percent (25%) of the floor area of any single floor/story of the principal structure, except as provided in Section 11.05 and as allowed per Section 10.32.

C.	
Shall store all materials and equipment used for the home occupation within an enclosed structure.

D.	
Shall not be allowed any exterior alterations that are inconsistent with the residential nature or character of the principal structure.

E.	
Shall only be allowed signs as allowed by and in accordance with Article 08. 

F.	
Only residents of the principal residence shall be engaged in home occupation activities.

G.	
Shall not generate vehicular traffic that is unreasonably excessive for a residential land use.

H.	
Shall not generate parking demand that is unreasonably excessive for a residential land use; shall not utilize the required front yard for parking, other than existing driveway(s).

I.	
Shall utilize no equipment that creates a nuisance of noise, odor, emissions or electrical interference; or otherwise interfere with another’s personal enjoyment or utilization of their principal residence.


11.03.	
Allowable Home Occupations 


The following home occupations shall be allowed, subject to the limitations of Section 11.02 and other provisions of these regulations.
A.	
Instruction in the visual and performing arts, restricted to five (5) students at any one time.

B.	
Creation, display, and sales of works of art, crafts, and other items handcrafted on-premise.

C.	
Professional and technical office-based work, as defined in Section 05.02.

D.	
Personal care services, as defined in Section 05.02, except for nail salons and tanning salons.

E.	
Agricultural business activities performed in A-1 zoning districts.

F.	
Office, administrative, appointment-setting, or similar non-production activities related to occupations with primary  work activities conducted off-premise, such as telecommuting, taxi drivers, and other work of a similar nature.

G.	
Work related to the following personal and household services, as defined in Section 05.02:
1.	
Household items or furnishings repair and maintenance

2.	
Repair and maintenance of personal items or goods

3.	
Tailors and dressmakers



H.	
Day care services, as provided in Section 11.05. 


11.04.	
Prohibited Home Occupations 


The following home occupations shall be specifically prohibited under any circumstances.
A.	
Retail sales of any goods or merchandise, except as provided in Section 11.03.B.

B.	
Rental or leasing of any equipment or consumer goods.

C.	
Automotive and equipment service work, as defined in Section 05.02.

D.	
Physician, dental, chiropractic, optometric, psychiatric, psychological, physical therapy, occupational therapy, social therapy, counseling, or other related medical, mental, or social care provided by a licensed or unlicensed professional.

E.	
Bed and breakfast inns, which are specifically defined as transient lodging in Section 05.02.

F.	
Animal or pet-related services such as veterinary medicine, grooming, breeding, and boarding.

G.	
No prohibition listed in this section shall be construed to prohibit services from being delivered within the residence of clients or patients, such as home health care or babysitting by the hour.

H.	
No prohibition listed in this section shall be construed to prohibit the performance of interior or exterior repairs or modifications to homes, home appliances, lawns, landscaping, etc.


11.05.	
Home Occupation Day Care Services


In addition to other applicable requirements, the following provisions shall apply to all day care homes and day care nurseries.
A.	
Shall be limited to providing care for no more than three (3) children at any one time, which do not reside on-premise, except when appropriately licensed by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE).

B.	
KDHE-licensed Day Care Homes and Day Care Nurseries, shall comply with all other applicable local and state regulations.

C.	
Except for outdoor play, day care activities shall be conducted entirely within the principal structure and shall occupy no more than fifty percent (50%) of the principal structure’s gross floor area. 

D.	
Outdoor play shall be limited as follows:
1.	
Outdoor play equipment shall only be installed and outdoor play activities shall only take place within a side yard or rear yard enclosed within an approved fence with a secured gate.

2.	
Outdoor play activities shall occur only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.




Article 12	
Roles & Responsibilities

12.01.	
Purpose


This article identifies the responsibilities of each party playing a role in the establishment, amendment, enactment, administration, and enforcement of these regulations.
12.02.	
Planning Commission  


The City shall regulate land use as provided by K.S.A. 12-741, et. seq., and appoint a Planning Commission by City ordinance.
A.	
The Planning Commission has the following responsibilities.
1.	
Serve as an advisory body to the City Council on community planning matters.

2.	
Conduct public hearings on text amendments to these regulations, zoning district boundary changes (rezoning applications), and conditional use permits.

3.	
Establish findings of fact and adopt recommendations to the City Council on such zoning actions.

4.	
Review capital improvement for consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.

5.	
Conduct an annual review of the Comprehensive Plan and zoning regulations, including the Official Zoning Maps, to be held the first meeting each month of September. The review shall identify changing conditions, ensure consistency with the community vision and goals, and suggest needed amendments. A resolution shall be adopted stating the findings and recommendations of each annual review. 



B.	
General Rules & Procedures
1.	
All members of the Planning Commission are voting members.

2.	
Planning Commission members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses when	authorized by the City Council.

3.	
The Planning Commission shall elect officers from its membership to include Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Secretary.

4.	
The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws establishing specific rules for its operation.
a.	
Hearing procedures shall not conflict with the ordinance appointing the Planning Commission, applicable state statutes, or these regulations.

b.	
Bylaws shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.

c.	
Filing fees shall be established separately by the City Council.



5.	
The secretary shall keep public records of all official actions. Meeting minutes shall be kept as evidence of information presented at hearings, findings of fact, and decisions. The vote of each member shall be recorded on each item, including whether the member was absent, abstaining or disqualified from voting.

6.	
Special meetings may be held when called the Chairperson, or in accordance with the bylaws.

7.	
After a meeting has been called to order and a quorum declared present, all actions of shall be made by motion and decided by a majority vote of the members present and voting.




12.03.	
City Council


No action, recommendation, or resolution of the Planning Commission shall be enacted without having been approved and adopted by the City Council. Relative to these regulations, City Council shall have the following responsibilities.
A.	
Enact and amend the zoning regulations, including the Official Zoning Map, zoning district boundaries, and conditional uses, upon receiving and considering such recommendations from the Planning Commission.

B.	
Upon affirmative vote of approval on any such recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall adopt an ordinance to that effect. No approved application or recommendation from the Planning Commission shall be enforced without such an ordinance having been adopted.

C.	
Adopt a schedule of filing fees for the various types of zoning actions and permits, which may be amended as needed from time to time, to account for new or increased costs of administering these regulations. 


12.04.	
Office of the Zoning Administrator


A Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council and shall be responsible for administering and enforcing these regulations. Pursuant to these duties, the Zoning Administrator shall be granted the following authority and responsibilities.
A.	
Approve and issue all permits and certificates necessary for construction on a lot or the occupancy of a structure; and make and maintain records of all such permits and certificates.

B.	
Conduct inspections of structures and land uses to determine compliance with the provisions of these regulations or any decision of the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals.

C.	
Maintain a current set of administrative forms and applications for actions governed by these regulations, along with a schedule of filing fees.

D.	
Provide technical and administrative assistance to City staff, citizens, applicants, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and the City Council. 

E.	
Receive, file, and forward to the Planning Commissions all applications for zoning permits and information necessary to render decisions.

F.	
Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all applications for appeals and variances, including records and information necessary to render decisions.

G.	
Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning regulations including, but not limited to, the Official Zoning Map, and all amendments, variances, appeals and applications therefore and records of hearing thereon.

H.	
Maintain for public use or distribution copies of the zoning regulations, Official Zoning Map, and bylaws of the Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals.

I.	
Administer the Comprehensive Plan and Subdivision Regulations, and other duties as assigned by the City Council, either directly or by delegation through the City Administrator.


12.05.	
Office of the City Clerk


The City Clerk shall maintain official records and carry out responsibilities in the administration of these regulations as follows.
A.	
Maintain at least three (3) official copies of these regulations available for public inspection, which shall be marked “Official Copy as Incorporated by Ordinance No. __________.” Such copies shall include all text amendments, omissions, and deletions, which shall also be so noted.

B.	
Supply official copies, marked as indicated above, to the appointed official of all City departments.

C.	
Provide assistance to facilitate and record actions of the City Council related to their exercise of duties in administering these regulations.


Article 13	
Site Plan Review

13.01.	
Purpose  


Site plan review is intended to ensure that proposed developments meet applicable provisions of these regulations prior to approval; and to ensure that development occurs in accordance with these regulations and applicable conditions of approval prior to the issuance of Building Permits.
13.02.	
Applicability


This article provides for two types of Site Plan submittals: Zoning Site Plans and Development Site Plans. The applicability of each is as follows.
A.	
Zoning Site Plans
1.	
A Zoning Site Plan shall be required with all applications for change in zoning district, PDO overlay zoning, conditional uses, temporary uses, sign permits, and for any secondary or accessory structure allowed by-right that was not included on the original Site Plan approved for the lot on which it is located. Changes in zoning district classification to a lower intensity district, or “down zoning,” shall require a Zoning Site Plan only if there will be new structures built or existing structures modified. 

2.	
No application shall be considered complete without having a Site Plan attached that meets the requirements of this article. Zoning Site Plans are reviewed and approved as part of the accompanying application. 



B.	
Development Site Plans
1.	
Development Site Plan approval is required prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for construction of any new structure and any modification that alters the building footprint of an existing structure. 

2.	
Single-family residential principal structures shall be exempt, except when zoned R-3 and part of a zero lot line development. 




13.03.	
Zoning Site Plan Requirements
A.	
The following shall apply to all Zoning Site Plan submittals.
1.	
Twelve (12) copies submitted on letter size (8½” X 11”) or tabloid (11” X 17”) sheets; plus one (1)copy in electronic format (.pdf file extension).

2.	
Site address, owner name, north arrow, reference scale, scale bar, and legend. Reference scale shall be at an appropriate scale to depict all required elements, portrayed as 1 inch = X feet at a ten (10) foot increment. Drawings shall be oriented north, except when impractical.

3.	
Subject lot and adjacent lot property boundary lines and setback lines with dimensions.

4.	
Existing and proposed zoning and uses on the subject lot and adjacent lots. 

5.	
Edge of pavement for streets and sidewalks.

6.	
Sight triangles, access controls, and easements, with dimensions.

7.	
Existing and proposed structures within one-hundred and fifty (150) feet of the subject lot, with dimensions, number of floors/stories, gross floor area, and height. Not required for sign permit Site Plans.

8.	
Existing and proposed off-street parking, loading, and driveway locations.

9.	
Compatibility buffer requirements, including visual buffers, landscape buffers, and applicable compatibility height setbacks, with proposed locations and dimensions. Not required for sign permit Site Plans. 

10.	
Proposed outdoor display, storage, and garbage/liquid waste container areas with dimensions. Not required for sign permit Site Plans.

11.	
As applicable, other attachments required per Article 10 specific use standards. This shall not be required for sign permit Site Plans.



B.	
Sign permit Site Plans shall include the information indicated below.
1.	
Site plan with information as indicated in Section 13.03.A. In addition, the following shall be provided.
a.	
Location of the proposed sign(s), labeled with sign category and type.

b.	
Location of all existing signs to remain on the same lot, labeled with sign category, type, and face area. Sign height shall be provided for existing freestanding signs.

c.	
Indicate the spacing distance between all proposed freestanding signs and existing freestanding signs located within fifty (50) of a proposed sign on the same lot or an adjacent lot.

d.	
As applicable, the location and routing of electrical supply lines.



2.	
Scaled full-color elevation drawing showing the following information.
a.	
Freestanding Signs: Only the front elevation (face view) is required. Include dimension labels for total sign height and width (including support structure), sign face height and width, and sign face surface area.

b.	
Building Signs: The drawing shall show the entire front exterior building wall. Include dimension labels for wall height and width, total wall surface area, sign body height and width, sign face height and width, and sign face surface area.

c.	
The sign face layout shall be shown on the drawing, including dimensions of lettering and graphics.

d.	
Material descriptions and colors for the sign face, body/frame/cabinet material and support structure.



3.	
Detail drawings as follows.
a.	
Installation Details
i.	
Freestanding Signs: Foundation and footing details.

ii.	
Building Signs (except window signs): Anchor and mounting details.



b.	
Electrical wiring diagram, if applicable.

c.	
If applicable, planter box details with dimensions. Shall include construction materials and plant locations labeled with species.



4.	
Technical specifications for any type of artificial light source or electrical component.





13.04.	
Development Site Plan Requirements


A Development Site Plan shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of a Building Permit on any zoning lot. Development Site Plans shall meet the following requirements.
A.	
Shall be prepared and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect.

B.	
Drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet, on twenty-four by thirty-six inch (24” x 36”) sheets. Three (3) hard copies shall be submitted; plus one (1)copy in electronic format (.pdf file extension). Submittals for individual single-family residential lots may utilize letter size (8½” X 11”) sheets if drawn at the required scale.

C.	
Shall include the following information.
1.	
Site address, owner name, north arrow, reference scale, scale bar, and legend. Drawings shall be oriented north, except when impractical.

2.	
Subject lot and adjacent lot property boundary lines and setback lines with dimension.

3.	
Existing and proposed zoning and uses on the subject lot and adjacent lots.

4.	
Edge of pavement for streets and sidewalks, with dimensions and traffic flow arrows.

5.	
Existing and proposed contour lines at one (1) foot intervals; indicate direction of storm water flow.

6.	
Existing and proposed rights-of-way, access controls, easements (utility, drainage, access, fire lane), and sight triangles, with dimensions.

7.	
Existing and proposed utilities and storm water drainage structures.

8.	
Existing and proposed structures within one-hundred and fifty (150) feet of the subject lot, with dimensions, number of floors/stories, gross floor area, percent lot coverage, and height.

9.	
Existing and proposed off-street parking, loading, and driveway locations, with required quantities and dimensions, calculations and the number of stalls proposed.

10.	
Required compatibility buffers, including visual buffers, landscape buffers, and applicable compatibility height setbacks, with proposed locations and dimensions. 

11.	
Proposed outdoor display, storage, and garbage/liquid waste container areas with dimensions.

12.	
Existing and proposed permanent sign locations.

13.	
Boundary and elevation of the one-percent (1%) chance flood event (100-year floodplain).

14.	
Finished building pad elevation.

15.	
Parking layout of all off-street parking areas with the quantity of proposed parking stalls and calculations for standard and ADA-accessible parking stall requirements.

16.	
Delineate on-site circulation with traffic flow arrows, designated delivery/service entrances and routes, on-site pavement markings, traffic control signage, and incidental directional signs.

17.	
Location and species name (common and scientific) of all existing isolated trees having a diameter of six (6) inches or more. Groupings of existing trees may show the perimeter outline, with a written inventory of individual trees.



D.	
Scaled building elevation drawing for all sides with:
1.	
Elevations of all proposed and related existing structures with roof pitches noted.

2.	
Location of signs to be mounted on the elevations.

3.	
List of exterior siding and roofing material types.



E.	
Lighting Plan
1.	
Location of all existing and proposed lighting fixtures and poles.

2.	
Size specifications and elevation view with dimensions.

3.	
Illumination type, pole and fixture materials and colors.

4.	
Foundation/footing or wall anchorage details.

5.	
Photometric plan



F.	
Buffer and Landscape Plan: Consistent with the requirements of Section 09.06, inclusive of all screening fences/walls, berms, and landscape elements.

G.	
Drainage Plan: Upon request of the Zoning Administrator or designated official.

H.	
Parking & Traffic Studies: Upon request of the Zoning Administrator or designated official.


13.05.	
Development Site Plan Approval
A.	
The Zoning Administrator’s approval or denial shall utilize the following standards of review:
1.	
The extent to which the proposal conforms to these regulations.

2.	
The extent to which the development would be compatible with the surrounding area.

3.	
The extent to which the proposal conforms to the City’s Subdivision Regulations.

4.	
The extent to which the proposal conforms to customary engineering standards used in the City.

5.	
The extent to which the location of streets, paths, walkways, and driveways are located so as to enhance safety and minimize any adverse traffic impact on the surrounding area.



B.	
Zoning Administrator approval or denial may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals per Section 15.04.




Page Intentionally Left Blank
Article 14	
Processes & Procedures

14.01.	
Purpose


This article establishes the rules for amending these regulations, changing zoning district boundaries, approving conditional and temporary uses; approving Site Plans and the processes by which such shall be administered. 
14.02.	
Amendments; Conditional & Temporary Uses


There are two types of amendments to these regulations: revisions to the regulations (text, uses, standards, etc.); and changes to zoning district boundaries (rezoning cases). These types of amendments are reviewed and approved according to the same rules and processes used for conditional use applications and temporary use requests.
A.	
Process: Applications for any of these actions utilize the general process shown in the diagram below.


Figure 14.1: Zoning Approval Process
B.	
Applications
1.	
Applications for text amendments to the regulations may be submitted only by the City Council or Planning Commission. Applications for all other zoning actions affecting specific properties may be submitted by the City Council, Planning Commission, or property owners or their authorized agents (K.S.A. 12-757). Regardless of the applicant, the general review and approval process shown in Figure 14.1 is used for all text amendment, rezoning, conditional use, temporary use, and  Development Site Plan applications.

2.	
The following shall apply to applications for Site Plan approval.
a.	
Zoning Site Plans shall be submitted as part of the related rezoning, conditional use, or temporary use application, including secondary or accessory uses/structures that require conditional use approval.

b.	
Zoning Site Plans shall be submitted as part of the Zoning Compliance Certificate application for establishing any secondary or accessory use/structure allowed by-right in the applicable zoning district that was not approved on the original Site Plan for the subject lot. Such applications are approved by the Zoning Administrator without requiring a public hearing, Planning Commission action or City Council approval.

c.	
A Development Site Plan application shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for the construction of any secondary or accessory structure requiring such permit. 



3.	
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain current application forms for the various types of zoning actions, a schedule of filing fees, and schedule of Planning Commission meeting dates with associated filing deadlines.  

4.	
Such documents and forms shall be readily accessible to the public, both in hard copy available at the City Administration Building and electronic versions posted to the City website.

5.	
Applications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. All complete applications submitted by the filing deadline will be processed and added to the scheduled Planning Commission agenda. Applications shall only be considered complete when submitted with the following.
a.	
A completed application form with the appropriate filing fee.

b.	
Names, addresses, telephone numbers, email addresses, and signatures of the property owner(s), plus the same for applicant(s) and agent(s), as applicable.

c.	
The type of action requested and a written description of the specific request, including:
i.	
Existing and proposed land uses, structures, and zoning district classifications

ii.	
For text and regulation revisions, the description shall include a marked up version of the original language and a clean copy of the exact new language, word for word.

iii.	
All other applications shall include the legal description and street address of the subject property. A general description of location shall suffice undeveloped properties having no assigned street address. 



d.	
Lot dimensions of the subject property stated in acres or square feet, including fractions.

e.	
A Zoning Site Plan per Section 13.03, including all required information and graphic depictions, except for text and regulation revisions.

f.	
The required certified property ownership list specified in Section 14.03.A. 3, except for text or regulation revisions, and “down zoning” of a property from one zoning district classification to a zoning district of lower intensity. The relationship of intensity between the various zoning districts is provided in Section 04.03. 

g.	
Any additional information and attachments as may be required by these regulations or indicated in the Planning Commission bylaws.



6.	
Public hearings for all zoning applications shall be heard within forty-five (45) days of the application date, except when the applicant requests a later public hearing date or withdraws the application prior to the hearing date.

7.	
At the time of filing, a copy of the completed application form, with the application date and scheduled public hearing date, shall be provided to each applicant.




14.03.	
Public Notification & Conduct of Hearings
A.	
The following means of public notice shall be provided at least twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled public hearing date.
1.	
Published once in the official newspaper, including the hearing time and location, the legal description of the subject property, or a general description sufficient to identify the property location. When only a general description is provided, notices shall state that a complete legal description is available for public inspection and where such information is available.

2.	
A copy of such notice shall be mailed to each property owner, applicant, and owner’s agent listed on the application, and to the Secretary of the Planning Commission.

3.	
Notice shall also be mailed to all owners of record of real property:
a.	
This property owner notification provision does not apply to public hearings for text or regulation revisions, or down zoning requests, as described in Section 14.02.B.4.f.

b.	
Inside Augusta city limits and located within two-hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundary of the subject property.

c.	
Inside the corporate limits of a city other than Augusta and located within two-hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundary of the subject property.

d.	
In unincorporated Butler County and located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of the exterior boundary of the subject property.

e.	
A certified list of such property owners of record, including names and mailing addresses, shall be provided by the applicant. Such ownership lists may be obtained from the Butler County Mapping Department. An applicant may also obtain such a list from a land title company, provided it is certified as being true and accurate by a licensed abstractor or title professional. Failure of any a property owner to receive such notice after it has been properly addressed and mailed shall not invalidate any action of the Planning Commission or City Council.



4.	
If, after notifications have been made and a quorum of the Planning Commission has not convened for the subject hearing; or the Planning Commission has, by vote, authorized the continuance of a hearing to a later date, such may be rescheduled. No further public notice need be given when the future date and time are announced at the present meeting.

5.	
The Planning Commission may give additional notice to any person at any time as provided in its bylaws. Such rules may include requirements for additional notice to be provided for by the posting of signs on the property to be considered in the appeal application.



B.	
Conduct of Hearings




After providing the required notifications, all such meetings and hearings shall be open to the public and subject to the Kansas Open Meetings Act (K.S.A. 75-4317, et seq.). All public hearings shall be conducted according to the following provisions.
1.	
No voting or binding actions shall be taken without a quorum being present. 

2.	
The Planning Commission may exercise quasi-judicial functions and deliberations in closed session according to K.S.A. 75-4318(a), provided:
a.	
A closed session may only proceed upon proper motion and vote of the Planning Commission.

b.	
No voting or binding actions shall be taken in a closed session.



3.	
Any person may testify at a hearing, either in person or by authorized agent or attorney.

4.	
The Planning Commission may request additional testimony and written or verbal reports on issues related to a specific hearing, from any person, property owner, subject matter expert, utility provider, government agency, etc. when deemed necessary to render an informed decision. Such reports shall be attached to the meeting minutes and made part of the public record.

5.	
Every official Planning Commission decision shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator without unreasonable delay and shall be open to public inspection during regular business hours.

6.	
A report on each official Planning Commission action, including summaries of all public hearings, shall be filed with the City Council within fourteen (14) days of the action or hearing date. Such reports may be incorporated into the meeting minutes, rather than filed as separate documents.


14.04.	
Official Actions & Decisions


In considering the merits of an application and rendering official decisions, the Planning Commission and City Council shall be allowed to act in accordance with the following provisions.
A.	
All Planning Commission decisions authorized by this article are advisory recommendations subject to the City Council’s discretion as provided in this section.

B.	
Conditions of Approval
1.	
When deemed appropriate based on findings of fact, the Planning Commission may stipulate conditions of approval in addition to minimum requirements. This shall include:
a.	
Condition of approval specifically allowed by these regulations or authorized by Kansas statutes.

b.	
Measures that are not required for the proposed use, but required as a specific use standard or compatibility buffer for similar uses, when deemed a reasonable means of mitigating negative impacts of the proposed use.

c.	
For proposed changes to zoning district boundaries only, a lesser intensity zoning district may be approved in lieu of the applicant’s requested zoning district. Such shall not trigger any additional public notification requirements.

d.	
No condition allowing deviation from a minimum requirement shall be allowed if such is defined as a variance per Article 15 or would have an effect equal to a variance. 

e.	
The City Council may only require conditions of approval in the circumstance and manner described below in Section 14.04.C.6.





C.	
Planning Commission & City Council Voting Provisions
1.	
Planning Commission votes are determined by the majority of only those members present and voting; and shall not require a majority of the full membership to be in concurrence.

2.	
Failure of the Planning Commission to make a recommendation shall be considered a recommendation of denial (disapproval).

3.	
The Planning Commission shall submit recommendations to the City Council, which shall include:
a.	
The findings of fact upon which the recommendations is based.

b.	
As circumstances dictate, the Planning Commission’s verbal motions and recommendations, and written recommendations, reports, and resolutions:
i.	
Need not cite specific findings of fact or list them individually when such findings, recommendations, and other relevant details are cited individually in written staff reports.

ii.	
May incorporate by reference findings of fact and other relevant details contained in written staff reports, provided such staff reports are attached to or incorporated into the meeting minutes, case reports, and resolutions containing written recommendations.



c.	
Likewise, the Official Zoning Map shall be incorporated by reference.



4.	
In taking action on a Planning Commission recommendation for text or regulation revisions, rezoning cases, or conditional uses, the City Council may only take one of the following actions:
a.	
Adopt the recommendation by ordinance, as submitted.

b.	
Override the recommendation with a vote of at least a two-thirds (²/3) majority of City Council.

c.	
Return it to the Planning Commission for reconsideration with an explanation of the reasoning for such.



5.	
Upon receiving a recommendation returned by the City Council, the Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions during its next regular meeting:
a.	
Resubmit the original recommendation with an explanation of the reasoning for such.

b.	
Submit an amended recommendation based on the original.

c.	
Submit a new recommendation.

d.	
Take no action, which shall be considered a resubmittal of the original recommendation.



6.	
When the follow-up recommendation is received from the Planning Commission, the City Council, by simple majority vote, may take one of the following actions:
a.	
Override the recommendation.

b.	
By ordinance, adopt the Planning Commission’s recommendation as submitted, with revisions or amendments, or with conditions (see Section 14.04.B).

c.	
Take no action.



7.	
The proposed amendment, rezoning, or conditional use shall become effective upon publication of the adopting ordinance.




14.05.	
Petitions of Protest


Planning Commission decisions (approval or denial) on rezoning and conditional use applications may be protested by petition as follows. Temporary uses are not subject to this provision.
A.	
Petitions of protest shall only be declared valid when containing a sufficient number signatures of individuals having standing to protest, which shall be limited to either of the following cases:
1.	
Twenty percent (20%) or more of the owners of record of all real property that would be rezoned by approval of the application.

2.	
Owners of record of twenty percent (20%) or more of the total notification area for the application, as described in Section 14.03.A.3. The area calculation shall include properties located both inside and outside of Augusta city limits, but shall exclude public street rights-of-way.



B.	
Protest petitions must be filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the public hearing’s conclusion to be considered valid.

C.	
Upon being certified by the City Clerk as a valid protest petition, a super-majority approval threshold is triggered. This shall require the adopting ordinance to pass with at least a three-fourths (¾) majority vote of the Governing Body.


14.06.	
Other Planning Actions & Approvals
A.	
The Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator have authorities, powers, and responsibilities over the administration and enforcement of the Subdivision Regulations similar to those prescribed by these regulations for zoning activities. Such are detailed in the Subdivision Regulations and shall be carried out accordingly in concert with these regulations and the Comprehensive Plan.

B.	
Comprehensive Plan Adoption & Amendment
1.	
Procedural Requirements
a.	
Prior to conducting public hearings in consideration of adopting the Comprehensive Plan and subsequent plan amendments, notification shall be published in the official newspaper in a manner similar to that described in Section 14.03, except for the listed information that is unique to actions affecting individual properties only.

b.	
Public hearings shall also be conducted in a like manner as provided in these regulations.

c.	
The Comprehensive Plan and all amendments to the plan shall be adopted as such by resolution of the Planning Commission, which shall include a recommendation of approval.

d.	
Upon adoption according to these procedures, the Planning Commission shall submit to the City Council, a certified copy of the plan or amendments to the plan, with a written summary of the public hearing. A copy of the plan shall be “certified” when transmitted with a written statement, signed by the Chairperson and Secretary, attesting that the provided copy is a true and accurate representation of the same plan that was presented for the public hearing and Planning Commission approval proceedings.

e.	
All Planning Commission approvals and resolutions shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Planning Commission membership, except as otherwise stipulated in these regulations or prescribed by Kansas statutes.

f.	
An attested (certified) copy of the adopted or amended Comprehensive Plan shall be sent, along with a written summary of the public hearing, to all taxing subdivisions (townships, school districts, special districts, etc.) in the City’s established planning area.

g.	
The Comprehensive Plan and Comprehensive Plan amendments, shall become effective only after being approved by the City Council and adopted by ordinance.





C.	
Conditional Uses




Conditional uses approved in accordance with these regulations shall run with the land upon approval. They shall remain in effect without regard to ownership, so long as the use remains on the subject property without being significantly altered or destroyed.
D.	
Temporary Uses


Temporary uses are considered a form of conditional use and shall be reviewed and approved according to a similar process and in a similar manner, except that the following provisions differ from those for conditional uses.
1.	
They are not permanent and do not run with the land. They shall be established for limited period of time, which shall be specified as a condition of approval.

2.	
In no case shall a temporary use be established for longer than sixty (60) consecutive days, provided that extensions may be approved by the Zoning Administrator upon written request of the applicant. No more than three (3) extensions shall be approved, each lasting the same period of time specified in the original approval. Additional extensions shall only be approved by separate application for a new temporary use permit and approval of such by the original process.

3.	
Temporary uses shall only be required to provide public notice by publication in the official newspaper, not individual property owners. In addition, the protest petition provision shall not apply to temporary uses.

4.	
Emergency temporary use applications and those having critical time constraints, may qualify for expedited approval if, in the Zoning Administrator’s judgment, sufficient justification has been provided in writing. In such cases:
a.	
The application may be forwarded directly to the City Council for consideration without a Planning Commission recommendation.

b.	
Only very short-term uses, lasting for a period no longer than seven (7) consecutive days, shall qualify for expedited approval; and no time extensions shall be approved.

c.	
Only complete applications submitted at least twenty-one (21) days from the date of commencement shall be considered for expedited approval.

d.	
The Zoning Administrator shall review the request in the same manner and according to the same criteria as a normal temporary use application. The supporting documents and applicable recommendations shall be provided to the City Council for consideration of the application.

e.	
As approved by applicable Kansas statutes and City code, the City Council may approve the adopting ordinance on an emergency basis and waive normal approval, public notification, and ordinance publication procedures/requirements.




14.07.	
Standards of Review
A.	
The Planning Commission shall review applications for all types of zoning approval governed by these regulations, according to the standards of review outlined in this section.

B.	
All Planning Commission actions deemed to be in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, shall be presumed to be reasonable.

C.	
In reviewing rezoning requests, conditional uses, and temporary uses, findings of facts shall be incorporated into all recommendations and resolutions of approval.  Such findings shall specifically consider the degree to which the proposed use or application is compatible with surrounding uses, and its appropriateness at the proposed location within the proposed zoning district.




Such reviews of compatibility shall be based on and stated in terms of the following criteria:
1.	
Character of the immediate neighborhood.

2.	
Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, vision, and character of the City of Augusta.

3.	
Adequacy of public utilities, roadways, and other needed public services, relative to the anticipated impacts of the proposed use. 

4.	
Suitability of the uses to which the property has been restricted under its existing zoning.

5.	
Length of time property has remained vacant as zoned.

6.	
Compatibility of the proposed district classification with nearby properties.

7.	
The extent to which the zoning amendment may detrimentally affect nearby property.

8.	
The proportionality of losses/impacts to individual property owners in the immediate vicinity relative to the net public gain for the community-at-large.

9.	
Public input or sentiment regarding the proposed use as voiced in the public hearing and other communications.


14.08.	
Finality of Council Decisions


As provided by K.S.A. 12-760, as amended, all zoning decisions provided in these regulations are considered to be reasonable exercises of authority granted to the City. All such actions enacted by the City Council are considered final upon publication of the adopting ordinance. Any person, government official or agency, or other individual, jointly or separately dissatisfied or aggrieved by any such action, may file a petition within thirty (30) days of the ordinance publication in the Butler County District Court seeking relief by judicial review.
14.09.	
Zoning Compliance Certificates


The Zoning Administrator shall issue a written Zoning Compliance Certificate to the owner or occupant of any property, or authorized agent thereof, as follows.
A.	
Sent to zoning change and conditional use applicants within ten (10) days of publication of the adopting ordinance. The compliance certificate shall cite specific applicable references of these regulations and related approvals regarding the uses that can be established and any related standards.

B.	
Provided within ten (10) days of submitting an application for a secondary or accessory use or structure. The Zoning Administrator shall provide a compliance certificate upon verifying the subject property is appropriately zoned for the proposed use or structure and located in compliance with these regulations according to the Zoning Site Plan submitted with the application or previously approved for the subject property.

C.	
Provided within ten (10) days of submitting an application for a Development Site Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall provide a compliance certificate upon accepting the Site Plan application and verifying that the subject site is appropriately zoned for the proposed use and structure. 

D.	
Provided upon request to any new tenant seeking to occupy an existing developed structure, which shall apply only occupants of business, commercial, and industrial properties. No new commercial/industrial utility connections or accounts, which have not been previously reviewed  for zoning compliance, shall be set up without first being issued a Zoning Compliance Certificate.

E.	
The Zoning Administrator shall issue a Zoning Compliance Certificate prior to any Certificate of Occupancy being issued by the Building Inspector or other designated official.  No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued without a Zoning Compliance Certificate.


14.10.	
Building Permits
A.	
 An approved Building Permit shall be obtained prior to commencement of the following activities.
1.	
Construction, remodeling, reconstruction, or moving of a structure, when such is subject to the provisions of the Building Code.

2.	
Moving, relocation, or set up of a mobile or manufactured home.

3.	
Grading, excavation, or other improvement of land preliminary to the establishment of a use on any property subject to the floodplain regulations.



B.	
Every Building Permit application shall include the following information.
1.	
A copy of the recorded plat of such land certified by the Butler County Register of Deeds office shall be required for new principal structures.

2.	
No application shall be accepted without verification that a Site Plan has been approved for the subject property, as applicable.

3.	
Applications that do not require an approved Site Plan shall instead include a plot plan drawn to scale showing the following information:
a.	
Location of proposed building site with the ground area, height, and bulk of all present and proposed structures.

b.	
Access drives and parking lots.

c.	
Structure footprint in relation to lot lines, waste disposal areas, the use to be made of such present and proposed structures on the land.

d.	
Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector for the proper enforcement of these regulations.



4.	
One (1) copy of both the plat and the Site Plan or plot plan, whichever is applicable, shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector as a public record.



C.	
A Building Permit shall be either issued or refused by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector within ten (10) days after the application is filed or within such further period as may be agreed to by the applicant.  No Building Permit shall be issued unless all the zoning requirements of these regulations are met.

D.	
A Building Permit shall become null and void one-hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance, unless within such period construction, structure, moving, remodeling or reconstruction of a structure is commenced or a use is commenced.

E.	
Any Building Permit issued in conflict with these regulations shall be null and void.



Article 15	
Board of Zoning Appeals

15.01.	
Authorization


The City Council shall designate a Board of Zoning Appeals, hereinafter referred to as the “Board,” as prescribed by K.S.A. 12-759. If so designated, the Planning Commission is authorized under K.S.A. 12-759 to serve in such capacity.
15.02.	
General Rules & Procedures


The Board shall operate according to the following general rules and procedures.
A.	
All members of the Planning Commission are voting members of the Board.

B.	
Board members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses when	authorized by the City Council.

C.	
All officers of the Planning Commission are officers of the Board.

D.	
The Board shall adopt bylaws establishing specific rules for its operation.
1.	
Hearing procedures shall not conflict with the ordinance designating the Planning Commission as the Board, applicable state statutes, or these regulations.

2.	
Bylaws shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.

3.	
Filing fees shall be established separately by the City Council.



E.	
The secretary shall keep public records of all official actions, which shall be maintained separately from that of the Planning Commission. Meeting minutes shall be kept as evidence of information presented at hearings, findings of fact, and decisions. The vote of each member shall be recorded on each item, including whether the member  was absent, abstaining or disqualified from voting.

F.	
Special meetings may be held when called the Chairperson, or in accordance with Board bylaws.

G.	
Board meetings shall be held separately from Planning Commission meetings; provided that they may be held in conjunction with Planning Commission meetings, which have been recessed to conduct Board business and reconvened to continue the Planning Commission agenda.

H.	
After a Board meeting has been called to order and a quorum declared present, all Board actions of shall be made by motion and decided by a majority vote of the members present and voting.


15.03.	
Powers and Jurisdiction  


The Board shall have the following jurisdiction and authority as a quasi-judicial body.
A.	
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of these regulations. Appeals to the Board may be taken by the person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, or bureau of the government affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. 

B.	
To authorize in certain cases a variance from the specific terms of these regulations, which are not contrary to the public interest and where a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will result in unnecessary hardship.
1.	
In all variances, the Board shall observe the spirit of these regulations, preserve and secure public safety and welfare, ensure that substantial justice is done.

2.	
The Board shall not authorize any variance that permits any use prohibited within the applicable zoning district.



C.	
Shall have jurisdiction, in accordance with the authority granted the Board in these regulations, only to hear appeals and variances affecting properties located within the City limits of the City of Augusta.


15.04.	
Appeals of Zoning Administrator Determinations


Determinations of the Zoning Administrator regarding the interpretation, application, or enforcement of these regulations, may be appealed to the Board. Such appeals may be filed as provided in this article by any person aggrieved, by any officer of the City, or any governmental entity affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator.
A.	
Applications of Appeal
1.	
Applications of appeal shall be filed with the Chairperson within thirty (30) days of the date the subject determination was made by the Zoning Administrator. Such applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee and the following:
a.	
A written description of the grounds for appeal.

b.	
The legal description of the subject property.

c.	
The required ownership list specified in Section 14.03.

d.	
Any additional information as may be required by the rules of the Board.





B.	
Stay of Enforcement
1.	
Upon filing, an appeal shall stay all enforcement of the action being appealed.

2.	
Enforcement shall not be stayed if the Zoning Administrator certifies in writing to the Board that by reason of facts stated in writing, a stay would pose a danger to or otherwise threaten public health, safety, or welfare. In such cases, enforcement shall not be stayed, except by order of the Board or a court of record with notice and basis of due cause provided to the Zoning Administrator.



C.	
Public notice shall be given and a hearing on the application of appeal conducted as specified under Section 14.03.A.3.

D.	
Board Actions
1.	
The Board may take any of the following actions on an appeal of a Zoning Administrator determination.
a.	
Affirm or reverse, wholly or partly.

b.	
Modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination; and substitute its own, which shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator.

c.	
Issue or direct the issuance of a zoning permit or compliance certificate.



2.	
No conditions may be attached to such a decision that would not otherwise have been available to the Zoning Administrator in making the initial determination.




15.05.	
Requests for Variance
A.	
The Board may authorize variances from the terms of these regulations when such are not contrary to the public interest, observe the spirit of these regulations, preserve and secure public safety and welfare, and ensure that substantial justice is done. Variances shall:
1.	
Only be authorized in the manner and under the circumstances stipulated in this article.

2.	
Be accompanied by findings of fact that demonstrate the literal enforcement of specific provisions of these regulations will result in unnecessary hardship for the applicant.

3.	
Not permit any use that is prohibited by these regulations in the applicable zoning district.



B.	
Applications for Variance
1.	
Applications for variance shall be filed with the Chairperson. Such applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee and the following:
a.	
A written description of the requested variance.

b.	
The legal description of the subject property.

c.	
The required ownership list specified in Section 14.03.A.3.

d.	
Additional information including:
i.	
The particular requirements of these regulations that prevent the proposed use or construction.

ii.	
The characteristics of the subject property that prevent compliance with the requirements of these regulations.

iii.	
The reduction of the minimum requirements of these regulations necessary to permit the proposed use or construction.

iv.	
The particular hardship that would result if the particular requirements	of these regulations  were applied to the subject property.

v.	
A sketch drawn to scale showing the subject lot(s), with all existing and proposed structures that necessitate the request.





2.	
Public notice shall be given and a hearing on the application of variance conducted per Section 14.03.



C.	
 Authorized Variances




Variances from the provisions of these regulations shall be granted by the Board only in accordance with the standards set out in Section 15.05.D, and shall be granted only as follows.
1.	
Variances to the applicable minimum lot area, lot width and lot depth requirements.

2.	
Variances to the lot coverage and minimum yard requirements.

3.	
Variances to the dimensions of fences and other permitted obstructions in required yards.

4.	
Variances to the required number of off-street parking spaces and amount of off-street loading, except for adjustments to ADA requirements.

5.	
Variances to dimensional sign provisions.

6.	
Variances to applicable requirements and conditions of approval for conditional use and temporary use applications.

7.	
Variances to applicable provisions of the floodplain district regulations.


D.	
Standards of Variance Approval
1.	
The Board may grant variances supported by written findings of fact based upon the particular evidence presented the hearing, subject to the conditions stipulated by K.S.A. 12-759(e) as follows.
a.	
The variance requested arises from a condition that meets all of the following provisions:
i.	
Unique to the property in question.

ii.	
Not ordinarily found in the same zoning district.

iii.	
Not created by an action or actions of the property owner or the applicant.



b.	
Granting of the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents.

c.	
Strict application of the provisions of these regulations from which a variance is requested will constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented in the application.

d.	
The variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or general welfare.

e.	
Granting the variance will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of these regulations.



2.	
The Board shall consider the extent to which the evidence supports the conclusions required by Section 15.05.D.1 and demonstrates that:
a.	
The hardship claimed by the applicant is an unnecessary hardship caused by the physical  surroundings, lot shape, or topography of the subject property; rather than the proposed use being inappropriate for the subject property or incompatible with its surroundings, or another mere inconvenience to the applicant. 

b.	
The hardship claimed by the applicant is not solely economic in nature, such as an attempt to avoid expenses related to meeting the otherwise applicable provisions, or a desire to increase the applicant’s profit margin for such development.

c.	
The requested variance will not diminish the condition or value of other properties in the vicinity; or the inhibit the rights of others to use their property in a lawful manner and enjoy the benefits gained from such uses. 

d.	
The requested variance will not result in an inadequate supply of light or air to adjacent property; create a substantial increase to congestion on public roadways; disproportionately impact public utility system service or capacity; impose a flood or fire hazard; or otherwise endanger the public health, safety, or welfare.





E.	
Performance Assurances


The Board may impose conditions upon the granting of a variance or require certain guarantees of the applicant as may be necessary to achieve compliance with the standards of Section 15.05.D, to mitigate potentially negative effects of such variances, and to carry out the general purpose and intent of these regulations.
1.	
Such performance assurances may include, but not be limited to:
a.	
Conditions
i.	
Further restrictions on bulk regulations.

ii.	
Time of operation and use limitations.

iii.	
Visual buffers, landscape buffers, and height compatibility setbacks, except as otherwise prohibited by applicable laws and regulations.

iv.	
Provision of utilities, drainage and other public improvements.

v.	
Additional access or access controls.

vi.	
Off-street parking and loading requirements.

vii.	
Platting, dedications, or guarantees.



b.	
Guarantees
i.	
Covenants that run with the land and filed with the County Register of Deeds that assure the installation of conditional improvements at a future date.

ii.	
Corporate surety bonds, cashier’s checks, escrow accounts, or similar security accepted in lieu of installing/constructing conditional improvements within a specified time. Such shall be in the City’s name, filed with the City Clerk in an amount to be fixed by the Board, which amount shall be roughly proportional to the estimated costs. The City Council may enforce such securities by all equitable means.





2.	
Failure to comply with any of the conditions imposed upon a variance shall constitute a violation of these regulations. Upon a finding by the Board of such a violation, the resolution granting the variance may be declared null and void.

3.	
Changes to such conditions may only be made in the same manner as the original variance. In such cases, it shall be required to apply for a new hearing. Only the requested change shall be considered at the rehearing.


15.06.	
Notice & Conduct of Hearings
A.	
The Board shall be subject the same requirements for public notifications and conduct of public hearings as the Planning Commission, which are provided in Section 

B.	
Decisions & Records
1.	
On all actions, the Board shall render a written decision in the form of a resolution without reasonable delay, but within forty-five (45) days of closing the hearing.

2.	
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain complete records of all actions of the Board with respect to applications for variances in order to properly issue permits.

3.	
Variances granted by the Board shall be valid for a period not to exceed one-hundred and eighty (180) days from the hearing date. Applicable zoning permits shall be received within that time, provided that upon written request, the Board may grant extensions, each not to exceed one-hundred and eighty (180) days. Such extensions granted shall not require further notice or hearing.





15.07.	
 Finality of Board Decisions
A.	
Orders and determinations of the Board are not subject to appeal to the Planning Commission or City Council. All such decisions are considered final, notwithstanding the right of any aggrieved party to seek a judicial review as provided by law.

B.	
Any person, official or governmental agency, jointly or separately dissatisfied by any decision of the Board, may seek relief by petition of the Butler County District Court. Such petitions shall by duly filed with the Court within thirty (30) days of the date the final decision is filed with the Zoning Administrator.




Page Intentionally Left Blank
Article 16	
Growth Area Regulations

16.01.	
Authority


This Article is established by authority of an inter-local agreement between Butler County, Kansas and the City of Augusta, Kansas delegating certain land use regulatory authority to the City within territory designated as the “Growth Area” of the City of Augusta. K.S.A. 12- 2901 et seq. and K.S.A. 12-744(c). Growth area is defined in Section 01.02.
16.02.	
Building Code & County Regulations


Properties within the Growth Area shall comply with the current Butler County building codes and sanitation codes. Butler County shall have jurisdiction over building codes and sanitation codes within the Growth Area, and shall enforce and administer such codes.
16.03.	
Residential Infrastructure Requirements


All residential uses shall be subject to the following infrastructure requirements.
A.	
Water
1.	
The County Sanatarian shall approve a property’s domestic water supply prior to the establishment of a residential use. In addition, the property owner shall provide written proof the adequacy and availability of the property’s domestic water supply.

2.	
Domestic water service shall only be provided by a rural water district or the City of Augusta when so approved by the Planning Commission.



B.	
Sewage
1.	
All sewage collection and treatment facilities shall be in compliance with the Butler County Sanitation Code.

2.	
A minimum lot size of one (1) acre shall be required for private sewage disposal systems.

3.	
A minimum lot size of five (5) acres shall be reqired for lagoon sewage treatment.



C.	
Streets


Properties being developed shall be subject to the following requirements for the provision of adequate streets.
1.	
Subdivisions of five (5) or more lots of one (1) acre or less: The developer shall provide or guarantee for the streets abutting each lot by the creation of a special benefit district for asphalt surfaced streets with curbs and gutters.

2.	
Subdivisions of five (5) or more lots between one (1) acre and twenty (20) acres: The developer shall provide or guarantee for the streets/roads abutting each lot by the creation of a special benefit district for six-inch (6”) thick asphalt surfaced streets with proper drainage ditches, per Ordinance No. 1870.

3.	
Subdivisions of fewer than five (5) lots over twenty (20) acres: The developer shall provide for or guarantee for the steets/roads abutting each lot by the creation of a special benefit district for concrete, asphalt or gravel  surfaced streets with proper drainage ditches.

4.	
Impact fees to provide for off-site street and road improvements shall be paid in accordance with the Butler County Road Impact Fee Resolution.


D.	
Building Setback Line
1.	
To allow ample area for highway expansion, the following building setback lines are hereby established for properties with frontage on U.S. 54 Highway.
a.	
One-hundred fifty (150) feet from the highway centerline between Hunter Road and Diamond Road.

b.	
One-hundred (100) feet from the highway centerline between Diamond Road and Indianola Road.



2.	
No land use shall be established and no building or structure shall be constucted on either side of U.S. 54 Highway within the designated setback area, except for allowable obstructions as defined by these regulations.



E.	
Fire Protection
1.	
The following information shall be provided in writing to the applicable rural fire district:
a.	
Street layout of the proposed development

b.	
Ingress and egress of the proposed development and each lot therein

c.	
Adequacy of the planned water supply system and/or surface water features for firefighting purposes.



2.	
The fire chief of the applicable rural fire district shall review the above items and, if applicable, recommend necessary modifications. No development shall occur without the property owner/developer eceiving approval from the fire chief. 



F.	
Exemptions & Variances


No exemptions or variances from the infrastructure requirements of this section shall be approved under any circumstances.
16.04.	
Manufactured Homes
A.	
Under circumstances of extreme hardship, as defined by these regulations, the temporary placement and use of a manufactured home in addition to an existing residence may be approved by conditional use, provided:
1.	
The applicant clearly states the reason for the hardship.

2.	
All requirements for the Butler County Sanitation Code are met.





Article 17	
Enforcement

17.01.	
Violations


Any of the following shall be a violation of the City of Augusta Zoning Regulations and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this article and by other applicable law.
A.	
Development of Use Without Permit or Approval


To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or other activity of any nature upon the land and improvements thereon subject to the jurisdiction of the City without all of the required permits, approvals, certificates and other forms of authorization required by these regulations in order to conduct or engage in such activity.
B.	
Development or Use Inconsistent with Permit or Approval


To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with the terms and conditions of any permit, approval, certificate or other form of authorization required in order to lawfully engage in such activity.
C.	
Development or Use Inconsistent with Conditions


To violate, by act or omission, any terms, condition or qualification placed by the City upon a required permit, certificate, rezoning, plan approval or other form of authorization granted by the City to allow the use, development of other activity upon land or improvements thereon.
D.	
Development of Use Inconsistent with Regulations


To erect, construct, reconstruct, remodel, alter, maintain any land in violation or contravention of any zoning, subdivision or general regulation of the zoning regulations or any amendment thereof.
E.	
Making Lot or Yard Nonconforming


To reduce or diminish any lot area so that the yards or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by these requirements or the final plat or plan.
F.	
Increasing Use Intensity


To increase the intensity of use of any land or structure, except in accordance with the procedures and substantive requirements of the zoning regulations.
G.	
Continuing Violation


To continue any of the above violations.  Each day of a violation shall be considered a separate offense.
H.	
Removing, Defacing, Obscuring Notice


To remove, deface or obscure any sign required by the zoning regulations or otherwise interfere with any notice required thereby.
17.02.	
Enforcement Actions
A.	
The Zoning Administrator or other designated official may inspect any property or structure whenever there is reasonable cause to believe a violation of these regulations may exist. Upon being presented with proper credentials by the Zoning Administrator or designated official:
1.	
No person shall refuse entry or access to the site or property where a sign exists when entry is required for the purpose of conducting an inspection.

2.	
No person shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such City representatives while in the process of carrying out their official duties.



B.	
The City shall have the enforcement authority to take the following actions in resolving violations of these regulations.
1.	
The City may deny or withhold any and all permits, certificates, plan or plat approvals or other forms of authorization on any land, structure, or improvement when evidence exists of unmet general zoning requirements; unmet requirements for specific types of land uses, developments, or structures; unmet conditions or qualifications of a permit, certificate, approval or previously granted authorization; uncorrected violations of these regulations.
a.	
The City may grant such authorization on a provisional basis, subject to the condition that the deficiency or violation be corrected.

b.	
These provisions shall apply regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in questions.



2.	
The City may revoke issued permits and granted approvals when the Zoning Administrator or other designated official finds a departure from the plans, specifications or conditions required under the terms of a particular permit, plan, or other approval; such authorization was procured by false representation of the applicant or was issued by mistake; any provision of these regulations is being violated.
a.	
If the violation involves a failure to comply with approved Site Plans or conditions of Site Plan approval, the City Council may, upon sending written notice to the applicant and conducting a hearing:
i.	
Revoke such Site Plans or related approvals.

ii.	
Allow development to continue subject to strict compliance with applicable plans, approvals, and conditions of approval, or the provision of security bond.



b.	
The Zoning Administrator or other designated official may revoke a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy upon sending written notice of violation to the applicant or owner and shall post such notice in a prominent location on the site or building that is readily visible to any individual entering the site or building.
i.	
Further construction activities shall be prohibited upon posting of the notification.

ii.	
Upon revocation of a Building Permit which was issued by mistake, the owner shall meet with the City to determine the nature of and reason for the mistake.

iii.	
If construction plans are in conflict with ordinances, regulations or other City requirements, the City may require modification to such plans that conform to all applicable ordinances, regulations or requirements.

iv.	
If a mistake has been made calculating the fee for a Building Permit, the proper fee shall be calculated and the difference refunded or charged to the applicant, as appropriate.





3.	
With or without revoking permits, the City may issue a stop work order for any construction activities on a building, structure, or property when it has a good faith belief that there is an uncorrected violation of a City regulation, issued permit or other granted authorization.

4.	
The City may seek an injunction or other equitable relief to stop any violation of these regulations or an issued permit, certificate, or granted authorization.

5.	
The City may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement or other action or proceeding to abate or remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to the violation.

6.	
The City may seek such criminal or civil penalties as provided by Kansas law for violation of these regulations.  Criminal penalties shall not exceed $500.00, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months for each offense, or both.  For purposes of these penalties, each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense.



C.	
The City shall may pursue any remedy that is not specifically listed herein, but is otherwise available under Kansas law and applicable to a specific violation of these regulations or related provisions.

D.	
The remedies listed above shall be cumulative.



17.03.	
Enforcement Procedures
A.	
Routine Enforcement




In the case of violations that do not involve ongoing site development, construction in progress, or an emergency situation, the City shall give written notice of the nature of the violation to the applicant, property owner, authorized agent, or occupant of the property, which shall be sent to the last known address.
B.	
Emergency Enforcement


If the Zoning Administrator or other authorized City official makes a reasonable determination that an emergency or unsafe situation exists in violation of these regulations, the City may immediately use the enforcement powers and remedies available under this article. This may include filing a compliant seeking criminal penalties in Municipal Court. No other notification procedures shall be required as prerequisites to any such immediate action.
Appendix A - Supplemental Landscape Guidance

Page Intentionally Left Blank








MONOPOLE TOWER

COLLOCATED ON WATER TOWER

SELF-SUPPORTED LATTICE TOWER

GUYED LATTICE TOWER

Figure 3.4: Illustrative Examples of Wireless Support Structure Types




Page Intentionally Left Blank


Figure 8.1: Sign Structure Portability & Installation



FIXED

PORTABLE

FIXED





BUILDING

FREESTANDING

PORTABLE




GROUND

TETHERED

TETHERED


VEHICLE

VEHICLE


Figure 8.2: Sign Structure Types




AWNING

CANOPY

AIR-ACTIVATED




COLUMN

INFLATABLE

MARQUEE



MONUMENT

POLE

MONUMENT




POLE

PROJECTING

PROJECTING




SECURED ATTACHMENT

ROOF

SIDEWALK





WINDOW

WALL

WALL



YARD

WINDOW

YARD


Figure 8.3: Sign Panel Types 1-8




BALLOON

AIR MOTION

BALLOON




CHANGEABLE COPY

BLADE

BANNER



ELECTRONIC MESSAGE

DIGITAL VIDEO

FLAG


Figure 8.4 - Sign Panel Types 9-12




FREE-FORM

FULL BODY

FREE-FORM



MECHANICAL MOVEMENT

FULL BODY

MECHANICAL MOVEMENT



PARTIAL BODY

PARTIAL BODY



Figure 8.5 - Illuminated Sign Examples




INTERNAL ILLUMINATION

EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION

INTERNAL ILLUMINATION

INTERNAL ILLUMINATION

EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION

Figure 8.6: Building Sign Component & Dimension Examples




Figure 8.7: Freestanding Sign Component & Dimension Examples





Page Intentionally Left Blank


SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
City of Augusta, Kansas
Augusta Planning Commission
Abstract
Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1834. 2002 Model Code.
1
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2002
City of Augusta, Kansas
Prepared by the
AUGUSTA PLANNING COMMISSION
Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1834 Adopted March 18, 2002 Effective Date March 22, 2002
Replacing the 1984 Subdivision Regulations Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1481 Adopted November 14, 1983 Effective Date January 18, 1984
Amended by Ordinances Numbered:
1506
May 25, 1985
1643
November 16, 1992
1697
September 18, 1995
1759
July 20, 1998
1789
May 1, 2000
1813
June 4, 2001
1872
November 17, 2003
1933
September 18, 2006
1943
July 2, 2007
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION, APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS .. 5
100: TITLE .................................................................................................................................... 5
101: PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 5
102: AUTHORITY .......................................................................................................................... 5
103: JURISDICTION ...................................................................................................................... 5
104: APPLICABILITY ..................................................................................................................... 6
105: LOT SPLITS AND LEGAL SURVEYS ........................................................................................ 6
CHAPTER 2: INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION .............................................................. 8
200: INTERPRETATION ................................................................................................................ 8
201: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION .................................................................................................. 8
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND FILING FEES .......................................... 9
300: DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY .............................................................................................. 9
301: DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR ........................................................................................ 9
302: DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION ........................................................................... 9
303: DUTIES OF THE GOVERNING BODY ................................................................................... 10
304: ENFORCEMENT .................................................................................................................. 10
305: BUILDING PERMITS ........................................................................................................... 10
306: FILING FEES ........................................................................................................................ 10
307: ENGINEERING PLAN REVIEW FEE ...................................................................................... 11
CHAPTER 4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS, PRELIMINARY PLATS, FINAL PLATS AND MASTER DRAINAGE PLANS ..................................... 12
400: SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN .................................................................................. 12
401: PRELIMINARY PLAT............................................................................................................ 13
402: FINAL PLAT ........................................................................................................................ 14
403: FINAL PLAT AS A UNIT DEVELOPMENT ............................................................................. 15
404: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLATS FOR SMALL TRACTS .............................................................. 15
405: GOVERNING BODY ACTION ON THE FINAL PLAT .............................................................. 15
406: BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS ............................................................................. 16
407: COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS............................................................................................ 16
408: MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN ................................................................................................. 16
3
CHAPTER 5: CONTENTS OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS, PRELIMINARY PLATS, FINAL PLATS AND DRAINAGE PLANS .............................................................................................. 17
500: CONTENTS OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS ........................................................ 17
501: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT .................................................................................... 17
502: CONTENTS OF THE FINAL PLAT ......................................................................................... 19
503: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS .......... 28
503A: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN WITHIN THE GROWTH AREA . 29
504 CONTENTS OF MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS .................................. 29
504A: CONTENTS OF MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN IN THE GROWTH AREA ................................. 32
CHAPTER 6: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS ........................................................................ 34
600: SCOPE ................................................................................................................................ 34
601: COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN ........................................................................... 34
602: LAND FOR PUBLIC FACILITY SITES ..................................................................................... 34
603: LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING ........................................................................................... 34
604: LAND FOR OPEN SPACE ..................................................................................................... 34
605: LAND SUBJECT TO EXCESSIVE EROSION BY WIND OR WATER .......................................... 35
606: STREETS – LAYOUT AND DESIGN ....................................................................................... 35
TABLE 605.8.7 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA .............................................................................. 37
607: ALLEYS ............................................................................................................................... 38
608: BLOCKS .............................................................................................................................. 39
609: LOTS ................................................................................................................................... 39
610: EASEMENTS ....................................................................................................................... 41
611: ASSEMBLY, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS ............................................ 41
CHAPTER 7: PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL OF LOT SPLITS ..................................................... 42
700: AUTHORIZATION FOR APPROVAL OF LOT SPLITS ............................................................. 42
701: APPLICATION PROCEDURES .............................................................................................. 42
702: APPROVAL GUIDELINES ..................................................................................................... 42
703: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................................... 43
704: REQUIREMENTS FOR LEGAL SURVEY ................................................................................ 43
705: CERTIFICATE OF LOT SPLIT APPROVAL .............................................................................. 43
CHAPTER 8: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS ......................................... 45
4
800: GOVERNMENTAL JURISDICTION AND ENGINEERING ....................................................... 45
801: SUBMITTAL OF IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES OR PETITIONS ......................................... 45
802: FINAL IMPROVEMENT PLANS ............................................................................................ 46
803: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS ............................................................................... 47
804: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS .................................................................................... 48
805: EXCEPTIONS FOR EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS ................................................................... 48
806: VACATION OF UNDEVELOPED SUBDIVISIONS................................................................... 48
807: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS .............................................................................................. 48
CHAPTER 9: APPEALS, WAIVERS AND VARIANCES ................................................................ 52
900: APPEALS GENERAL ............................................................................................................ 52
901: APPEALS ON IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS ....................................................................... 52
902: WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS OR GUARANTEES OF INSTALLATION OF SAME 52
903: VARIANCES ........................................................................................................................ 52
CHAPTER 10: DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................... 53
1000: DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................... 53
CHAPTER 11: AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW........................................................................... 58
1100: AMENDMENT PROCEDURES ........................................................................................... 58
1101: ANNUAL REVIEW ............................................................................................................. 58
1102: JUDICIAL REVIEW ............................................................................................................ 58
CHAPTER 12: SEVERABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................ 59
1200: SEVERABILITY .................................................................................................................. 59
1201: EFFECTIVE DATE .............................................................................................................. 59
APPENDIX CHAPTER ‘A’ ....................................................................................................... 60
5
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS CITY OF AUGUSTA, KANSAS
CHAPTER 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION, APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS
100: TITLE
The regulations herein shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision Regulations of the City of Augusta, Kansas” and shall hereinafter be referred to as “these regulations.”
101: PURPOSE
Responsible land subdivision is the beginning step in the process of orderly community development. These regulations are designed and intended to serve the following purposes:
1. To realize the goals and policies contained in the Comprehensive Development Plan;
2. To provide for the harmonious development of the City and the “Growth Area” in Butler County;
3. To provide for the proper location and width of streets, lot layouts, drainage, safety, population and open spaces for public parks;
4. To minimize water and air pollution, flooding, impact on the city infrastructure and traffic congestion;
5. To facilitate fire and police protection;
6. To establish administrative procedures to assure a fair and uniform basis for a working relationship with sub-dividers, utility companies, and other governmental agencies.
102: AUTHORITY
The regulations set forth herein are adopted under authority established by K.S.A., as amended, 12-705, 12-705b, 12-734, 12-735, 12-3009 through 12-3012, 12-3301 and 12-3302.
103: JURISDICTION
These regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the City as presently exists or hereafter established, and within the “Growth Area” located outside the City limits as described in the Zoning Regulations, Chapter 16 “Growth Area Regulations”. Section 103 as it existed prior to Ordinance No. 1933 (approved September 18, 2006) shall be repealed.
6
104: APPLICABILITY
The owner(s) of any land within the jurisdiction of these regulations desiring to:
1. Divide or further divide land into two or more lots or parcels, or
2. Otherwise alter the boundaries of lots or parcels of land, or
3. Establish land for use as streets or alleys or other property intended for public use or for the use of a purchaser or owner(s) of lots or parcels, shall cause a plat to be made in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
4. These regulations shall not apply whenever any lot, parcel or tract of land located within the jurisdiction governed by these regulations has been legally subdivided, re-subdivided or re-platted prior to the effective date of these regulations.
105: LOT SPLITS AND LEGAL SURVEYS
(Revised and approved by Ordinance No. 1789)
1. Lot Splits. A Lot Split shall be required when the division of land creates no more than one additional lot or tract of land and which:
1.1. Does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
1.2. Is not located in a flood plain;
1.3. Meets the standards set by these regulations for the disposal of sewage and for water supply including lot size; and
1.4. Conforms to the zoning regulations.
2. Legal Survey
2.1. A Transaction between owners of adjoining land which involves only a change in the boundary between the land owned by such persons and which does not create an additional lot or which does not result in the creation of a substandard lot by either owner according to the zoning regulations or sanitary code shall require a Legal Survey.
2.2. Land used for highway or other public purposes relating to the dedication of a parcel of land for a public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use shall require a Legal Survey.
7
2.3. A conveyance made to correct a description in a prior conveyance and clearly labeled as a “Correction Conveyance” shall require a Legal Survey. A Legal Survey shall not be required when there is no change in the land boundary.
2.4. Any land transfer by operation of law shall require a Legal Survey.
3. Any request made in writing for a determination as to qualifications as to requiring a Lot Split or Legal Survey shall be answered by the Administrator within 30 days of filing said request.
REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
8
CHAPTER 2: INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION
200: INTERPRETATION
1. Where the conditions imposed by these regulations are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
2. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement, provided, however, that where the requirements of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
3. These regulations are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws, ordinances or resolutions heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter governing any subject matter set forth in these regulations.
4. A subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations shall not become or made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of these regulations.
201: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
The language set forth in these regulations shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
1. The singular number includes the plural and plural the singular.
2. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present.
3. The word “shall” is mandatory while the word “may” is permissive.
REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
9
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND FILING FEES
300: DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY
The administration of these regulations is vested in the following governmental bodies of the City:
1. Administrator
2. Planning Commission
3. Governing Body
301: DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR
The administrator shall administer the provisions of these regulations and in furtherance of such authority, shall:
1. Maintain an up-to-date copy of these regulations, including amendments thereto.
2. Assist the Planning Commission in informing applicants of required procedures and of decisions on plats.
3. Provide application forms to applicants and process the filing fee.
4. Receive and transmit Subdivision Development Plans, Preliminary and Final Plat to the Planning Commission and governmental, public and private organizations as appropriate.
5. Receive and process lot splits.
6. Maintain a filing system for all applications, correspondence, plats, and related materials.
302: DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission shall:
1. Review and approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the Subdivision Development Plans.
2. Review and approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the Preliminary Plat.
3. Review and approve or disapprove the Final Plat and transmit the same to the Governing Body.
10
4. Make such other determinations and decisions as may be required of the Planning Commission acting as the Board of Zoning Appeals in granting variances to these regulations, and as required by these regulations, or the applicable sections of the Kansas Statutes Annotated.
303: DUTIES OF THE GOVERNING BODY
The Governing Body shall review and approve or disapprove all final plats and, in cases of approval and where appropriate, accept dedications of streets, alleys, and other public ways and sites shown on such plats. In cases of disapproval, the sub-divider shall be informed in writing of the reasons for disapproval.
The City Council shall be responsible for all required improvements required by these regulations within the corporate limits of the City. The Board of County Commissioners of Butler County shall be responsible for all required improvements required by these regulations within the “Growth Area.”
304: ENFORCEMENT
No plat shall be approved which does not comply with the provisions of these regulations, or be entitled to record at the office of the County Register of Deeds, or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner prescribed by these regulations.
305: BUILDING PERMITS
1. No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued by the Inspection Department until there has been compliance with all of the provisions of these regulations and conditions of plat approval.
2. No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued by the Butler County Zoning and Building Department until there has been a Growth Area zoning certificate issued by the City Inspection Department.
306: FILING FEES
The following filing fees shall be required at the time documents are presented to the City for Consideration:
Subdivision Development Plan
$500
Preliminary Plat
$500
Final Plat
No Additional Charge
One-Step Final Plat
$500
Master Drainage Plan
$500
Lot-Split
$250
11
A written receipt shall be issued to the person(s) making such payment. No fee shall be required when such proposed plat or lot-split is owned by any agency, political subdivision, board or commission of any township, City, the County, the State, or Federal Government. No fee shall be refunded in the event any Subdivision Development Plan, Preliminary Plat, Final Plat, Master Drainage Plan, or lot-split is disapproved. (Ordinance No. 1813)
307: ENGINEERING PLAN REVIEW FEE
The developer shall pay the engineering plan review fee to the City before the Planning Commission will approve the Master Drainage Plan. (Ordinance No. 1872)
REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
12
CHAPTER 4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS, PRELIMINARY PLATS, FINAL PLATS AND MASTER DRAINAGE PLANS
400: SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN
All new subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots, including reserves for future developments shall be required to have prepared a “Subdivision Development Plan.” The Planning Commission may require a subdivision development plan for less than ten lots when such lots may impact other subdivisions.
1. Said plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission before consideration of any Preliminary for Final Plat for the same subdivision.
2. The subdivision development plan shall encompass all land to be developed (entire Preliminary Plat area).
3. In addition, the plan shall have an “Area Map” that encompass land surrounding the subdivision to a distance of an including the nearest major collector or arterial streets, the nearest adjacent subdivisions, and/or undeveloped land to the nearest quarter section line. (Ordinance No. 1813)
4. The Subdivision Development Plan shall be submitted to the City not less than 20 days prior to the next regular scheduled Planning Commission meeting date.
5. The Subdivision Development Plan shall be submitted with no less than 20 copies.
6. The Administrator shall distribute copies to affected City departments, public and private utility companies and the Butler County Zoning Administrator.
7. The Administrator shall hold a Staff Meeting with all affected City department and utility representatives and submit a report to the Planning Commission with recommendations related to the development of the subdivision(s) affected.
8. The Planning Commission shall review the subdivision development plan and the Staff Report. The Subdivision Development Plan shall be approved by the Planning Commission before submittal of a Preliminary or Final Plat.
13
401: PRELIMINARY PLAT
After the Subdivision Development Plan has been approved by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission may consider the Preliminary Plat. The sub-divider may submit a Preliminary Plat of the entire subdivision along with the Subdivision Development Plan or within 180 days after the Subdivision Development Plan has been approved.
1. The Preliminary Plat shall be submitted to the City not less than 20 days prior to the next regular scheduled Planning Commission meeting date.
2. The Preliminary Plat shall be submitted with no less than 20 copies.
3. The Administrator shall distribute copies to affected City departments, public and private utility companies and the Butler County Zoning Administrator. Utilities receiving copies who do not attend the Administrator’s Staff Meeting shall signify approval of the plan.
4. The Administrator shall hold a Staff Meeting with all affected City department and utility representatives and submit a report to the Planning Commission with recommendations related to the development of the subdivision effected.
5. The Planning Commission shall review the Preliminary Plat and the Staff Report. The Preliminary Plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission before submittal of a Final Plat. The Planning Commission may conduct a public hearing if deemed desirable, for the purpose of receiving information supporting or opposing the Preliminary Plat. The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the Preliminary Plat within 60 days after the plat is submitted to the Administrator or within 60 days after receipt of requested information, or extended by mutual consent of the sub-divider.
6. Preliminary Plat Approval. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the Preliminary Plat meets the design standards and requirements of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Regulations, and other applicable provisions of the regulations of the City. If the Planning Commission is satisfied, it shall approve the Preliminary Plat and so notify the sub-divider in writing.
6.1. Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall not constitute approval of the subdivision by the Planning Commission, but shall signify in general the acceptability of the proposed subdivision. (Revised)
6.2. Such approval shall be considered permission to submit the Final Plat.
14
6.3. Such approval shall be effective for no more than 12 months from the date approval was granted. The Planning Commission may grant an extension based on a written request by the sub-divider.
7. Preliminary Plat Disapproval. If the Planning Commission determines that the Preliminary Plat does not meet the requirements as stated above, it may require modifications so as to satisfy such conditions.
7.1. The sub-divider may amend the Preliminary Plat so as to incorporate such modifications and resubmit the plat to the Planning Commission, which shall then grant its approval.
7.2. The sub-divider may appeal the disapproval of the Preliminary Plat to the Governing Body. Such appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the Administrator within 60 days after the date the Planning Commission issued its disapproval.
402: FINAL PLAT
After the Preliminary Plat has been approved by the Planning Commission, the sub-divider may submit a Final Plat of the entire Preliminary Plat or a portion of the Preliminary Platted area. The sub-divider shall provide the Planning Commission with a Preliminary Master Drainage Plan along with the Final Plat. (Ordinance No. 1813)
1. The Final Plat and Master Drainage Plan shall be submitted to the City not less than 20 days prior to the next regular scheduled Planning Commission meeting date.
2. The Final Plat and Master Drainage Plan shall be submitted with no less than 20 copies.
3. The Administrator shall distribute copies to affected City departments, public and private utility companies and the Butler County Zoning Administrator. Utilities receiving copies who do not attend the Administrator’s Staff Meeting shall signify approval of the plan.
4. The Administrator shall hold a Staff Meeting with all affected City department and utility representatives and submit a report to the Planning Commission with recommendations related to the Final Plat and Master Drainage Plan.
5. The Planning Commission shall review the Final Plat, Master Drainage Plan and the Staff Report. The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the Final Plat within 60 days after the plat is submitted to the Administrator or within 60 days after receipt of requested
15
information, or extended by mutual consent of the sub-divider. The Planning Commission shall approve the Final Plat if:
5.1. It is substantially the same as the approved Preliminary Plat;
5.2. There has been compliance with all conditions which may have been attached to the approval of the Preliminary Plat; and
5.3. It complies with all the provisions contained in these regulations and of other applicable regulations or laws.
403: FINAL PLAT AS A UNIT DEVELOPMENT
A Final Plat may be submitted for final approval in separate geographic units rather than the entire Preliminary Platted area under the following conditions:
1. Each Final Plat shall contain not less than 20 lots.
2. The Planning Commission shall approve the Final Plat units at the time the Preliminary Plat is approved.
3. A Final Plat of at least one unit shall be submitted for approval within one year from the date the Preliminary Plat was approved. The Final Plats for the entire Preliminary Plat shall be submitted for approval within five years from the date the Preliminary Plat was approved. The Planning Commission may grant extensions upon written request by the sub-divider.
404: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLATS FOR SMALL TRACTS
A Preliminary Plat and Drainage Plan shall not be required for any Final Plat where only one additional lot of ten acres or less and no public street or easement of access is to be dedicated.
405: GOVERNING BODY ACTION ON THE FINAL PLAT
The Governing Body shall either approve or disapprove the Final Plat and the dedication of any land for public purposes within 30 days after the first meeting of the Governing Body following the date of submission of the plat to the City Clerk.
1. The Governing Body may defer action for an additional 30 days for the purpose of allowing for modifications to comply with the requirements established by the Governing Body.
16
2. If the Governing Body defers or disapproves of the plat and any dedications thereto, it shall advise the Planning Commission and the sub-divider in writing of the reasons the plat was disapproved.
406: BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
All Final Plats located in the Growth Area shall be submitted to the Butler County, Kansas Board of County Commissioners for their acceptance of dedications for right-of-ways, easements and other public ways. It is the responsibility of the sub-divider to accomplish the acceptance of dedications.
407: COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS
The Final Plat with all required signatures and in the form as approved by the City shall be recorded by the sub-divider with the Butler County, Kansas Register of Deeds.
1. The sub-divider shall pay the recording fee.
2. The sub-divider shall return one copy of the plat to the City after it has been recorded.
3. The Final Plat shall be considered null and void if the plat is not recorded within 180 days after acceptance by the Governing Body.
408: MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN
A Master Drainage Plan shall be required for all new subdivisions of ten or more lots and may be required for subdivisions of less than ten lots.
1. A Preliminary Master Drainage Plan shall be submitted along with the Final Plat at least two weeks prior to the next Planning Commission meeting.
2. The Final Plat may be sent to the Governing Body for final approval and recording without having the final Master Drainage Plan.
3. The Final Master Drainage Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at least two weeks prior to its next meeting.
4. The Inspection Department will not issue a building permit until the Master Drainage Plan has been recorded and a recorded copy is received by the department. (Ordinance No. 1813)
17
CHAPTER 5: CONTENTS OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS, PRELIMINARY PLATS, FINAL PLATS AND DRAINAGE PLANS
500: CONTENTS OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLANS
The Subdivision Development Plan shall have the same contents as the Preliminary Plat and the following additional requirements:
1. The addition of all drainage easements, natural drainage ways entering and exiting the subdivision.
2. Have arrows showing the proposed direction(s) of runoff water and estimate the amount of additional runoff onto adjacent property.
3. Shall show the tentative locations for all utility locations within the utility easements. (Ordinance No. 1813)
4. City staff shall prepare a report to the Planning Commission estimating the impact the Subdivision Development Plan will have on city traffic flow, utility production and distribution. The Planning Commission shall request a similar report be completed by the Gas Service Company, Telephone Company and Cable TV Company. The Electrical Company and Rural Water District shall provide a report in the Growth Area.
501: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
The Preliminary Plat and vicinity map shall be drawn to an appropriate scale approved by the Zoning Administrator. The engineer/surveyor preparing the plat shall provide one copy in the scale of one inch equals 100 feet.
1. General Information. The following general information shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat:
1.1. The proposed name of the subdivision.
1.2. Date of Preparation, north pointing arrow, and scale of drawing.
1.3. Identification as a Preliminary Plat.
1.4. Location of the subdivision by quarter-section, township and range and by measured distances to a section corner to further define the location and boundaries of the tract.
1.5. Names of adjacent subdivisions or, in the case of un-platted land, the name of the owner(s) of adjacent property.
18
1.6. The name and address of the owner, the sub-divider, and the engineer/surveyor who prepared the plat.
2. Existing Conditions. The following existing conditions shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat:
2.1. The location, width and names of all existing public or private streets within or adjacent to the tract, together with easements, rights-of-way, and other important features such as section lines and corners, city and township boundary lines and monuments.
2.2. The horizontal location and elevation within the subdivision and the horizontal location in the adjoining streets and property of existing sanitary sewer and storm water sewers including flow lines, water mains, culverts, underground wiring, pipe lines and gas lines proposed to serve the property to be subdivided.
3. Contour lines or spot elevations based on Mean Sea Level (MSL) or other datum approved by the Planning Commission having the contour intervals of two foot contours for ground slopes less than 10%, five foot intervals for ground slopes exceeding 10% and spot elevations where the ground is too flat for contours.
3.1.1. The date of the topographic survey(s) shall be shown including the location, elevation and description of the benchmark controlling the vertical survey and the location of existing monuments and survey markers.
4. The location and direction of all watercourses and area subject to flooding, including the floodway and flood fringes areas, where available.
5. Significant natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes, lakes and wooded areas.
6. Existing use of the property including the location of all existing structures showing those that will be removed and those that will remain on the property after the Final Plat is recorded.
7. Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated and total acreage therein.
8. Streets, showing the location, width, names and approximate grades thereof. The Preliminary Plat shall show the relationship of all streets to any projected streets shown, or
19
any applicable Comprehensive Plan proposal, or if none proposed, then as suggested by the Planning Commission.
9. Easements showing the width and purpose.
10. Lots showing approximate dimensions, minimum lot sizes and proposed lot and block numbers.
11. Location and type of utilities to be installed including provisions for storm water drainage.
12. Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for park, playground or other public purposes.
13. Minimum front yard building setback lines as established by applicable zoning or other regulations, or more restrictive setbacks if desired by the sub-divider.
14. A vicinity map showing existing subdivisions, streets and un-subdivided tracts adjacent to the proposed subdivision and showing the manner in which the proposed streets may be extended to connect with existing streets.
502: CONTENTS OF THE FINAL PLAT
The Final Plat shall be prepared by a Kansas Licensed Engineer, and drawn in waterproof black ink on tracing cloth, Mylar or their equivalent. Alternatively, a Final Plat may be prepared by a photographic process provided it is submitted on 0.004 inch polyester photographic film such as Mylar or its equivalent. The permitted page size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches, or a size acceptable for recording. Larger sizes will not be accepted. The scale shall be 100 feet to one inch except that a variation in scale may be allowed where the Zoning Administrator determines it is necessary for proper exhibit of the subdivision. The engineer/surveyor preparing the plat shall provide one transparency of the Final Plat in the scale of one inch equals 100 feet and a digital copy of the plat on disk. When more than one sheet is used for any plat, each sheet shall be numbered in relation to the total number of sheets. Linear dimensions shall be given in feet and decimals of a foot. (Ordinance No. 1697)
The Final Plat shall show on the face thereof:
1. The name of the Subdivision, its legal description with reference to its location by quarter-section, township and range.
2. The date of preparation, scale, north pointing arrow, legend and controlling physical features, such as watercourses, highways and railroads.
20
3. A small vicinity map showing the proposed subdivision as related to adjacent streets and/or existing subdivisions.
4. A legal description of the tract boundaries.
5. Reference ties to previous surveys and plats, as follows:
5.1. Distance and direction to the monuments used to locate the land described in the certificate of survey.
5.2. The location of all other monuments required to be installed by the provisions of these regulations.
6. Tract boundary, block boundary, street and other right-of-way lines with distances and angles (and/or bearings). Where these lines follow a curve (all curves must be circular), the central angle, the radius and points of curvature. Error of closure of the perimeter survey shall not exceed one foot for each 10,000 feet.
7. Lot lines with dimensions. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to street lines unless otherwise shown. Rear lot lines shall be parallel to block or tract lines unless otherwise indicated. Point of deflection of rear lot lines shall be indicated by angles and distances.
8. Block numbers or letters continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the subdivision. Such identification shall be solid, of sufficient size and thickness to stand out, and so placed as not to obliterate any figure.
9. Lot numbers beginning with the number one, and numbered consecutively in each block.
10. Minimum front yard setback lines as established by applicable zoning or other regulations, or more restrictive setback if desired by the sub-divider.
11. All easements shall be denoted by the fine dashed lines, clearly identified, and if already on record, the recorded reference of such easements. If an easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of such easement shall be included.
11.1.1. The width of the easement with sufficient ties to locate it definitely with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated through the
21
plat map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner’s certificate of dedication and identification.
12. The width of the streets being dedicated and the width of any existing right-of-way.
13. The name of each street shown on the subdivision plat.
14. Land parcels to be dedicated for any purpose, public or private, to be distinguished from lots or tracts intended for sale.
15. A statement that the Final Plat is covered by a Required Master Drainage Plan. For plats within the City Limits:
The statement shall be placed under the subdivision name.
16. Marginal lines encircling the sheet. All information shall be within this margin.
17. The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate: certificates requiring a seal should be located near the edge of the plat to facilitate affixing the seal. All names on the plat must also be typed of clearly printed under the signatures.
17.1. OWNER’S CERTIFICATE AND DEDICATION. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record, title, or interest in the land subdivided; consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat; and dedicating all parcels of land shown on the Final Plat which are intended for public use as highways, streets, alleys, easements and public grounds. This certificate may be in the form:
OWNER’S CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION
STATE OF KANSAS )
) ss: COUNTY OF BUTLER )
This is to certify that the undersigned owner(s) of the land described in the Engineer’s Certificate; have caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided on the accompanying plat into lots, blocks, streets and other public ways under the name of ____________________; that all highways, streets, alleys, easements and public grounds as denoted on the plat are hereby
22
dedicated to and for the use of the public for the purposes of constructing, operating, maintaining, and repairing public improvements; and further that the land contained herein is held and shall be conveyed subject to any restrictions, reservations, and covenants on file or hereafter filed in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Butler County, Kansas.
Date Signed: _________________________ Date Signed: _________________________
(Signature) (Signature) ______________________________ ______________________________ NAME PRINTED OR TYPED NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
17.2. NOTARY CERTIFICATE. The acknowledgement of a notary in the following form:
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS )
) ss: COUNTY OF BUTLER )
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day of _________________, 20_____, by _________________________.
(Signature)
________________________________________, Notary Public NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
(SEAL)
My appointment expires: ____________________
17.3. SURVEY CERTIFICATE DESCRIPTION. A certificate signed by the surveyor responsible for the survey and final plat. The surveyor shall not sign the plat until all monuments, irons, or benchmarks are set as required by these regulations. Said signature shall be accompanied by a legal description of the land surveyed, the total acreage, the month and year such survey was made, and the surveyor’s seal.
23
SURVEY CERTIFICATE AND DESCRIPTION
I, the undersigned, licensed professional (engineer or surveyor) of the State of Kansas, do hereby certify that the following described tract of land was surveyed on __________________ and the accompanying Final Plat prepared and that all monuments shown herein actually exist and their positions are correctly shown to the best of my knowledge and belief:
(Legal description and total acreage):
Date: ______________________________
(SEAL) ___________________________________ (Engineer/Surveyor Name and License Number)
17.4. PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE. The certificate of the Planning Commission in the following form:
PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS )
) ss: COUNTY OF BUTLER )
This plat approved by the Augusta City Planning Commission on this __________ day of ____________________, _______________.
(Chairman Signature)
________________________________________ NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
ATTEST:
(Secretary Signature)
_________________________, Secretary NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
24
17.5. CITY ATTORNEY’S CERTIFICATE. If a plat is an addition to the City, a certificate signed by the City Attorney indicating that all conditions of K.S.A. 12-401 have been met.
CITY ATTORNEY’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS )
) ss: COUNTY OF BUTLER )
This plat is approved as an addition to the City of Augusta, Kansas pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-401.
Date Signed: ____________________
(City Attorney Signature) _________________________ NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
17.6. GOVERNING BODY CERTIFICATE. A certificate signed by the Governing Body approving the Final Plat and acceptance of dedications in the following form:
GOVERNING BODY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS )
) ss: COUNTY OF BUTLER )
This plat approved and all dedications shown hereon, if any, are hereby accepted by the City Council of the City of Augusta, Kansas on ___________________________________.
(Mayor Signature) (SEAL) _________________________, Mayor NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
ATTEST:
25
(City Clerk Signature) _________________________, City Clerk NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
17.7. BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS’ CERTIFICATE. A certificate signed by the Board of County Commissioners acceptance of dedications in the Growth Area in the following form:
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS’ CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS )
) ss: COUNTY OF BUTLER )
The dedications shown on this plat are hereby accepted by the Board of County Commissioners, Butler County, Kansas, on ___________________________________.
(Chairman Signature) _________________________, Chairman NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
ATTEST:
(County Clerk Signature) ________________________________________, County Clerk (SEAL) NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
(County Commissioner Signature) ________________________________________, Commissioner NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
26
17.8. TRANSFER RECORD. A place to note the transfer record date of the Butler County Clerk in the following form:
TRANSFER RECORD
Entered on transfer record this __________ day of _________________________.
(County Clerk Signature) _________________________, County Clerk NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
17.9. REGISTER OF DEEDS CERTIFICATE. The recording certificate of the Butler County Register of Deeds in the following form:
REGISTER OF DEEDS CERTIFICATE
STATE OF KANSAS )
) ss: COUNTY OF BUTLER )
This is to certify that this instrument was filed for record in the Register of Deeds Office at ____(Time)______, on the _____ day of _______________ and is duly recorded. Book __________ Page __________
(Register of Deeds Signature) _________________________, Register of Deeds NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
(Deputy Register of Deeds Signature) _________________________, Deputy Register of Deeds NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
27
17.10. LAND SURVEYOR’S REVIEW. A certificate signed by a licensed Kansas land surveyor has reviewed the Final Plat. (K.S.A. 58-2005)
LAND SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATION
Reviewed in accordance with K.S.A. 58-2005 on this _____ day of ________________________.
(Registered Land Surveyor’s Name) _________________________, Appointed Land Surveyor, Butler County, Kansas NAME PRINTED OR TYPED
_______________ R.L.S. Number
18. “Growth Area Subdivision Waiver of Annexation. Subdivisions which lie in the “Growth Area” for which a request has been made for the extension of one or more City utility services shall agree to a waiver of protest of potential future annexation by a statement waiving the right to protest annexation, and such statement shall be included in the covenants of the subdivision which must be filed with the Butler County Register of Deeds. Such statement shall be located below the name of the subdivision.
18.1.1. “Owners of land within this subdivision do hereby bind themselves to waive any protest to annexation by the City of Augusta.”
19. MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN CERTIFICATION. A statement shall be included on the Final Plat to the effect that a Master Drainage Plan has been approved and made mandatory for all lots in the subdivision. The statement shall be located below the name of the subdivision. This certification is required only on plats within the City Limits.
20. The following information shall be submitted with the Final Plat:
20.1. A copy, if any, of restrictive covenants applicable to the subdivision. Such covenants shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Staff to determine if any potential conflicts exist with the City’s statutes.
28
20.2. A title report by an abstract or a title insurance company, or an attorney’s opinion of title, showing the owner of the land and all other persons who have an interest therein, and describing any encumbrances on the plat, including such items as rights-of-way, easements, pipelines, leases, mortgages, real estate taxes, special assessments, and other encumbrances affecting the ownership.
503: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS
The Preliminary Master Drainage Plan presented to the Planning Commission at the time the Planning Commission considers a Final Plat must have the following:
1. Existing ground contours shall be shown at the same interval as required for Preliminary Plats. Benchmark information shall be included.
2. Existing spot elevations shall be shown at top of curbs on connecting streets, inlets, storm sewers and other physical sections that will govern the runoff from the proposed subdivision.
3. Areas where the proposed subdivision will accept drainage from outside the perimeter of the proposed subdivision.
4. Locations of discharges from the proposed subdivision and characteristic of the receiving system (ditches, storm sewer, etc.)
5. Proposed top of curb elevations at control points such as intersections and vertical point of intersections.
6. Proposed percent grade of streets.
7. Preliminary locations and sizes of storm sewers and channels.
8. Arrows and labels showing proposed direction of lot drainage, cross-lot drainage and locations of drainage swales.
9. Proposed location of drainage easements.
10. Proposed type of foundation/basement system for each lot.
29
503A: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN WITHIN THE GROWTH AREA
In the Growth Area, a drainage plan shall be presented to the Planning Commission at the time the Planning Commission considers the Final Plat that includes the following:
1. Existing ground contours shall be shown at the same interval as required for Preliminary Plats. Benchmark information shall be included.
2. Areas where the proposed subdivision will accept drainage from outside the perimeter of the proposed subdivision.
3. Locations of discharges from the proposed subdivision and characteristic of the receiving system (ditches, storm water, etc.).
4. Proposed percent grade of ditches.
5. Preliminary locations and sizes of storm sewers, ditches and channels.
6. Arrows and labels showing proposed direction of lot drainage, cross-lot drainage and locations of drainage swales.
7. Proposed location of drainage easements.
8. For lots less than 1 acre and/or subdivisions with planned water features, the following additional information may be required:
8.1. Type of foundation (i.e. view-out basement; walk-out basement; slab floor; pad elevation; etc.).
8.2. Lowest structure opening.
8.3. Water feature 100-year flood elevations.
504 CONTENTS OF MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS
The Master Drainage Plan shall be prepared by a licensed engineer that is familiar with the design of all streets, sewer and water installations within this jurisdiction. Storm water runoff from the site will exit the site in drainage easements or public right-of-way. The developer shall be responsible for obtaining all off-site drainage easements from the effected property owners. The engineer designated by the City shall review all proposed Master Drainage Plans. The developer shall pay the City for the engineering review based on the reviewing engineer’s fees.
30
1. All drainage easements shall be identified and dedicated on the final plat. Cross-lot drainage shall be discouraged without drainage easements. Cross-lot drainage may be accepted when it can be demonstrated that run-off from adjacent areas is insignificant or undue hardship is created by requiring a drainage easement.
2. Drainage Elevations. The Master Drainage Plan shall show the following:
2.1. Elevation of property corners.
2.2. Elevation and location of drainage swales and drainage appurtenances.
2.3. Street curb elevations at property lines, drainage structures and locations that could affect the drainage.
2.4. Benchmark information with one or more benchmarks with the subdivision.
3. Pad type and elevations. The Master Drainage Plan shall have the pad elevations for:
3.1. Garage floor;
3.2. Foundation wall/slab floor;
3.3. Basement window and/or lowest opening below foundation wall;
3.3.1. The recommended slope for drainage swales is 2%. The minimum slope for drainage swales shall be 1%. Flatter slopes will require paving of the swale or underground pipe with inlets to maintain positive drainage. The ground elevation 10 feet away from the house shall be a minimum of 6 inches (finished grade including sod, etc.) below the lowest house opening.
3.3.2. Each lot on the Master Drainage Plan shall stipulate the type of foundation that may be constructed on the lot with the following designations: (WO) walk-out basement; (B) Basement; and/or (VO) view-out basement, is allowed.
4. Utility and Building Contractors. All utility companies shall comply with these regulations. City staff or an engineer appointed by the City shall coordinate the proper placement of all utilities within the utility/drainage easement. The design engineer shall hold a pre-construction meeting with all utility companies prior to the placement of streets and other
31
utilities. The design engineer shall coordinate the installation of all underground utilities with the appropriate utility engineering staffs and contractors. All underground utilities shall be installed in the utility/drainage easement before the drainage way is constructed do r shall require the utility companies to put the grade back to the original level after construction. Utility and building contractors are required to protect and maintain rear flow line monuments during construction. Utility and building contractors who remove any lot monuments, front or back, shall be required to hire a licensed surveyor to replace the missing monument before the final occupancy inspection and provide documentation of same.
5. Building Contractors. The building permit process shall include the following:
5.1. Prior to the issuance of a building permit and the start of construction, the builder will develop an individual Lot Grading Plan consistent with the Master Drainage Plan. The Lot Grading Plan will show the following:
5.1.1. Boundary of lot with setbacks and easements;
5.1.2. The house “footprint;”
5.1.3. Street curb with top of curb elevations along lot;
5.1.4. Swale and drainage appurtenance locations and elevations of high and low points within lot, where applicable;
5.1.5. Foundation wall/slab floor elevation;
5.1.6. Garage floor elevation;
5.1.7. House opening elevation if below foundation;
5.1.8. Arrows showing direction of all lot drainage. Location and elevation of drainage swales. Location and elevations of high and low points within lot that are not mentioned above;
5.2. Prior to issuance of a building permit and the start of construction, the builder shall have an initial lot survey conducted. This survey shall consist of the following:
5.2.1. All lot corners are to be set and/or checked;
32
5.2.2. Controlling elevations shall be checked for compliance with Lot Grading Plan. This will include top or curb, drainage swales, appurtenances and relevant lot corners;
5.2.3. Set 2 benchmarks at lot or cut/fill stakes for builder/inspector use;
5.2.4. Provide plat or survey to builder showing the above information certified by a registered land surveyor;
5.2.5. After an acceptable Lot Grading Plan and the initial lot survey have been received, the Building Inspector will issue a building permit. In the event the survey is substantially different from the Master Drainage Plan, the builder shall prepare a new Lot Grading Plan and have the Master Drainage Plan revised.
5.3. Foundation Survey – After the foundation/slab is constructed, a registered land surveyor shall check the elevation of the foundation/slab and furnish a certificate of actual elevation to the builder and the Building Inspector.
5.4. Framing Permit – Foundation/slab elevation certificate will be checked for compliance with the Lot Grading Plan. A framing permit will be issued by the Building Inspector upon substantial compliance with the Lot Grading Plan.
5.5. “As-Built Survey” – After completion of the house and all landscaping, an “As-Built Survey” will be performed. The plat of survey will show the actual elevations of all points shown on the Lot Drainage Plan. This survey will be signed by a registered land surveyor. A copy of the “As-Built Survey” shall be provided to the Building Inspector.
5.6. Occupancy Permit – The Building Inspector will check “As-Built Survey” for compliance with the Lot Grading Plan and issue an Occupancy Permit upon substantial compliance.
504A: CONTENTS OF MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN IN THE GROWTH AREA
The Master Drainage Plan shall be prepared by a licensed engineer that is familiar with the design of all roads, sewer and water installations within Butler County. The design engineer will determine if water detention areas and downstream drainage easements are required. The developer shall be responsible for obtaining all off-site drainage easements from the effected property owners. The engineer designated by the City or the City staff may review all proposed Master Drainage Plan. The developer shall pay the City for the engineering review based on the reviewing engineer’s fees. (Ordinance No. 1813)
33
1. Drainage Easements. All drainage easements and reserves for drainage shall be dedicated rights-of-way as shown on the Final Plat. (Ordinance No. 1813)
2. Drainage Elevations. The Master Drainage Plan shall have a minimum of one elevation for each lot and shall have adequate ditch elevations. (Ordinance No. 1813)
3. First Floor – Lowest Opening Elevations. The minimum elevations for a foundation wall shall provide a reverse slope from the first floor elevation and /or lowest opening in the foundation away from the structure for a minimum distance of 20 feet.
REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
34
CHAPTER 6: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
600: SCOPE
All subdivision of land subject to these regulations shall conform to the minimum design standards of this article and the classification of urban and rural type subdivisions as defined in Chapter 7.
601: COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Subdivisions shall conform to the intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
602: LAND FOR PUBLIC FACILITY SITES
Public agencies using the Comprehensive Development Plan as a guide may use the following procedure for acquiring sites for public facilities which does not preclude voluntary dedications and mutual negotiations for land or the use of the condemnation laws of the State:
1. The sub-divider offers to sell the appropriate public body, agency or authority, lands, sites and locations for parks, playgrounds, schools, fire stations, or other public facilities. As soon as the Preliminary Plat has been received and reviewed, the Planning Commission shall give 45 days’ notice to the public body, agency and authority that it appears that lands should be considered for public acquisition. If within that 45 days the body receiving notice fails to act or submits a negative report on acquisition, then the subdivision and design thereof shall be treated as if no such request for land had been made.
2. If the organization receiving notice replies in writing that they desire to acquire land within the subdivision, they shall have an additional 45 days after making such reply to make arrangements for such land acquisition.
3. The time allocated for making the above determination may be extended with the mutual consent of the sub-divider and the organization involved.
603: LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING
All land subject to the Federal Flood Plain Management Ordinance as adopted by the City of Augusta shall be subdivided whereby building construction shall not be allowed in the flood plain or floodway. New or replacement water supply and/or sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. On-site sewage disposal systems shall not be located in a flood plain or floodway.
604: LAND FOR OPEN SPACE
The following conditions may be required as part of the approval of any subdivision plat:
35
1. That the sub-divider provide appropriate easements for the preservation of open space areas within a subdivision. Such open space may be needed to preserve areas containing watercourses, drainage ways, land periodically flooded, substantial woodland, rugged topography, and wildlife habitat; to maintain water quality and quantity. Such land is not normally considered as buildable land and should not be developed in order to maintain the quality of the environment.
2. When accepted by the appropriate Governing Body, such land may be voluntarily dedicated to public use by the sub-divider.
605: LAND SUBJECT TO EXCESSIVE EROSION BY WIND OR WATER
On land subject to excessive soil movement by the forces of wind and/or water and that may cause environmental health hazards, necessary preventative measures shall be a part of the subdivision plat. Conservation standards applicable to subdivisions shall be adhered to which are used by the County Conservation District.
606: STREETS – LAYOUT AND DESIGN
1. Definitions – See Chapter 10 of these regulations.
2. All lots located in any subdivision shall be served directly by a public street.
3. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the intent of the Comprehensive Development Plan, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned street; to reasonable circulation to traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; to topographical conditions; to the run-off of storm water; to public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such street.
4. Where such is not shown on the Comprehensive Development Plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
5. Local Streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
6. If a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed limited access highway or arterial street or railroad right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with access control provisions along the rear property line and
36
screening, deep lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
7. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is placed with the applicable Governing body under acceptable conditions.
8. Street right-of-way requirements. Street right-of-way requirements shall be determined by the total aggregate needs for the functional components for the particular system being considered. The total aggregates shall be in increments of even numbers only. The components involved shall be as follows depending upon the urban or rural type characteristics of the street needed based on land use, traffic and density:
8.1. Moving or traffic lanes may be variable from 9 feet to 12 feet depending on the street function, low density, residential, collector, arterial and on design speed of the roadway. A moving lane may utilize a portion of the surface of certain types for curb construction.
8.2. Parking lanes for on-street temporary parking of vehicles shall be at least 8 feet in width. For computation purposes, up to 2 feet for curb or shoulder may be included as part of the parking lane.
8.3. Curbs shall be considered to require 2 feet irrespective of construction type.
8.4. Shoulders for rural type roadways shall be not less than 3 feet in width.
8.5. The parking for urban streets shall be a minimum of 14.5 feet on both sides of the street. The parking is that area between the back of the curb and the adjacent property line. The parking shall be used for the installation of utilities, street lighting, traffic control devices, fire hydrants, sidewalks, and to provide a transition area in grades (if necessary) between the roadway and the property adjacent to the right-of-way. The parking for rural type roads shall be variable in width based on drainage needs.
8.6. For Streets and roadways on the Federal Aid Secondary System (FAS) or any comparable functional system, prevailing design standards shall apply.
8.7. Street design criteria of right-of-way, street width, horizontal sight distances and roadway grades, shall comply with Table 605.8.7 below.
37
TABLE 605.8.7 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(in feet)
Horizontal Sight*
(in feet)
Roadway Grades
(Distances in feet)
(in percent)
Urban Local
60
29 – 31
200
0.4 – 10
Urban Collector
70
36 – 38
300**
0.4 – 8
Urban Arterial
80
40 – 53
500**
0.4 – 6
Rural Local
80
Shall comply with the applicable township or county regulations and specifications.
Rural Collector
90
Rural Arterial
100
Marginal Access
50
29 – 31
200
0.4 – 10
*The sight distance shall be measured within street rights-of-way from a height of four and one-half feet above the proposed pavement surface in the right-hand lane of the roadway.
**Whenever possible, there shall be an inside tangent at least 100 feet in length introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
***Deviations to these requirements, recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the Governing Body, shall be recorded on the Final Plat. (Ordinance No. 1872)
9. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 80 degrees.
38
10. Street jogs are to be avoided on arterial and collector streets. On local streets, centerline offsets of less than 150 feet should be avoided.
11. Roadway pavement at intersections shall be rounded by the following minimum radii:
Type of Roadway
Intersecting Width
Min. Curb Radii
Local Residential
Local Residential
20 feet
Local Residential
Collector
25 feet
Local Residential
Arterial
50 feet
Collector or Arterial
Collector or Arterial
50 feet
12. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be used where they are or would be logical extensions of existing streets even though separated by undeveloped land.
13. Half-streets shall not be permitted.
14. Cul-de-sacs in single-family residential areas shall not be longer than seven times the average lot width or 500 feet, whichever is less as measured to the throat of the cul-de-sac. In multiple-family residential areas, such streets shall not exceed 300 feet. Urban type streets shall have a turn-around diameter of at least 70 feet and a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet, or shall have an alternative turn-around area such as hammerheads, as providing service equal to the foregoing requirement. For rural type streets, a minimum street property line diameter of 120 feet or more may be required for fire protection and other equipment.
607: ALLEYS
1. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial areas, except that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking spaces consistent and adequate for the uses proposed. Alleys in residential districts are to be discouraged.
2. When provided, the minimum width of an alley shall be 20 feet.
3. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, a turning radius shall be provided to permit safe vehicular movement.
39
4. Dead-end alleys shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities.
608: BLOCKS
1. The lengths, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1.1. Provisions of adequate building sites suitable for the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
1.2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, off-street parking and loading.
1.3. Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
1.4. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
2. A block should not exceed 1,320 feet in length unless the previous layout or topographic conditions justify a variation. In general, block shall not be less than 400 feet unless necessary because of existing street patterns.
3. All blocks shall be so designed so as to provide two tiers of lots, unless a different arrangement is required in order to comply with or be permitted by other sections of these regulations.
4. Blocks may be irregular in shape, provided they are harmonious with the overall pattern of blocks in the proposed subdivision.
5. In extra-long blocks, a public pedestrian way may be required to provide access to public or private facilities such as schools or parks.
609: LOTS
1. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines, shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of urban or rural development and use contemplated.
2. Lot dimensions shall conform to the minimum requirements of any applicable zoning regulations or sanitary or building codes, unless higher standards are established in accordance with this section:
2.1. All subdivisions in the City shall be connected to the public water and sewage disposal systems.
40
2.2. Within the City limits where no water or sewer system is available, the provisions of the 2000 International Sewage Disposal Code shall apply. The sub-divider and/or property owners shall sign a waiver stating that they will connect to public water and public sewer within 180 days after said lines are constructed and that all private sewage systems will be disconnected and destroyed according to applicable regulations.
2.3. Within the “Growth Area” where no public water or sewer system is available, the provisions of the Butler County Sanitation Code shall apply. The sub-divider and/or property owners shall sign a waiver stating that they will connect to public water and public sewer within 180 days after said lines are constructed and that all private sewage systems will be disconnected and destroyed according to applicable regulations.
2.4. It is the intent of these regulations to require the installation of a public water supply and public disposal systems wherever feasible.
3. In those areas where there may be public water supply and public sewage disposal systems anticipated in the foreseeable future, the Planning Commission may require that the subdivision be designed to urban standards and lots be added together to meet the minimum rural lot requirements. In such case, only one single family dwelling shall be erected to the rural lot requirements and shall be placed on the lots in such a manner that the additional lots can be sold at a later date. The creation of such a building site through use of multiple groups of lots shall be contingent upon the establishment for record of restrictive covenants satisfactory to the legal counsel of the Planning Commission.
4. As a general guideline, the maximum depth of all residential lots shall not exceed two and one-half time the width thereof. For all other types of lots, the depth shall not exceed three times the width.
5. The area of the street right-of-way shall not be included and calculated in the area of the lot with respect to minimum lot area requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
6. There shall be no double frontage lots for single family and two family dwellings, except where the lots abut upon a limited access highway or arterial street. Double frontage lots shall not have vehicular access between such lots and an abutting limited access highway or arterial street.
7. Reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where such are essential to provide a separation of residential development from limited access highways or arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
41
8. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width when necessary to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
9. Side lot lines, where delineated, shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or substantially so.
610: EASEMENTS
1. Utility easements shall be provided where necessary, and centered on rear or side lot lines and shall be at least 20 feet wide along rear lot lines and ten feet wide alongside lot lines, except that easements for street lighting purposes shall not in any event be required to exceed 10 feet. Side lot easements, when needed for other than street lighting purposes such as drainage, may be 20 feet.
2. Where a lot or group of lots side or back on an existing high pressure oil or gas line, a building setback easement shall be provided along the high pressure oil or gas easement line. No building or structure shall be constructed within the high pressure oil or gas easement. Utility easements may abut the pipeline easement but not be located inside said easement.
3. If a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, or channel, then a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way shall be provided. Such easement or right-of-way shall conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse and shall be of such width or construction as may be necessary to provide adequate storm water drainage and for access for maintenance purposes. Parallel streets may be required in connection therewith. Drainage easements shall be vegetated with adapted perennial grasses or otherwise stabilized to prevent soil erosion and sediment movement by wind and water.
4. Vision triangle easements may be required on any corner lot to provide an open and usable vision path for drivers of vehicles approaching the intersection. The vision triangle shall be engineered to meet the conditions of the two streets intersecting.
611: ASSEMBLY, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS
1. The minimum width of streets adjacent to areas designated, proposed or zoned for assembly, commercial or industrial use may be increased by the Planning Commission to such extent as may be deemed necessary to assure the free flow of through traffic without interference from parked or parking motor vehicles.
2. Block intended for assembly, commercial or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purpose, with adequate spaces set aside for off-street parking and loading.
42
CHAPTER 7: PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL OF LOT SPLITS
700: AUTHORIZATION FOR APPROVAL OF LOT SPLITS
The Planning Commission hereby delegates to the Subdivision Administrator the authorization to approve or disapprove lot splits in accordance with this Chapter. If necessary, appeals from the decision of the Subdivision Administrator may be made to the Planning Commission for final determination.
701: APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Requests for lot split approval shall be made to the Administrator by the owner of the land. Four copies of a Legal Survey Drawing to scale of the lot involved showing the precise location and dimensions of the split.
702: APPROVAL GUIDELINES
Approval or disapproval of lot splits shall be made based on the following guidelines. No lot split shall be approved if:
1. A new street or alley is needed or proposed.
2. There is less street right-of-way than required by these regulations or the Comprehensive Development Plan unless such dedications can be made by separate instrument.
3. A vacation of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or easements is required or proposed.
4. All easement requirements have not been satisfied.
5. Such split will result in a tract of land without direct access to a street or which cannot meet flood plain requirements.
6. A substandard sized lot or parcel will be created according to these regulations or any applicable zoning regulation, except in the case of splitting a lot containing a duplex (two-family attached dwelling), no lot created by the split shall contain less than forty percent (40%) of the square footage of the original lot (Ordinance No. 1506)
7. Such action will result in significant increases in service requirement, e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.; or will significantly interfere with maintaining existing service levels, e.g. pumping stations, repaving, storm drainage, etc.
43
703: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
The Subdivision Administrator may make such additional requirements as deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of existing land development regulations and Governing Body policy. Requirements may include, but no be limited to, installation of public facilities, dedication of right-of-way and easement, and providing restrictive covenants for the protection of other landowners in the original subdivision.
704: REQUIREMENTS FOR LEGAL SURVEY
The owner of the property shall cause to be made a legal survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor. The survey shall contain the following:
1. Lot, Block and Addition of the subdivision to be split or the CAMA number and legal description of the property if located in the “Growth Area.”
2. Addresses of the original lot and the lot created.
3. Total square feet or acres of the new lots created.
4. North pointer located on the map.
5. Lot lines and all pertinent dimensions shown.
6. Street names displayed on all named roadways.
7. Name of the person who prepared the map, date map was drawn and the land surveyor’s license number.
705: CERTIFICATE OF LOT SPLIT APPROVAL
The Administrator shall, in writing, either approve with or without conditions or disapprove the lot split within 30 days of application. If approved, and after all conditions have been met, the Administrator shall sign the following certificate of approval. The Administrator shall cause the certificate to be recorded with the Butler County Register of Deeds. The original copy shall be retained by the Administrator and the land owner shall be furnished two copies.
44
CERTIFICATE OF LOT SPLIT APPROVAL
STATE OF KANSAS )
)ss:
COUNTY OF BUTLER )
I, _________________________, Subdivision Administrator of the City of Augusta, Kansas, do hereby certifiy that this lot split has been examined by me and found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Augusta, Kansas, and is therefore, approved for recording.
Lot Split No. ______________________________
Lot _____ Block _____ Subdivision ___________________________________
CAMA No. _____________________________________________________________________
Dimensions of existing Lot: _______________________________________________________
Total size of existing Lot: _________________________________________________________
Lot ‘A’ Dimensions: ______________________________________________________________
Total Size of Lot ‘A’: _____________________________________________________________
Lot ‘B’ Dimensions: ______________________________________________________________
Total size of Lot ‘B’: _____________________________________________________________
Existing Zoning: _________________________________________________________________
Date: ______________________________
___________________________________ ___________________________________ (Subdivision Administrator Signature) (Subdivision Administrator Printed Name)
SUBSCRIBED and SWORN to before me this _____ day of ____________________.
(SEAL) ________________________________________, Notary Public
My Appointment Expires: _________________________
45
CHAPTER 8: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
800: GOVERNMENTAL JURISDICTION AND ENGINEERING
1. Corporate limits of the City of Augusta. The City Council of the City of Augusta shall be responsible for the acceptance of installation improvements within the corporate limits of the City. The City shall designate a Kansas licensed engineer to set standards and specifications, approve engineering drawings, inspect improvements, recommend acceptance of improvements, prepare petition forms and establish the amount of surety for guaranteeing the installation of such improvements.
2. Growth Area. The Board of County Commissioners of Butler County, Kansas shall be responsible for the acceptance of installation improvements within the “Growth Area.” The County Engineer has the authority for final acceptance of utilities within their jurisdiction.
3. Utilities. The utility companies shall designate an engineer as responsible for the improvements of their utility as required. The City or County Engineer has the authority for final acceptance of utilities within their jurisdiction.
801: SUBMITTAL OF IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES OR PETITIONS
The sub-divider shall so indicate at the time the Final Plat is approved by the Governing Body if the required improvements are to be installed by Fiscal Sureties or Petitions. This does not preclude the possibility that the applicable Governing Body may, at its discretion and in recognition of its financial position, share in the cost of oversized improvements which may benefit other related areas of the jurisdiction-at-large.
1. Fiscal sureties for Improvements.
1.1. Upon final approval of plans and specifications for required improvements, the sub-divider shall enter into an agreement with the applicable Governing Body under which the sub-divider agrees to install such required improvements. Such agreement shall be contingent upon the approval of the Final Plat by the Governing Body.
1.2. The sub-divider shall furnish a corporate completion bond by a firm authorized to do business in Kansas with good and sufficient sureties or a cashier’s check, escrow account, or irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the applicable Governing Body, in the amount of the estimated cost as approved by the engineer responsible for setting and enforcing the applicable design and construction standards of the installation of the required improvements. Such financial guarantee shall be contingent upon the satisfactory installation of such required improvements within two years from the date the Final Plat was approved by the Governing Body.
46
2. Petitions for Improvements
2.1. The petitions must be valid petitions as may be required by Kansas law.
2.2. The petitions must be approved by the applicable Governing Body.
2.3. The initiating resolution of such improvement must be adopted by the applicable Governing Body concurrently with the petition approval or as soon thereafter as may be provided by law.
2.4. The initiating resolution must be recorded with the Butler County Register of Deeds after it has been adopted by the applicable Governing Body showing that the land described in the resolution will be liable in the future for special assessments for the improvements authorized.
3. For streets and drainage in the Growth Area, pre-construction of improvements as an alternative method of guaranteeing their installation may be used if approved by the Board of County Commissioners and the County Engineer.
4. The sub-divider shall submit to the Governing Body at the time the Final Plat is approved, letters from the utility companies involved stating that arrangements have been made by the sub-divider guaranteeing the installation of their respective utilities.
5. Monuments and benchmarking shall be installed by the sub-divider before the Final Plat is recorded with the Butler County Register of Deeds.
802: FINAL IMPROVEMENT PLANS
All improvement plans shall be prepared by a Kansas licensed engineer or electrical engineer. Engineered drawings shall be submitted in duplicate to the jurisdiction involved for review and approval.
1. Content. Engineering drawings for improvements, when required, shall contain the following information plus any additional information deemed necessary by the applicable engineer, including standardized specifications:
1.1. Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates for roadway, alley, sidewalk construction; including plans, profile indicating existing topography and elevation including curb and sidewalk elevation when required, intersection control elevation and
47
paving geometrics for each street with a typical cross section of the roadway. The profiles of grade lines shall be shown to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet horizontal, and one inch equals ten feet vertical; or to a scale approved by the applicable civil engineer.
1.2. Plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed storm drainage improvements.
1.3. Plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed water distribution systems, water supply facilities and fire hydrants.
1.4. Plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed sanitary sewage systems.
1.5. All plans for other utilities shall be prepared by or at the direction of the utility providing the service.
2. Review. An engineer appointed by the City or County Engineer shall be responsible for determining specifications, standards and conformity of the engineered drawings to the requirements of these regulations and engineering practices. The applicable engineer shall either correct such deficiencies as found during the review or cause the design engineer to correct the deficiencies. A report shall be compiled by the applicable engineer and submitted to the applicable Governing Body.
3. Approval. The applicable Governing Body shall approve the engineering drawings, plans, specifications and standards upon recommendation of the applicable engineer.
803: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
No improvements shall be constructed nor shall any work preliminary thereto be done under a pre-construction agreement, until such time as the improvements have been approved and in compliance with all of the requirements relating to any agreement and guarantees as specified in these regulations.
1. Inspection. All improvements constructed or erected shall be subject to inspection by the applicable engineer responsible for setting and enforcing the applicable design and construction standards of the required improvements. The cost attributable to all inspections required by these regulations shall be charged to and paid by the sub-divider or special assessments against the subdivision. The contractor installing the improvements shall make arrangements with the applicable engineer to insure all inspections are made.
48
2. Inspection Procedures. After an inspection notice is received the applicable engineer may conduct an on-site inspection to determine that the work complies with the approved engineering plans and specifications. If in the opinion of the applicable engineer, the work does not comply with the final drawings, the engineer shall have authority to order that all such work shall be terminated until such time as necessary steps are taken to correct any defects or deficiencies. Upon the correction of such defects or deficiencies, the contractor shall again notify the applicable engineer for a re-inspection.
3. Final Inspection. Upon completion of all improvements within the area covered by the Final Plat, the applicable engineer shall conduct a final inspection of all improvements installed. After the final inspection is made the applicable engineer shall prepare a report to the Governing Body stating that all improvements have been installed according to the design drawings and specifications and that the installed improvements meet all the requirements of these regulations. The applicable engineer shall also file a report to the Governing Body certifying that all obligations incurred in the engineering and construction of the improvement have been properly paid and settled, and prepare a report of the total costs of the improvements.
804: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
Upon the receipt of a favorable report from the applicable engineer, the Governing Body shall by resolution, or utility, by letter formally accept such improvements. The improvements shall become the property of the applicable Governing Body or utility company involved.
805: EXCEPTIONS FOR EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS
Where the proposed plat is a re-plat of an existing subdivision and no additional improvements are required, no duplication of improvements shall be required. If the improvements are not in good condition, the Governing Body may require repair, correction or replacement of such improvements.
806: VACATION OF UNDEVELOPED SUBDIVISIONS
When no lots on a plat have been sold, the sub-divider may request, in writing, the vacation of the plat prior to the time any improvements have been installed. In such case, the Governing Body shall return all sureties to the sub-divider except for engineering or other expenses incurred for the design of the required improvements.
807: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
As a condition to Final Plat approval, the sub-divider of a proposed subdivision shall be responsible to install or, in cooperation with governmental bodies and utility companies, cause to be installed the following necessary facilities and improvements:
49
1. Urban Developments. All roadways, alleys, curbs, gutters, and street drainage facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards set by the Governing Body. All urban streets shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, or asphaltic concrete and no gravel or sanded roadways shall be constructed.
2. Growth Area Developments. All roadways located in the “Growth Area” shall be constructed to standard specifications as approved by the County Engineer. Lot entrances shall be as specified in the “Growth Area” regulations adopted by the Zoning Regulations of the City of Augusta.
3. Sidewalks shall be constructed 5 feet wide as required by ADA Regulations, 4 inches thick and using 3,000 psi concrete mix. (Ordinance No. 1643)
3.1. In general, sidewalks shall be constructed nearer to property lines rather than curb lines; except in assembly, commercial and industrial areas.
3.2. Construction of sidewalks shall take place concurrently with the installation of driveways.
3.3. The requirement for sidewalks may be waived where there is clearly a minimum amount of pedestrian traffic such as on the perimeter of cemeteries and parks.
3.4. Sidewalks may be installed on designated local streets.
3.5. Sidewalks are mandatory on all designated collector and arterial streets constructed after the effective dates of these regulations.
4. Urban Sanitary Sewer Systems. Whenever sanitary sewers are to be installed as required by these regulations, laterals, mains, and sub-mains shall be constructed at the direction of the applicable Governing Body subject to the regulations of the Kansas Department of Health and Environment. In those areas within the corporate city limits where a sanitary sewer system is not to be installed within a reasonable time, private sewer systems may be installed according to these regulations and the International Private Sewer Disposal Code.
5. Growth Area Sanitary Sewer Systems. All sanitary sewer systems installed in the “Growth Area” shall comply with the “Growth Area” provisions in the zoning regulations, the Bi-County Health Department and the Kansas Department of Health and Environment.
50
6. Urban Water Distribution Systems. Whenever a public water distribution system is required by these regulations, said system shall be designed and constructed according to the specifications of the city engineer and the Kansas Department of Health and Environment.
7. Growth Area Water Distribution Systems. Whenever five or more lots with each lot containing less than 10 acres, a public water distribution system is required. (Ordinance 1643) Said water distribution systems, where required, shall be designed according to the specifications of the County Engineer and the Kansas Department of Health and Environment. Individual water systems shall comply with the regulations established by the Bi-County Health Department.
8. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed according to the standards of the applicable Fire Chief, but not less than the minimum standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
9. Storm Drainage System. A storm drainage system shall be constructed, separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system, meeting all of the specifications of the Governing Body and applicable engineer. The storm drainage system shall be connected to any existing storm sewer system discharging into the nearest major water channel. A Master Drainage Plan shall be designed for all subdivisions according to these regulations.
10. Electrical Distribution Systems. Underground wiring for electric power, street lights, telephone and other cable systems shall be mandatory within the City and encouraged in the Growth Area.
11. If landscaping is required, a landscaping plan shall be submitted and the landscaping installed.
12. Street signs shall be approved by the applicable Governing Body.
13. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets, and all intermediate points as shall be required by the Planning Commission. Monuments shall be made of iron rebar not less than 5/8 inch in outside diameter and not less than 18 inches in length. All monuments shall be securely placed and set in such a manner that the top of the monument shall be at ground level. Benchmarks may also be required of such material, size, and length as may be approved by the Planning Commission.
14. Relocation of Existing Facilities. Whenever existing facilities or utilities, known or unknown, are required to be relocated due to the required improvements, the costs of such
51
relocations shall be the responsibility of the sub-divider and/or jurisdiction if the improvements are being installed by petition as special assessments.
15. Where required, measures will be taken during construction to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation by wind or water. Conservation standards shall be adhered to which have been adopted by the County Conservation District.
REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
52
CHAPTER 9: APPEALS, WAIVERS AND VARIANCES
900: APPEALS GENERAL
The sub-divider of a proposed subdivision may appeal decisions of the Planning Commission to the Governing Body. The applicable Governing Body shall make its decision and notify the Planning Commission and sub-divider. No further action will be taken on a plat during the appeal to the Governing Body.
901: APPEALS ON IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Any appeal as to the approval of standards, or plans and engineering drawings in connection with required improvements shall be directed to the applicable Governing Body and that action shall be final.
902: WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS OR GUARANTEES OF INSTALLATION OF SAME
Any waiver of the required improvements or guarantees of installation may be made only by the applicable governing Body on a showing that such improvements are not feasible or needed.
903: VARIANCES
In cases in which there is unwarranted hardship in carrying out the literal provisions of these regulations as to design criteria on the plat, the Planning Commission may grant a variance from such provision based on the following criteria:
1. A request for a variance shall be made to the Administrator who shall transmit it to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall give the sub-divider and any other interested person an opportunity to be heard with respect to the requested variance.
2. The Planning Commission shall not grant a variance unless it shall find that the strict application of these regulations will create an unwarranted hardship, and unless the variance is in harmony with the intended purpose of these regulations and that the public safety and welfare will be protected. The term “unwarranted hardship” shall mean the effective deprivation of use as distinguished from a mere inconvenience.
3. Variances permitted under the provisions of this Section shall not include improvement standards, waiver of required improvements or guarantees of installation. Consideration of a request for a variance does not relieve the sub-divider from the necessity of proceeding under the applicable provisions of any other regulations including zoning.
53
CHAPTER 10: DEFINITIONS
1000: DEFINITIONS
Any word or phrase that is defined in this Section shall have the meaning assigned to it by this Section whenever the word or phrase is used in these regulations.
ADMINISTRATOR: A person designated by the Governing Body as the administrator of these regulations.
AGRICULTURE: The use of a tract of land for growing crops, pasturage, nurseries, dairying, or the raising of poultry or cattle and other livestock, including the structures necessary for carrying out farming operations and the residence(s) of those owning and operating the premises such as a member of the family thereof, or persons employed thereon and their families. The feeding or disposal of community or collected garbage shall not be deemed an agricultural use, nor shall riding academies, livery or boarding stables, dog kennels, commercial feedlots, or commercial greenhouses; however, forested and non-producing open space land are considered agricultural.
ALLEY: A strip of land along the side of or in the rear of lots intended to provide a secondary means of access to and from streets and such lots.
ARTERIAL STREET: Any street serving major traffic movements which is designed primarily as a traffic carrier between cities or between various sections of a city or county, which forms part of a network of through streets, and which prohibits direct access from residential lots. No parking is permitted on arterial streets except in designated areas.
BLOCK: A series of lots or tract of land bounded by streets, railway rights-of-way, waterways, parks or open land.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line on a lot indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected or altered and establishing the minimum open space to be provided. Such line may be more, but not less restrictive than applicable zoning or other regulations.
CITY: The City of Augusta, Kansas
COLLECTOR STREET: Any street serving a neighborhood or large subdivision designed primarily to gather traffic from local or residential streets, connect them to an arterial street system and with community facilities. Existing collector streets shall have no parking when safety needs are determined by the Governing Body. There shall be no parking permitted on all new collector streets constructed after the effective date of these regulations except where additional street width is provided for parking. Specifying collector streets will depend on housing density and the development plan of the areas served.
54
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The adopted Comprehensive Development Plan for the City and the surrounding “Growth Area.”
COUNTY: Butler County, Kansas
COUNTY ENGINEER: The officially appointed engineer for the County.
CROSS LOT DRAINAGE: The passage of storm water runoff from adjacent areas that is outside the perimeter of the lot onto the lot.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having only one outlet and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around at the other end.
DEAD-END STREET: A street having only one outlet and is not terminated by a vehicle turn-around at the other end.
DESIGN STANDARDS or DESIGN REQUIREMENTS: All requirements and regulations relating to design and layout of subdivisions contained in these regulations.
DRAINAGE SWALE: A shallow ditch that will carry storm water runoff to the street or drainage channel.
DRAINAGE CHANNEL: A drainage ditch constructed to a specific cross section that will receive runoff from streets and drainage swales.
DRIVING SURFACES: Shall be considered from back of curb to back of curb for urban streets and the width of the driving surface plus an 8-foot-wide shoulder on each side of the driving surface for rural streets.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner of the specific use of a strip of land by others.
ENGINEER: When used in connection with designing or surveying the plat, he shall be a professional engineer or surveyor licensed by the State of Kansas or licensed to practice in the State. When used in connection with designing or engineering any improvements, including drainage, either on site or off-site, he shall be a professional engineer licensed by the State of Kansas or licensed to practice in the State.
FINAL PLAT: A subdivision as it is represented as a formal document by drawing and writing which is prepared in accordance with these regulations to be placed on record with the County Register of Deeds.
FRONTAGE: The property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street; or with a dead-end street, all property abutting one side of such street measured from the nearest intersecting street and the end of the dead-end street.
55
GROWTH AREA: The area around the City of Augusta as designated by Ordinance No. 1789 and Inter-local Agreement with Butler County, Kansas whereby the City of Augusta exercises both subdivision and zoning control.
GOVERNING BODY: The City Council of Augusta, Kansas or the County Board of Commissioners of Butler County, Kansas.
HALF-STREET: A street bordering one or more property lines of a subdivision tract to which the sub-divider has allocated only one-half of the ultimate and intended street width.
IMPROVEMENTS: All facilities constructed or erected by a sub-divider and/or a city, township, or the county within a subdivision to permit and facilitate the use of lots or blocks for residential, assembly, recreational, commercial, industrial or other regulations.
LOCAL STREET: Any street designed primarily to provide access to other streets from individual property and of limited continuity within a neighborhood.
LOT: A portion of land in a subdivision or other parcel of land intended to be the unity by which such land would be individually transferred and/or developed, whether immediate or future.
LOT DEPTH: The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot, two opposite lot lines of which abut upon streets which are more or less parallel.
LOT LINE: The boundary line of a lot.
LOT SPLIT: The dividing or re-dividing of a lot or lots in a recorded plat of a subdivision or unplatted plot of land into not more than two tracts which meet the criterial within these regulations.
LOT WIDTH: The distance on a horizontal plane between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the line establishing the lot depth at the established building setback line.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A local street which is parallel with and adjacent to a limited access highway or arterial street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from fast through traffic on the limited access highway or arterial street.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to land to be subdivided under these regulations.
PARKING AREA: That portion of the legal right-of-way between the back of the street curb and the property line. The property owner does not own the parking area, but does have exclusive use to the parking area under certain conditions.
56
PLANNING AGENCY: The Planning Commission of the City of Augusta, Kansas.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision of land showing the character and general details of the proposed development.
PROPERTY LINE: The legal boundary encompassing a specific lot or tract of land. Said line may encompass any legal easements located within the property line on the lot or tract of land. The property line does not include any legal right-of-way (streets or alleys) controlled by the City, County, State or federal governments except such rights-of-way in the Growth area.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties which constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of property owners; and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values. The City of Augusta is not a party to any subdivision restrictive covenants.
RE-SUBDIVISION: The subdivision of a tract of land that has previously been lawfully subdivided and a plat of such prior sub-division duly recorded. (Sometimes referred to as a “replat”.)
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area between boundary lines of a street or other easement.
ROAD or ROADWAY: The paved or improved area existing on the street right-of-way which is used for vehicular traffic, exclusive of sidewalks, driveways or related uses.
RURAL STREETS: Those streets located within the “Growth Area.” Rural streets may be located within the corporate limits of the City, but only in the Agricultural Districts.
SCREENING: Decorative fencing or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing form view the area behind such fencing or evergreen vegetation.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street, paved or otherwise surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only.
STREET: The street right-of-way or easement, whether public or private, including the paving or other improvements on the street right-of-way. A street may also be called avenue, road, lane, boulevard, way, drive or other name describing the right-of-way for vehicular traffic.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the property lines abutting both side of a street right-of-way.
SUB-DIVIDE LAND: To partition a parcel of land into two or more parcels, tracts, lots or sites for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, when such parcel exists as a unit or contiguous units under a single ownership.
57
SUB-DIVIDER: The owner, or any person, firm or corporation, authorized by the owner, undertaking proceedings under the provisions of these regulations for the purpose of sub-dividing land.
SUB-DIVISION: Either an act of sub-dividing land as defined in this section or a tract of land sub-divided.
SUB-DIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A proposed development plan for an entire sub-division or tract of land containing more than one sub-division, including a distance surrounding the sub-division(s) on all sides.
SURVEY: A legal document containing a scale drawing and legal description of property, prepared by a licensed Kansas surveyor, and duly recorded with the County Register of Deeds.
TURN-AROUND: An area at the closed end of a dead-end street or cul-de-sac within which vehicles may reverse their direction without any backing up.
URBAN STREETS: Those streets located within the corporate limits of the City.
VISION TRIANGLE: A triangular area at the intersection of streets maintained in such a manner as to provide a safe and open line of vision for drivers of vehicles and pedestrians approaching the intersection. Within the vision triangle, no one shall install, construct, plant, park, or maintain any sign, fence, hedge, shrubbery, tree, natural growth or other obstruction which would materially impede vision between the heights of 33 inches and eight feet above the street level. Such restrictions shall not apply to official traffic signs and signals and utility poles.
REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
58
CHAPTER 11: AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW
1100: AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
These regulations may be amended at any time after the Planning Commission shall have held a public hearing on the proposed amendment. A notice of such public hearing shall be published once in the official city newspaper at least 20 days prior to the date of such hearing. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation for adoption of the proposed amendment(s) to the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall adopt the proposed amendment(s) by ordinance and such amendment(s) shall become effective and made part of these regulations after once being published in the official city newspaper. A copy of the adopting ordinance shall be added to the Appendix of these regulations.
1101: ANNUAL REVIEW
In order to maintain these regulations, the Planning Commission shall annually hold a public review at their first meeting in January to consider amendments, if any, to these regulations. Notification of such a public review may be distributed to governmental agencies and interested parties. Adoption of such amendments shall comply with the requirements of Section 1100 above.
1102: JUDICIAL REVIEW
As provided by State statutes, any taxpayer or any other person having an interest in property affected may have the reasonableness of these regulations and the ordinances incorporating these regulations by reference determined by bringing an action against the Governing Body in the County District Court.
REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
59
CHAPTER 12: SEVERABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE
1200: SEVERABILITY
If any provisions of these regulations are held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions of these regulations, said provisions to be completely severable from the remaining provisions of these regulations, and the remaining provisions of these regulations shall remain in full force and effect.
1201: EFFECTIVE DATE
These regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after their adoption by the Planning Commission, approval by the Governing Body by ordinance incorporating these regulations by reference, and publication of such ordinance in the official city newspaper.
ADOPTED by the Planning Commission on February 28, 2002.
______________________________ H.V. Chapin, Chairman
ATTEST:
______________________________ Nancy Turnage, Secretary
APPROVED by the Governing Body on March 18, 2002
______________________________ Ross Roundtree, Mayor
(SEAL)
ATTEST:
______________________________ Deborah L. Cossel, City Clerk
Approved by Ordinance No. 1834 by the Governing Body on March 18, 2002 and officially published on March 22, 2002.
60
APPENDIX CHAPTER ‘A’
Parking on Arterial Streets
Designated Arterial Street On Street Parking Permitted
Belmont Avenue No
Custer Lane No
David Avenue No
Hunter Road No
Kelly Avenue Yes
Lulu Street Yes
Main Avenue No
Ohio Street No
Osage Street Yes
Seventh Avenue No
SW Seventieth Street No
State Street Yes
Walnut Street No









