CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LANSING, KANSAS 
____________ 
Republished in 2017 by Order of the Governing Body 
  
Adopted: November 2, 2017 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LANSING, KANSAS 
____________ 
Michael W. Smith 

Mayor 
____________ 
David Trinkle, Jr. 
Gene Kirby 
Ward 1 Andrea Pawlowski 
Donald Studnicka 
Ward 2 Jesse Garvey 
Kerry Brungardt 
Ward 3 Anthony McNeill 
Gregg Buehler 
Ward 4  
  
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Tim Vandall 
City Administrator Sarah Bodensteiner 
City Clerk Sunshine Petrone 
Human Resources Director Jason Crum 
Parks and Recreation Director Anthony J. Zell Jr. 
Wastewater Utility Director Steven Wayman 
Police Chief Jeff Rupp 
Public Works Director Elizabeth Sanford 
Finance Director Terri Wojtalewicz 
Library Director Stefanie Leif 
Community and Economic
Development Director Catalina Thompson 
City Prosecutor Gregory Robinson 
City Attorney William Pray 
Municipal Judge Matt Harding 
City Engineer  
  
Administrative Officials 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2016 Code, as adopted November 3, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Governing Body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2016 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figures after the dash refers to the article and section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1, article I, is numbered 1-102, and the first section of chapter 6, article I, is 6-101. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-101 and 6-102 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-101.1 New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Supplement Department Vice President, and Katrina Hansen, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Gregory Robinson, City Attorney, and Sarah Bodensteiner, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lansing, KS. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lansing, Kansas, 2017. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1015 [1] 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LANSING, KANSAS, AUTHORIZED BY ORDINANCE NO. 272 PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN OTHER ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPTING CERTAIN ORDINANCES FROM REPEAL AND SAVING CERTAIN ACCRUED RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES. 
Be it Ordained by the Governing Body of the City of Lansing, Kansas: 
    SECTION 1. The codification of ordinances of the City of Lansing, Kansas, authorized by Ordinance No. 272 and K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015, as set out in the following chapters, Chapters 1 to 17 and Appendices A and B all inclusive, and entitled the "Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, 2018," is hereby adopted and ordained as the "Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, 2018," and said codification shall become effective upon publication of no fewer than 3 copies of said code in book form. 
    SECTION 2. All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general nature passed prior to the publication date of this ordinance are hereby repealed as of the date of publication of said code except as hereinafter provided. 
    SECTION 3. In construing this ordinance, the following ordinances shall not be considered or held to be ordinances of a general nature: 
(a)  Ordinances pertaining to the acquisition of property or interests in property by gift, purchase, devise, bequest, appropriation or condemnation; 
(b)  Ordinances opening, dedicating, widening, vacating or narrowing streets, avenues, alleys and boulevards; 
(c)  Ordinances establishing and changing grades of streets, avenues, alleys and boulevards; 
(d)  Ordinances naming or changing the names of streets, avenues and boulevards; 
(e)  Ordinances authorizing or directing public improvements to be made; 
(f)  Ordinances creating districts for public improvements of whatsoever kind or nature; 
(g)  Ordinances levying general taxes; 
(h)  Ordinances levying special assessments or taxes; 
(i)  Ordinances granting any rights, privileges, easements or franchises therein mentioned to any person, firm or corporation; 
(j)  Ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds and other instruments of indebtedness by the city; 
(k)  Ordinances authorizing contracts; 
(l)  Ordinances establishing the limits of the city or pertaining to annexation or exclusion of territory; 
(m)  Ordinances relating to compensation of officials, officers and employees of the city; 
(n)  Ordinances of a temporary nature; 
Provided that the above enumeration of exceptions shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, it being the purpose and intention to exempt from repeal any and all ordinances not of a general nature and general ordinances specifically excepted by this section. 
    SECTION 4. The arrangement and classification of the several chapters, articles, and sections of the code adopted by Section 1 of this ordinance and the head notes and footnotes at the ends of the sections, are made for the purpose of convenience and orderly arrangement, and do not constitute a part of the ordinances, and therefore, no implication or presumption of legislative intent or construction is to be drawn therefrom. 
    SECTION 5. The repeal of ordinances as provided in Section 2 hereof, shall not affect any rights acquired, fines, penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred thereunder, or actions involving any of the provisions of said ordinances or parts thereof. Said ordinances above repealed are hereby continued in force and effect after the passage, approval and publication of this ordinance for the purpose of such rights, fines, penalties, forfeitures, liabilities and actions therefor. 
    SECTION 6. If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, portion or part of the "Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, 2018," or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
    SECTION 7. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the publication of the "Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, 2018," as provided in K.S.A. 12-3015. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED by the Governing Body of the City of Lansing, County of Leavenworth, State of Kansas, this 20th day of December, 2018. 
  
{SEAL} _____
Michael W. Smith, Mayor Attest: _____
Sarah Bodensteiner, City Clerk APPROVED AS TO FORM: _____
Gregory Robinson, City Attorney Published: Leavenworth Times Date Published:  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1015, adopted Dec. 20, 2018, has been treated as superseding Ordinance No. 991, adopted Nov. 2, 2017. 

SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 978  6- 1-2017 Omit 1 979  6-15-2017 Omit 1 980  7- 6-2017 Omit 1 981  8- 3-2017 Include 1 982  8- 3-2017 Include 1 983  8- 3-2017 Omit 1 984  8- 3-2017 Omit 1 985  8- 3-2017 Omit 1 986  9- 7-2017 Omit 1 987  9- 7-2017 Omit 1 988  9-21-2017 Omit 1 989  9-21-2017 Omit 1 990 10-19-2017 Omit 1 Memo of 10-26-2017 Include 1 991 11- 2-2017 Include 1 992 11- 2-2017 Omit 1 993 11- 2-2017 Omit 1 994 12- 7-2017 Omit 1 1-2018(Char.)  3-15-2018 Omit 2 996  3-15-2018 Omit 2 997  5-17-2018 Omit 2 999  7- 5-2018 Omit 2 1000  7- 5-2018 Omit 2 1001  8- 2-2018 Omit 2 1002  8- 2-2018 Omit 2 1003  8-16-2018 Omit 2 1004  8-16-2018 Omit 2 1005  8-16-2018 Include 2 1006  8-16-2018 Include 2 1007  9- 6-2018 Omit 2 1008  9- 6-2018 Include 2 1010 10-18-2018 Include 3 1012 11-15-2018 Include 3 1014 12-20-2018 Include 3 1015 12-20-2018 Include 3 Ord. of 12-20-2018(1) Include 3 Ord. of 12-20-2018(2) Include 3  
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-101. - Code designated. 
    The chapters, articles and sections herein shall constitute and may be designated as the "Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas," or the "Lansing City Code," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-102. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed in the construction of this Code and of all ordinances unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Governing Body or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    City shall mean the City of Lansing, in Leavenworth County, Kansas. 
    Computation of time means the time within which an act is to be done and shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    County means the County of Leavenworth, Kansas. 
    Delegation of Authority means whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the head of a department or other officer of the City to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
    Gender means words importing the masculine gender including the feminine and neuter. 
    Governing Body means the Governing Body of Lansing, Leavenworth County, Kansas. 
    In the City means and includes any territory within the corporate limits of the City of Lansing, Kansas, and the police jurisdiction thereof and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the City by law, except as otherwise specified. 
    Joint authority means all words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers and shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Number means words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and affirmed." 
    Owner applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of the whole but any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Property includes real, personal and mixed property. 
    Real property includes land, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall and will are mandatory. 
    Sidewalk means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Street means and includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the City. 
    Tenant or Occupant applied to a building or land, means any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Sec. 1-103. - Parenthetical and reference matter. 
    The matter in parenthesis at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the Code. Citations to ordinances indicate only the source and the text may or may not be changed by this Code. This Code is a new enactment under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015. Reference matter not in parenthesis is for information only and is not a part of this Code. 
Sec. 1-104. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catch lines or headings of the sections of this Code are intended as mere words to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catch line, is amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-105. - Amendments: repeal. 
    Any portion of this Code may be amended by specific reference to the section number as follows: "That section _______ of the Code of the City of Lansing is hereby amended to read as follows: (The section as amended shall then be set out in full)." A new section not heretofore existing in the Code may be added as follows: "That the Code of the City of Lansing is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) which reads as follows... (the new section shall be set out in full)..." All sections, or articles or chapters to be repealed shall be repealed by specific reference as follows: "Section (or article or chapter) _______ of the Code of the City of Lansing is hereby repealed." 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 12-3004 
Sec. 1-106. - Repealing ordinances. 
    The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed. The repeal of an ordinance, the adoption of an ordinance containing a repeal of an ordinance, or the adoption of a codification of the general ordinances of the City including the repeal of such general ordinances, does not impair or affect the validity of a pending action, proceeding or prosecution under the repealed ordinance, unless the content of the surviving ordinance clearly indicates such affect. The repeal of an ordinance as part of the codification of the ordinance shall not be interpreted as a repeal of the findings or recitals of the ordinance unless such findings or recitals are explicitly repealed therein. 
Sec. 1-107. - Powers generally. 
    All powers exercised by cities of the second class or which shall hereafter be conferred upon them shall be exercised by the Governing Body, subject to such limitations as prescribed by law. 
Sec. 1-108. - Ordinances. 
    The Governing Body shall have the care, management and control of the City and its finances and shall pass all ordinances needed for the welfare of the City. No ordinance shall be valid unless a majority of all the members elected or appointed to the Governing Body vote in favor. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 12-3002 
Sec. 1-109. - Same; publication. 
    No ordinance, except those appropriating money, shall be in force until published, in summary or in whole, in the official City newspaper by the City Clerk. One publication, or summary of any such ordinance shall be sufficient unless additional publications are required by statute or ordinance. The publisher of the newspaper shall prefix such published ordinance by a line in brackets stating the month, day and year of such publication. If a summary of the ordinance is printed in the newspaper, the full ordinance shall be available on the City's official website for at least one week after the publication of the summary. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 12-3007 
Sec. 1-110. - Same; ordinance book. 
    Following final passage and approval of each ordinance, the City Clerk shall enter the same in the ordinance book of the City as provided by law. Each ordinance shall have appended thereto the manner in which the ordinance was passed, the date of passage, the page of the journal containing the record of the final vote on its passage, the name of the newspaper in which published and the date of publication. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 12-3008 
Sec. 1-111. - Resolutions, motions. 
    Except where a state statute or City ordinance specifically requires otherwise, all resolutions and motions shall be passed if voted upon favorably by a majority of a quorum of the Governing Body. 
Sec. 1-112. - Emergency government. 
    In the event of a catastrophe in which all or a majority of the members of the Governing Body are fatally injured, the interim Governing Body shall be composed of the surviving members: the City Attorney, the City Clerk and a sufficient number of the appointed officials selected in the order of the greatest seniority in office to make up a Governing Body of the prescribed number. 
Sec. 1-113. - Meetings. 
A.  Regular meetings of the Governing Body shall be held on the first and third Thursday of each month. Meetings will be held at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chamber in City Hall. When such meeting day shall be on a legal holiday (or any other day observed as a holiday by the City) or the day before Christmas, the Governing Body may fix the preceding or succeeding day not observed as a holiday as a regular meeting day by a majority vote of the Governing Body. 
B.  The Mayor or any three (3) Governing Body members may call special meetings of the Governing Body. When any special meeting of the Governing Body is called, the object thereof shall be submitted to the Governing Body in writing, and the Clerk shall enter the call and the object, as well as any action taken thereon, upon the journal and no other business shall be transacted except that mentioned in the call. A written notice of any such special meeting shall be served personally upon each council member or left at his or her usual place of residence and each council member shall be contacted verbally at least two hours before the time of such meeting. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 14-111 
Sec. 1-114. - City records. 
    The City Clerk or any other officer or employee having custody of City records and documents shall maintain such records and documents in accordance with K.S.A. 12-120 to 12-121 inclusive, which is incorporated by reference herein as if set out in full. 
Sec. 1-115. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change, amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Lansing to be misrepresented thereby. This restriction shall not apply to amendments or revisions of this Code authorized by ordinance duly adopted by the Governing Body. 
Sec. 1-116. - Scope of application. 
    Any person convicted of doing any of the acts or things prohibited or made unlawful or the failing to do any of the things commanded to be done, as specified and set forth in this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in accordance with Section 1-117. Each day any violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 1-117. - General penalties. 
    Whenever any offense is declared by any provision of this Code, absent a specific or unique punishment prescribed, the offender shall be punished in accordance with this section. 
A.  A fine of not less than $1.00 or more than $500.00; or 
B.  Imprisonment in the City jail for not more than 30 days; or 
C.  Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed [subsections] A. and B. above. 
Sec. 1-118. - Severability. 
    If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid or unenforceable such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
Sec. 1-119. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City, any authorized official of the City may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance; provided that, except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-four hours written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant duly authorized by law. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
Sec. 1-120. - Appeal of adverse administrative rulings. 
    Any administrative ruling, order or decision made by any officer or employee of the City, including but not limited to denial or revocation of permits and licenses, which adversely affect any person, may be appealed by such person to the Governing Body in writing within ten days following the adverse ruling, order or decision. A hearing shall be scheduled by the Governing Body within ten days following the written appeal. The decision of the Governing Body on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 1-201. - Governing Body; vacancies. 
    The Governing Body shall consist of a Mayor and eight Governing Body members to be elected as provided by Charter Ordinances No. 1- 2016 set out in Appendix A of this Code. Vacancies on the Governing Body shall be filled by the election of a successor by a majority vote of the remaining Council Members, except that in the case of a tie vote, the Mayor shall cast the deciding vote. No distinction shall be made in the titles and duties among the Councilmember's except as the Governing Body shall organize itself for business. Vacancies for the position of Mayor shall be filled according to Chapter 6 Section 6-107F. of the City Code. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 12-1005e; 13-1806 
Sec. 1-202. - Same; quorum; conduct of meetings. 
    All regular and special meetings shall be open to the public. It shall require a majority of the Governing Body elect to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No ordinance shall be passed except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members that may include the Mayor of the Governing Body. 
Sec. 1-203. - Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Governing Body. He or she shall have the tie-breaking vote on all questions when the members present are equally divided. He or she shall: 
A.  Take care that the ordinances of the City are complied with; 
B.  Sign the commissions and appointments of all officers elected or appointed; 
C.  Endorse the approval of the Governing Body on all official bonds; 
D.  From time to time communicate to the Governing Body such information and recommend such measures as he or she may deem advisable; 
E.  Have the power to approve or veto any ordinance as the laws of the state shall prescribe. Any ordinance vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over the veto by a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the whole number of council members elected; 
F.  Sign all orders and drafts drawn upon the City Treasury for money. 
Sec. 1-204. - President of the Council. 
    The Governing Body shall elect one of its own bodies as President of the Governing Body at the first meeting in May. The President of the Governing Body shall preside at all meetings of the Governing Body in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of both the Mayor and the President of the Governing Body, the Governing Body shall elect one of its members as "Acting President of the Governing Body." The President and Acting President, when occupying the place of Mayor, shall have the same privileges as other Council Members but shall exercise no veto. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 14-204, 14-308 
Sec. 1-205. - City Administrator. 
    The Governing Body shall provide for such offices as shall be necessary to carry out the provisions of the law and determine salaries for the same. It shall appoint a City Administrator as hereinafter provided who shall be responsible for his or her efficient administration of the City's business. 
Sec. 1-206. - Administrative departments. 
    Administrative departments shall be created by the Governing Body as the public business may demand and as provided by State statutes. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 12-1015 
Sec. 1-207. - Boards and Committees. 
    Whenever authorized to do so by State law or the ordinances of the City, the Mayor, with approval of the City Council shall appoint members of various City Boards and Committees. 
Sec. 1-208. - Administrative powers. 
    The Governing Body may designate whether the administration of a policy or the carrying out of any order shall be performed by a committee, an appointive officer, or the Mayor. If no administrative authority is designated it shall be vested in the Mayor. 
Sec. 1-209. - Compensation. 
    There is hereby established for the elected Council Member's a salary of $200.00 per month, and for the elected Mayor a salary of $600.00 per month. In the instance where a newly elected official will take office in January, the incoming and outgoing elected officials will split the monthly stipend for the month of January. 
(Memo of 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 1-210. - Expenses. 
    Members of the Governing Body shall be reimbursed for all expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. However, no expense shall be reimbursed until an itemized accounting shall have been presented and approved by the City Administrator. 
Sec. 1-211. - Bonds of Mayor and Councilmembers. 
    Each Governing Body member shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a good and sufficient surety bond, payable to and for the use and benefit of the City. Such bond shall be in the sum of $10,000.00, conditioned for the faithful discharge of duties and that he or she will save the City harmless from all loss caused by neglect of duty or misfeasance in office, or for the willful expenditures of any moneys of the City in violation of the law. The cost of such surety bond shall be borne by the City. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 1-301. - City Administrator; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the position of the City Administrator, who shall be under the direct supervision of the Mayor and Governing Body of the City. The City Administrator will be appointed by the Governing Body. He or she may be discharged for cause with a majority vote of the Governing Body. The City Administrator may resign by submitting a resignation in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the expected departure date, unless the parties otherwise agree. The City Administrator, no later than six months after accepting employment with the City, shall reside in the City. The City Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of qualifications and ability. 
Sec. 1-302. - Appointment and term. 
    The administration of the City's business shall be in the hands of the City Administrator, who shall be appointed by the Governing Body and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Governing Body. The City Administrator shall be under the direct supervision of the Mayor and the Governing Body. The City Administrator shall be hired by the Mayor after consultation with and the approval of the Governing Body. 
Sec. 1-303. - Powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Administrator. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance of the City, the City Administrator shall: 
A.  Act as personnel officer for the City; recommend salary and wage scales and working conditions for officers, officials and employees of the City. The City Administrator shall have the authority to reprimand and suspend, with or without pay, any employee of the City. It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator to see that all employees are duly and properly evaluated. The City Administrator shall make recommendations to the Governing Body as to any other personnel actions. 
B.  Exercise general supervision and control over all City purchases and expenditures in accordance with the budget and such policies as established by the Governing Body. 
C.  Have the care and management of all City-owned land, property, buildings and equipment. The City Administrator shall supervise the taking and recording of departmental inventories. 
D.  In conjunction with the City Finance Director, annually prepare and submit to the Governing Body the required budgets. 
E.  Represent the City in intergovernmental matters and affairs as directed by the Governing Body. 
F.  Keep the Governing Body advised of: possible grants, other benefits, any changes and/or improvements which the Administrator believes may be beneficial to the municipality. 
G.  Attend all official meetings of the Governing Body, and other bodies as directed by the Governing Body, and to prepare, in cooperation with other policies of the City, the agenda and order of business for the Governing Body, unless excused by the Mayor and/or Governing Body. 
H.  Make such recommendations to the Governing Body as are deemed necessary for effective and efficient administration of all City services. 
I.  Perform such other duties as the Governing Body may direct from time to time. 
J.  Investigate the affairs and conduct of any department, agency, officer or employee, and compile evidence and insure the attendance of witnesses for administrative proceedings. 
Sec. 1-304. - Duties and functions of City Administrator; appointments. 
    The City Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of all the affairs of the City. He or she shall see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. He or she shall appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the City. All appointments shall be made upon merit and fitness alone. The City Administrator shall be responsible for the discipline of all appointive officers, and may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or the conduct of any officer or employee to be examined. He or she shall prepare and submit the annual budget to the Governing Body and keep the Governing Body fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City. He or she shall make recommendations to the Governing Body on all matters concerning the welfare of the City. No member of the Governing Body shall directly interfere with the conduct of any department except at the expressed direction of the Governing Body. 
Sec. 1-305. - Certain powers of the City Administrator concerning property owned or leased by the City of Lansing. 
A.  The City Administrator and his or her designees are granted the authority, with good and lawful cause, to order any individual not to enter, to leave, or not to return to any property owned by the City of Lansing. 
B.  The powers in this section are not an exclusive enumeration of the powers of the City Administrator and are not meant in any way to impair the City Administrator's ability to exercise the other powers that he or she possesses. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 1-401. - Organization. 
    The affairs of the City shall be conducted by the officers and employees of such administrative divisions as may be established by the City Administrator. 
Sec. 1-402. - Officers and employees; appointment. 
    All City officers and employees shall be appointed by the City Administrator in accordance with Charter Ordinance 1-2016, except as otherwise provided by state law or other City ordinances. The City Administrator is authorized to act as, and to perform the duties of any office for which he or she is qualified; and may appoint one person to perform the duties of more than one officer or employee provided their duties are not incompatible and the same is not prohibited by law or by other ordinances. 
Sec. 1-403. - Contract positions. 
    The contract positions of the City shall include the City Attorney, City Prosecutor, City Engineer, Municipal Judge, Public Defender, and the City Administrator. The Mayor shall appoint, by and with consent of the City Council, the contract positions. 
Sec. 1-404. - Qualifications. 
    Qualifications for appointment to a position in the classified service and duties assigned to any such position shall be in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Governing Body. 
Sec. 1-405. - Residency requirements for certain City employees. 
A.  The City Administrator is hereby required to establish and maintain a permanent residence within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
B.  All Department Directors, including, but not limited to the following positions: City Clerk, Chief of Police, Community and Economic Development Director, Finance Director, Human Resources Director, Library Director, Parks and Recreation Director, Public Works Director, and Wastewater Utility Director, are required to establish and maintain a residence within the boundaries of Lansing Unified School District 469 (USD 469), Kansas for a minimum of five (5) years. After the five (5) year period, the Department Director is required to establish and maintain a permanent residence within the incorporated boundaries of Leavenworth County, Kansas. 
C.  Employees as described in subsections A and B of this section who are not already residents of the City of Lansing shall have a period of six (6) months after completion of their probationary period to establish residence within the City, after the end of such eighteen (18) month period their exemption from the requirements of this section shall terminate. 
D.  Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall result in discharge from employment with the City. 
E.  Any such individual employed at the time this section is adopted by the Governing Body shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in this section; however, in the event an exempt employee relocates into the City limits the employee's exemption status shall terminate. 
F.  The City Administrator, in his sole discretion, may exempt an individual from this provision when he or she believes that such exemption is in the best interest of the City. The City Administrator will provide notification to the Governing Body on any request for an employee to be exempted from the residency requirement. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2018(1)) 
Sec. 1-406. - Vacancy in office. 
    Whenever a vacancy occurs in any appointive office for whatever reason, the vacancy shall be filled by the City Administrator with approval of the Governing Body. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve only until the next regular time for appointment. 
Sec. 1-407. - Oath. 
    All officers and employees of the City, whether elected or appointed, either under the laws of the state or ordinances of the City, shall before entering upon the duties of their respective office, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation as follows: "I do affirm that I will support the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State of Kansas and faithfully discharge the duties of ___________ (here enter the name of office), for the City of Lansing, Kansas during the term for which I was appointed." 
Sec. 1-408. - City Clerk. 
    The City Clerk shall: 
A.  Be custodian of all the City records, books, files, papers, documents and other personal effects belonging to the City not properly pertaining to any other office. 
B.  Carry on all the official correspondence of the City. 
C.  Attend and keep a record of the proceedings of all meetings of the Governing Body. 
D.  Keep record of every appointment of office and the date thereof. 
E.  Enter or place each ordinance of the City in the ordinance books after its passage. 
F.  Publish all ordinances or summaries thereof (except those appropriating money) and such resolutions, notices and proclamations as may be required by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 1-409. - Same; seal. 
    The City Clerk shall: 
A.  Have custody of the Corporate Seal of the City and shall affix the same to the official copy of all ordinances, contracts and other documents required to be authenticated; 
B.  Have power to administer oaths for all purposes pertaining to the business and affairs of the City. 
C.  Keep suitable files of all such oaths in accordance with Section 1-416. 
Sec. 1-410. - Same; fiscal records. 
    The Finance Director and/or their designee shall: 
A.  Prepare and keep suitable fiscal records according to generally accepted accounting principles. 
B.  Assist in preparing the annual budget. 
C.  Audit all claims against the City for goods or services rendered for the consideration of the Governing Body. The Finance Director's accounts shall properly show the amounts paid from any fund of the City and the cash balance existing in each fund. 
D.  Keep an accurate account of all bonds issued by the City. 
E.  Keep a record of all special assessments. 
Sec. 1-411. - Same; withholding agent. 
    The Finance Director is designated as the withholding agent of the City for the purposes of the Federal Revenue (Income Tax) Act and shall perform the duties required of withholding agents by said act or any other act requiring withholding from the compensation of any City officer or employee. 
Sec. 1-412. - Same; Finance Director. 
    The Finance Director shall, in coordination with the Accounting Specialist shall: 
A.  Keep a full and accurate record; 
B.  Publish a quarterly financial statement (K.S.A. 12-1608); 
C.  Deposit all public moneys and sign checks of the City; 
D.  Pay out the funds of the City upon properly signed warrants and warrant checks (K.S.A. 10-803); 
E.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Governing Body or the Kansas statutes. 
Sec. 1-413. - City Attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall be a licensed attorney in the State of Kansas and shall: 
A.  Attend meetings of the Governing Body; 
B.  Advise the Governing Body and all officers of the City upon such legal questions affecting the City and its offices as may be submitted to him/her; 
C.  When requested by the Governing Body, give opinions in writing upon any such questions; 
D.  Draft such ordinances, contracts, leases, easements, conveyances and other instruments in writing as may be submitted to him/her in the regular transaction of affairs of the City; 
E.  Approve all ordinances of the City as to form and legality; 
F.  Attend Planning Commission meetings; 
G.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Governing Body and the Kansas statutes. 
H.  The City Attorney shall report to City Administrator. 
Sec. 1-414. - City Prosecutor. 
    The City Prosecutor shall be a licensed attorney in the State of Kansas and shall: 
A.  Attend City Municipal Court on scheduled court dates; 
B.  Advise the Governing Body and all officers of the City upon such legal prosecutorial questions affecting the City and its offices as may be submitted to him/her; 
C.  When requested by the Governing Body, give opinions in writing upon any such questions; 
D.  Draft such resolutions, ordinances and other instruments in writing as may be submitted to him/her in the regular transaction of the prosecutorial affairs of the City; 
E.  Approve all ordinances which are prosecuted and enforced in the Lansing Municipal Court as to form and legality; 
F.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Governing Body and the Kansas statutes. 
G.  The City Prosecutor shall report to the City Administrator. 
Sec. 1-415. - City Engineer. 
    The City Engineer shall be a licensed professional engineer in the State of Kansas. He or she may be responsible for: 
A.  The design and specifications for all City streets, sewers, water lines, public buildings and other public facilities; 
B.  The inspection of all public works projects including streets, sewers, water lines and other public facilities; 
C.  The general supervision of the maintenance and repair of all public facilities as directed by the City Administrator; 
D.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Governing Body and the Kansas statutes; 
E.  The City Engineer shall report to the City Administrator. 
Sec. 1-416. - Oaths filed. 
    All officers and employees shall be supplied the forms for the oath at the expense of the City and upon taking and subscribing or signing such oath or affirmation, the same shall be filed with the City Clerk or Human Resources Director. 
Sec. 1-417. - Bonds; appointed officers. 
    The City Administrator and such other officers as the Governing Body may require, shall each, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices give a good and sufficient surety company bond to the City, approved by the Governing Body, in the amount specified herein or as shall be required by the Governing Body conditioned upon the officer's faithful performance and faithful discharge of his or her respective duties. The cost of such surety bonds shall be borne by the City. Bonds for the following officers shall be in the following amounts: 
City Administrator-$25,000.00; 
City Clerk-$25,000.00; 
Finance Director-$50,000.00; 
Human Resources Director-$25,000.00; 
Municipal Judge-$5,000.00; and 
Assistant City Clerk-$5,000.00. 
Sec. 1-418. - Condition of bonds. 
    Each of the bonds required in section 1-417 shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of duty and all acts required by the laws of Kansas and the ordinances of the City, and for the application and payment over to the proper persons of all moneys or property coming into the hands of each such officer by virtue of his office. 
Sec. 1-419. - Approval of bonds. 
    All bonds given to the City shall be approved as to their form by the City Attorney and as to surety and sufficiency by the City Clerk, unless otherwise provided by the laws of the State of Kansas. 
ARTICLE V. - INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS 

Sec. 1-501. - Investment of idle funds. 
    Temporarily idle moneys of the City not currently needed, may in accordance with the procedure hereafter described be invested in: 
A.  Temporary notes or no-fund warrants of the City; 
B.  Time deposits, open accounts or certificates of deposit with maturities of not more than two years in commercial banks or trust companies which have offices located in the City. If no commercial bank or trust company is located in the City, then in commercial banks or trust companies which have offices located in Leavenworth County, or in the counties of the State of Kansas adjacent to Leavenworth County, as provided for, and subject to the restrictions of, K.S.A. 12-1675; 
C.  Time certificates of deposit with maturities of not more than two years with state or federally chartered savings and loan associations which have offices located in the City; 
D.  Repurchase agreements with commercial banks, trust companies, or state or federally chartered savings and loan associations with offices located in the City, for direct obligations of, or obligations that are insured by, the United States government or any agency thereof. If no commercial bank, trust company, or state or federally chartered savings and loan association has an office in the City, then in any commercial bank, trust company, or state or federally chartered savings and loan association with offices located in Leavenworth County. If no such commercial bank, trust company, or state or federally chartered savings and loan association will enter into such an agreement at or above the interest rate set out by K.S.A. 12-1675(B. (4), then such repurchase agreements may be entered into with commercial banks, trust companies, or state or federally chartered savings and loan associations which have offices located in the State of Kansas; 
E.  United States treasury bills or notes with maturities as the Governing Body shall determine, but not exceeding two years. Investments shall only be conducted with the following, which is doing business within the State of Kansas, any state or national bank, state or federally chartered savings and loan association, or federally chartered savings bank, the federal reserve bank of Kansas City, Missouri, set out by K.S.A. 12-1675(B. (5); 
F.  Municipal Investment Pool Fund established in K.S.A. 1996 Supp. 12-1677a, and amendments thereto. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 12-1675 
Sec. 1-502. - Investment of temporarily idle funds; records; restrictions. 
    The City Administrator or his or her designee shall submit to the Governing Body a quarterly report of the City's investment program. This report shall contain information regarding the amount of money invested, the maturity date of the investment and the annual rate of interest of each security. The City Administrator shall provide an investment program which shall limit the amounts invested and schedule the maturities of investments so that at all times the City will have sufficient funds available in demand deposits in its depository banks to assure prompt payment of obligations. 
Sec. 1-503. - Custody and safekeeping. 
    Securities purchased pursuant to this article shall be under the joint care of the City Clerk, Finance Director and City Administrator and shall be held in the custody of a state or national bank or trust company, or shall be kept by such officers in a safety deposit box of the City in a bank or trust company, and shall be held in the name of the City and their redemption, transfer or withdrawal shall be permitted only upon the written instruct of at least two such City officers. 
Sec. 1-504. - Interest on time deposits and/or earnings. 
    The interest or earnings of investments made pursuant to this Article shall be credited pro rata to the fund or funds of the City from which the investments were made. 
Sec. 1-505. - Sale or transfer. 
    If, in order to maintain sufficient moneys on demand deposit in any fund as provided above, it becomes necessary to transfer or sell any securities of such funds, any two (2) or more of the officers so authorized as provided in section Sec. 1-503 may transfer said securities to any other fund or funds in which there are temporarily idle moneys, or shall sell such securities and for such purpose they shall have authority to make any necessary written directions, endorsements or assignments for and on behalf of the City. Any such transfer or sales shall be reported in writing to the Governing Body at its next regular meeting. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 1-601. - Personnel rules and regulations. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of establishing employee personnel rules and regulations the document entitled "Employee Handbook of the City of Lansing." An official copy shall be filed with the Human Resources Director and shall be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. The Employee Handbook shall be posted on the City's intranet and be available for access by all employees of the City of Lansing. 
ARTICLE VII. - OPEN RECORDS 

Sec. 1-701. - Statement of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City that all public records which are made, maintained or kept by or are in the possession of the City, its officers and employees, shall be open for public inspection as provided by, and subject to the restrictions imposed by, the Kansas Open Records Act. 
Sec. 1-702. - Access to open records. 
    Any person, upon request, shall have access to such open public records for the purpose of inspecting, abstracting or copying such records while they are in the possession, custody and control of the appointed or designated record custodian thereof, or his or her designated representative. 
Sec. 1-703. - Office hours. 
    All City offices keeping and maintaining open public records shall establish office hours during which any person may make a request for access to any open public record. Such hours shall be no fewer than the hours each business day the office is regularly open to the public. For any City office not open Monday through Friday, hours shall be established by the record custodian for each such day at which time any person may request access to an open public record. 
Sec. 1-704. - Inspection, copying fees. 
    It is the purpose of this Article to establish reasonable fees and charges for the provision of access to or copies of open public records in the possession of the City to avoid the necessity of using general public funds of the City to subsidize special services and benefits to a record requester. The official record custodian shall periodically recommend to the Governing Body such changes in this Article as may be necessary to secure this purpose. 
Sec. 1-705. - Inspection fee. 
A.  Where a request has been made for inspection of any open public record, which is readily available to the record custodian, there shall be no inspection fee charged to the requester. 
B.  In all cases not covered by Subsection A. of this section, a record inspection fee shall be charged at a rate of $18.00 per hour. 
Sec. 1-706. - Copying fee. 
A.  A fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per page, with a minimum of $5.00 (for the first five pages) shall be charged for photocopying public records, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials and equipment. 
B.  A fee of $5.00 per disk shall be charged for electronic copies. 
C.  For copying any public records, which cannot be reproduced by the City's photocopying equipment, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the City, including staff time, in reproducing such records. 
D.  A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per card will be charged for fingerprints. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be charged for fingerprints for Law Enforcement and National Security Checks per subject. 
E.  A fee of three dollars ($3.00) may be charged for each notary stamp needed other than those required for Law Enforcement or National Security purposes. 
Sec. 1-707. - Prepayments of fees. 
A.  A deposit of $25.00 shall be required from the requestor at the time of the record request prior to inspection of the requested record or delivery of the requested copies. This deposit will be used to offset the inspection and/or copying fees. No deposit will be required if the record is readily available and no copies are requested. 
B.  A record custodian shall demand prepayment of the fees established by this Article whenever he or she believes this to be in the best interest of the City. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the inspection and/or copying charges accrued in fulfilling the record request. Any overage or underage in the prepayment shall be settled prior to inspection of the requested record or delivery of the requested copies. 
C.  Prepayment of inspection and/or copying fees shall be required whenever, in the best estimate of the record custodian, such fees are estimated to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) above the prepaid deposit. 
D.  Where prepayment has been demanded by the record custodian, no record shall be made available to the requester until such prepayment has been made. 
Sec. 1-708. - Payment. 
    All fees charged under this Article shall be paid to the City Clerk. When the total fees due from whatever source under this section reaches $25.00; they shall be paid to the City Clerk, however, all fees shall be paid no less than once on a monthly basis. 
Sec. 1-709. - Appointment of official custodians. 
    The following City officers are hereby appointed as official custodians for purposes of the Kansas Open Records Act, and are hereby charged with responsibility for compliance with that Act with respect to the hereinafter listed public records: 
A.  City Clerk-All public records kept and maintained in the City Clerk's office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this section. 
B.  Chief of Police-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Police Department. 
C.  City Administrator-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Administrator's office. 
D.  City Attorney/City Prosecutor-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Attorney's and/or City Prosecutor's office. 
E.  City Engineer-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Engineer's office. 
F.  Clerk of the Municipal Court-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the municipal court. 
G.  Community and Economic Development Director-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Economic Development/CVB Department or Lansing Historical Museum. 
H.  Finance Director-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Finance Department. 
I.  Library Director-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Lansing Community Library. 
J.  Human Resources Director-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Human Resources Department. 
K.  Parks and Recreation Director-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Parks and Recreation Department. 
L.  Public Works Director-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Public Works Department. 
M.  Wastewater Utility Director-All public records not on file in the office of the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Wastewater Department. 
Sec. 1-710. - Designation of additional record custodians. 
A.  Each of the official custodians appointed is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record custodian. Such record custodians shall have such duties and powers as set out in the Kansas Open Records Act. 
B.  Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a record custodian he or she shall notify the City Clerk of such designation and the City Clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations. 
Sec. 1-711. - Duties of custodians. 
    All City officers and employees appointed or designated as record custodians under this article shall: 
A.  Protect public records from damage and disorganization; 
B.  Prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the City; 
C.  Provide assistance and information upon request; 
D.  Act upon any request for inspection of any open public records that are in his/her possession as quickly as possible but has until the end of the third business day to act upon these requests. If a response to a request is delayed, a written explanation will be provided by the City Clerk; and 
E.  Shall carry out the procedures adopted by this City for inspecting and copying open public records. 
Sec. 1-712. - Delays of open records requests. 
    If a response to a request is delayed, a written explanation will be provided by the City Clerk to the requestor. There may be delays in responding to requests for information for the following reasons: 
A.  Additional information is needed in order to retrieve the records. 
B.  Legal issues must be addressed before the records are released. 
C.  Requested records are archived or stored off site. 
D.  The volume of records requested is large and will take time to duplicate. 
Sec. 1-713. - Denial of open records requests. 
    If a response to a request is denied, a written explanation will be provided by the City Clerk to the requestor. A request may be denied in whole or part for the following reasons: 
A.  The requested record does not exist. 
B.  The requested records are exempt from disclosure by law. 
C.  The request is unclear and must be submitted with more detail. 
D.  The request places an "unreasonable burden" upon the City or is intended to disrupt the operations of the City. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 45-218(E.) 
ARTICLE VIII. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE 

Sec. 1-801. - Committee established, membership. 
    The Committee shall consist of the following positions: The Mayor of the City of Lansing, the City Administrator, representatives from the Economic Development Department including the Economic Development Director, Economic Development Assistant; the Public Information Officer, one (1) representative from the Lansing School District USD 469, three (3) members of the Governing Body, and five (5) representatives from the business community. 
Sec. 1-802. - Same, Committee duties. 
    The purpose of the Committee is to oversee the Economic Development Department's efforts to attract and retain jobs in Leavenworth County. The duties of the Committee shall be: 
A.  Review and make recommendations regarding issues related to economic development. 
B.  Receive briefings and reports regarding economic development related items including infrastructure, new businesses, prospective businesses, and marketing materials. 
C.  The Committee shall have other responsibilities and duties as the Governing Body of the City may from time to time assign to the Committee concerning the economic development of the City. 
Sec. 1-803. - Same, meetings. 
    The Committee shall meet on a quarterly basis, provided that the chair of the Committee may cause additional meetings of the Committee to be held as the need arises. 
Sec. 1-804. - Same, Committee chair. 
    The Committee shall be chaired by the Economic Development/CVB Director. The Committee shall provide for the preparation and approval of minutes of Committee meetings, and shall provide copies of the same to the Governing Body. 
Sec. 1-805. - Same, by-laws. 
    The Committee may adopt by-laws governing the operation of the Committee, provided that such by-laws do not conflict with the provisions of this Code or any other applicable law. 
CHAPTER 2 - ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING ANIMALS 

Sec. 2-101. - Findings of the Governing Body. 
    The Governing Body of the City of Lansing, Kansas hereby finds that to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare it is necessary to prohibit the ownership of certain animals within the City and to establish regulations governing the ownership of animals allowed within the City. 
Sec. 2-102. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Abandon shall mean to leave an animal without demonstrated or apparent intent to recover or resume custody; to leave an animal for more than 12 hours without providing adequate food and shelter for the duration of the absence; or to turn out or release an animal for the purpose of causing it to be impounded. 
    Animal shelter or pound means a facility which is used or designed for use to house, contain, impound or harbor any seized stray, homeless, relinquished or abandoned animal or a person who acts as an animal rescuer, or who collects and cares for unwanted animals or offers them for adoption. Animal shelter or pound also includes a facility of an individual or organization, profit or nonprofit, maintaining 20 or more dogs or cats, or both, for the purpose of collecting, accumulating, amassing or maintaining the animals or offering the animals for adoption. 
    Dangerous animal shall mean and include: 
1.  Any mammal, amphibian, fish, reptile or fowl which is of a species which, due to size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life, physical well-being, or property, including but not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, apes, gorillas, monkeys of a species whose average adult weight is 20 pounds or more, foxes, elephants, alligators, crocodiles, and snakes which are venomous or otherwise present a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings as a result of their nature or physical makeup including, but not limited to, boa constrictors, Madagascar ground boas, green and yellow anacondas, Cuban boas, Indian pythons, reticulated pythons, African rock pythons, Amethystine pythons, Boelen's pythons and all members of the family pythonidae that exceed six feet in length. 
2.  Any dog or cat having a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation. For the purposes of this chapter, where the official records of the Chief Animal Control Officer indicate a dog or cat has aggressively bitten any person or persons, it shall be prima facie evidence that said dog or cat is a dangerous animal. 
a.  Notwithstanding the definition of a dangerous animal above, no animal may be declared dangerous if any injury or damage is sustained by a person or animal who at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime, or if the animal was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault. 
3.  Any domesticated dog that has in its known genetic history and/or formal pedigree crossbreeding with the wolf species to include, but not be limited to, animals referred to as wolf- hybrids or wolf-mix breeds or the breed known as Tundra Shepherd. The registration of an animal at any time in any jurisdiction as a wolf-hybrid, wolf mix or Tundra Shepherd shall constitute prima facie evidence the animal is a dangerous animal. For the purposes of this section all references to animals described herein shall be to wolf- hybrids. 
    Domesticated shall mean bred for and adapted to living dependently in an urban household setting. 
    Humane shall mean a manner of care including, but not limited to, protection from harm, providing of shelter with adequate protection from the elements, ventilation, sanitation, and appropriate food and potable water consistent with the requirements and habits of the animal's species, type, size, age and condition. 
    Kennel shall mean a place of business where four or more animals are brought, sold, bred, raised or kept for the purpose of boarding, sale, resale, training or teaching, and which business is done commercially and for profit. 
    Officer shall mean City Animal Control Officer or City Police Officer. 
    Own or owning shall mean to keep, maintain, harbor, shelter, manage, possess, control, sell, trade, buy or have a part interest. 
    Owner shall mean the person who owns, keeps, harbors, shelters manages, controls or possesses an animal or specified animal. A parent or legal guardian shall be deemed to be an owner of an animal or specified animal owned or maintained by a minor in the parent's or guardian's charge. 
    Person shall mean and include any natural person, association, partnership, organization or corporation. 
    Spay or neuter shall mean to render permanently incapable of producing offspring. 
Sec. 2-103. - Owning certain animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to own, within the City limits, any animal except as excluded in Section 2-104. 
Sec. 2-104. - Animals excluded from prohibition. 
    Animals excluded from the prohibition under Section 2-103 are: 
A.  Domestic dogs, except: 
1.  Those hybridized with wild canines; or 
2.  Those that are "dangerous animals", as defined in Section 2-102C., unless the owner has complied with all requirements set forth in Section 2-402 of this chapter. 
B.  Domestic cats, except: 
1.  Those hybridized with wild felines; or 
2.  Those that are "dangerous animals", as defined in Section 2-102C., unless the owner has complied with all requirements set forth in Section 2-402 of this chapter. 
C.  Domesticated rodents. 
D.  Domesticated European ferrets. 
E.  Rabbits. 
F.  Birds and fowl including chickens, ducks, geese, turkey, guineas, and pigeons, except for species protected by state or federal law. 
G.  Nonvenomous snakes less than six (6) feet in length, except that such snakes shall be required to be maintained on the owner's premises or property. 
H.  Nonvenomous lizards. 
I.  Turtles, except for species protected by state or federal law. 
J.  Amphibians. 
K.  Fish. 
L.  Invertebrates except bees. 
M.  Any animal in the ownership of a veterinary clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian, provided that the animal is properly restrained. 
N.  Any animal in the ownership of a person designated and licensed as an animal rehabilitator by the Kansas Wildlife and Parks Department, provided that the animal is properly restrained. 
O.  Any animal in the ownership of a person temporarily transporting such animal through the City, provided that the animal is properly restrained. 
P.  Any animal in the ownership of a bona fide medical institution or accredited educational institution, provided that the animal is properly restrained. 
Q.  Any animal temporarily owned by a facility licensed by the Kansas Animal Health Department for the purpose of impounding, sheltering, or caring for animals, provided that the animal is properly restrained. 
Sec. 2-105. - Animals prohibited in residentially zoned areas. 
A.  A person wanting to own, keep, harbor or shelter any of the following in a residentially zoned area shall be required to apply for and obtain a permit as stated in Article V of this chapter: 
1.  Livestock, including but not limited to cattle, horses, mules, goats, swine, and/or sheep. 
B.  A person wanting to own, keep, harbor or shelter any of the following within the City limits shall be required to apply for and obtain a permit as stated in Article 9 of the conditional use permits under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lansing: 
1.  Bees and/or apiaries. 
(Ord. No. 1010,  1, 10-18-2018) 
Sec. 2-106. - Limit on number of animals. 
    With the exception of domesticated rodents, fish, and invertebrates, it shall be unlawful for any person(s) to own, keep or harbor any combination of more than four non-prohibited animals at the same address or on the same premises within the City limits without first applying for and obtaining a Special Permit as provided for in Article 5 of this chapter. 
Sec. 2-107. - Confiscation of prohibited animal. 
    The Municipal Court Judge may order the confiscation of a prohibited animal if the animal poses an immediate danger to the public or itself. Upon the conviction of a person for owning an animal as prohibited by this chapter, the Municipal Court Judge shall order the animal confiscated and transferred to an appropriate licensed animal rehabilitation or care facility. The Municipal Court Judge may order the release of the animal to the owner provided that the animal will not be kept within the City limits. 
Sec. 2-108. - Penalty. 
    Violation of Article I of this chapter, unless provided elsewhere within this article, shall be a municipal offense for which a mandatory court appearance is required, and upon conviction, the defendant shall be fined no less than $90.00 nor more than $500.00 per offense, plus applicable court costs. 
(Ord. No. 1010,  2, 10-18-2018) 
ARTICLE II. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS 

Sec. 2-201. - Cruelty to animals.[1] 
A.  Cruel acts and conditions enumerated: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
a.  To willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure or torture, strike, hit or beat with a stick, board, chain, club or other object; mutilate, burn, or scald with any substance; or drive over any domesticated animal, or cruelly set an animal upon another animal, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals; or 
b.  By any means to make accessible to any animal, with the intent to cause harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been treated or prepared with harmful or poisonous substances (it is not the intent of this subsection to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin of significance to the public health); or 
c.  To fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in said person's charge or custody as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shade, care, or structurally-sound weatherproof shelter appropriate for the type, age and/or size of the animal; or 
d.  To drive or work any animal cruelly; or 
e.  To abandon any animal within the City limits; or 
f.  To leave any animal confined in a vehicle for more than five (5) minutes in extreme weather conditions, defined as less than thirty (30) degrees Fahrenheit or more than eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit; or 
g.  To transport an animal in the trunk of a vehicle; or 
h.  To cause, instigate, stage, or train any animal to fight or permit any fight between any animal and another animal or human; or 
i.  To give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade; or 
j.  To attach chains or other tethers, restraints or implements directly to an animal without the proper use of a collar, harness, or other device designed for that purpose and made from a material that prevents injury to the animal; or 
k.  To continuously picket, tether or stake an animal (excluding those used by businesses for security during non-business hours) for more than two (2) continuous hours, except that tethering or staking of the same animal may resume after a hiatus of three (3) continuous hours, for up to six (6) hours total time on a tether or stake per day; provided that for the purpose of tethering or staking an animal, a chain, leash, rope or tether shall be at least 10 feet in length; or 
l.  To use a chain, leash, rope, collaring device, tether, or any assembly or attachments thereto to picket an animal that shall weigh more than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of the animal's body weight, or due to weight, inhibit the free movement of the animal within the area picketed; or 
m.  To picket an animal in such a manner as to cause injury, strangulation, or entanglement of the animal on fences, trees, or other manmade or natural obstacles. 
2.  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report any injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society. 
B.  Exceptions. Nothing in subsection A. of this section shall: 
1.  Be deemed to prohibit any action by a licensed veterinarian done in accordance with accepted standards of veterinary medicine, or any action taken by a law enforcement officer pursuant to the interests of public health and safety; or 
2.  Be interpreted as prohibiting any act done in self-defense or done to defend another person. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note- See 11.11 of the UPOC also. 

Sec. 2-202. - Procedures for cruelty to animals; fines. 
A.  Any public health officer, law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or licensed veterinarian may take into custody any animal, upon either private or public property, which clearly shows evidence of cruelty to animals, as defined by Section 2-201; provided that entry upon private property shall only be accomplished with the assistance of a law enforcement officer. Such officer, agent or veterinarian may inspect, care for, or treat such animal or place such animal in the care of any facility with which the City has contracted for animal sheltering services or a licensed veterinarian for treatment, boarding or other care or, if an officer of such animal sheltering facility or such veterinarian determines that the animal appears to be diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose, for humane destruction. 
B.  The owner or keeper of an animal destroyed pursuant to subsection A. shall not be entitled to recover damages for the destruction of such animal unless the owner proves that such destruction was unreasonable and unwarranted. 
C.  Expenses incurred for the care, treatment or boarding of any animal taken into custody pursuant to subsection A. pending prosecution of the owner or keeper of such animal for the crime of cruelty to animals as defined in Section 2-201 shall be assessed to the owner or keeper as a cost of the case if the owner or keeper is adjudicated guilty of such crime. 
D.  If a person is adjudicated guilty of the crime of cruelty to animals as defined in Section 2-201 and the court determines that such animal owned or possessed by such person would be in the future subject to any cruelty to animals, such animal shall not be returned to or remain with such person. Such animal may be turned over to a duly incorporated humane society, animal shelter or control or licensed veterinarian for sale, adoption or other disposition. 
E.  Unless the animal obtained pursuant to this section is the evidentiary subject of a pending prosecution, the owner or keeper of the animal shall have a maximum of four (4) business days after the animal is taken into custody to obtain the animal from the veterinarian or the animal sheltering facility having custody of the animal. The veterinarian or the animal sheltering facility shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal, if known or reasonably ascertainable. The failure of the owner or keeper to obtain custody of the animal in the time provided shall provide the authority for the Municipal Judge to declare that the animal be disposed of by the veterinarian or the animal sheltering facility by adoption or destruction. 
F.  Violation of Section 2-201 shall be a municipal offense for which a mandatory court appearance is required, and upon conviction, the defendant shall be fined not less than $90.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus applicable court costs, per offense. The Municipal Judge shall not have authority to suspend the minimum fine. In addition, the Municipal Judge shall have authority to sentence the convicted defendant to a maximum six (6) month sentence in jail. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-301. - Animal nuisances. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Own any animal, including a dog or cat, in a residentially-zoned district, which by frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person within the vicinity of such animal (see also noise ordinance 12-301); or 
2.  Own any animal, including a dog or cat, in a residentially-zoned district, which shall by the nature of their maintenance or by the numbers of the same shall create an offensive odor so as to be objectionable to surrounding residences; or 
3.  Own any dog or cat, in a residentially-zoned district, which is in heat, unless such animal is confined in a secure and sufficiently enclosed area; or 
4.  Own on their premises more than four (4) dogs, cats or other non-prohibited animals or combination of non-prohibited animals, ten (10) weeks in age or older, unless such premises is licensed as a commercial kennel or a Special Permit has been issued by the City as provided for in Article V of this chapter. The limit to four animals shall not include rodents, fish, and invertebrates. 
    Violation of this section shall be a municipal offense and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of $90.00, plus applicable court costs, per offense. 
Sec. 2-302. - Responsibility for removal of animal excrement. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear with an animal upon the public right-of-way, within public places or upon the property of another, absent that person's consent, without some means for removal of excrement that may be deposited by the animal. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person who is an owner or possessor of an animal in their care to fail to remove any excrement deposited by the animal upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner of the animal. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who have a physical disability or visual impairment, who are using service dogs, and can provide adequate documentation, upon demand of an animal control officer or law enforcement officer, that the service dog is an animal trained by an accredited institution which trains dogs for service work for the physically disabled or visually impaired. 
    Violation of this section shall a municipal offense and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of $90.00, plus applicable court costs, per offense. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend the fine or any portion thereof. 
Sec. 2-303. - Animals running at large; fines. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog or cat or other animal which runs at large in the City. Knowledge or acquiescence by the owner or keeper is not an element of the offense. 
B.  An animal shall not be deemed to be running at large if: 
1.  The animal is firmly attached to a leash or chain under the physical control of its owner or keeper; or 
2.  The animal is within a structure or within a fence enclosure with the permission of the owner or keeper of the structure or fence enclosure; or 
3.  The animal has an operating electronic collar and is under the charge, care or control, of its owner or keeper who is operating an electronic pet containment system or electronic training system for the animal in the owner's back or side yard. Notwithstanding this subsection, all animals on or in the public right-of-way must be kept on a leash or chain under the physical control of its owner or keeper. 
C.  Any animal on property without the permission of the property owner shall be deemed to be an animal at large and the owner of such animal shall be in violation of this section. 
D.  Any cat that is on the property of its owner or keeper shall not be deemed to be running at large in the City. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who have a physical disability or visual impairment, who are using service dogs, and can provide adequate documentation, upon demand of an animal control officer or law enforcement officer, that the service dog is an animal trained by an accredited institution which trains dogs for service work for the physically disabled or visually impaired. 
F.  Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be fined as follows: $90.00 for the first offense within a twelve (12) month period; $100.00 for the second offense within a twelve (12) month period; $110.00 for the third offense within a twelve (12) month period; and $160.00 for the fourth and subsequent offense(s) within a twelve (12) month period. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend the fine or any portion thereof established by this section. The fine shall be in addition to any applicable court costs or impoundment fees. The animal sheltering facility having custody of the animal, if any, shall not release an animal to an owner if the owner has failed to pay a fine or has failed to appear in Municipal Court for the adjudication of a violation of this section. 
Sec. 2-304. - Habitual violator; animal at-large. 
A.  It shall be a separate municipal offense for any person to receive four (4) or more citations for violation of Section 2-303 within a twenty-four (24) month consecutive period. Such person may then be cited as a habitual violator. 
B.  Violation of this section shall be a municipal offense for which a mandatory court appearance is required. Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be fined not less than $90.00 nor more than $500.00, plus applicable court costs, for each habitual violator citation. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend the minimum fine or any portion thereof. In addition thereto, the Municipal Judge shall have the authority to sentence the individual to up to six (6) months in jail. It shall be a defense to an alleged violation of this section for the defendant to have been adjudged not guilty, or the charge dismissed, for a specific citation issued under Section 2-303. 
Sec. 2-305. - Aggressive animals running at large; penalties. 
A.  An "aggressive animal running at large" means any animal at large pursuant to Section 2-303 that without provocation, exhibits aggression or combativeness toward a person or another domestic animal, whether or not said person or animal is attacked, bitten, or scratched by the aggressive animal at large. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating Section 2-303, where the animal at large is an aggressive animal pursuant to subsection A. of this section, shall be fined as follows: $110.00 for the first offense within a twelve (12) month period, or by imprisonment, for not more than 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; $120.00 for the second offense within a twelve (12) month period, or by imprisonment, for not more than 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; $130.00 for the third offense within a twelve (12) month period, or by imprisonment, for not more than 14 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and $180.00 for the fourth and subsequent offense(s) within a twelve (12) month period, or by imprisonment, for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend the fine (or any portion thereof) established by this section but shall have the authority to suspend the term of imprisonment. The fine shall be in addition to any applicable court costs or impoundment fees. The animal sheltering facility having custody of the animal, if any, shall not release an animal to an owner if the owner has failed to pay a fine or has failed to appear in Municipal Court for the adjudication of a violation of this section. 
Sec. 2-306. - Habitual violator; aggressive animal at-large. 
A.  It shall be a separate municipal offense for any person to receive four (4) or more citations for violation of Section 2-305 within a twenty-four (24) month consecutive period. Such person may then be cited as a habitual violator. 
B.  Violation of this section shall be a municipal offense for which a mandatory court appearance is required. Any person found guilty of violation of this section shall be fined not less than $180.00 nor more than $500.00, plus applicable court costs, for each habitual violator citation. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend the minimum fine or any portion thereof. In addition thereto, the Municipal Judge shall have the authority to sentence the individual to up to six (6) months in jail. It shall be a defense to an alleged violation of this section for the defendant to have been adjudged not guilty, or the charge dismissed, for a specific citation issued under Section 2-305. 
Sec. 2-307. - Pursuit onto private property. 
    A law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the right of entry upon any private unenclosed lots or lands to pursue and capture any animal, including a dog or cat, found to be running at large or whose presence is in violation of any article in this chapter. 
Sec. 2-308. - Impounding, redemption and disposition. 
    A dog, cat or other animal found running at large or in violation of the articles within this chapter, situated within the corporate limits of the City, may be taken up by the officer or brought in by a member of the public and may be impounded at any facility with which the City has contracted for animal sheltering services. The officer shall make a record of all dogs or cats so impounded with their description, date of impoundment and rabies vaccination number if available. If, within four (4) business days from the date any dog or cat is impounded and the owner of such dog or cat shall appear and claim his or her dog or cat, said dog or cat may be released upon payment of the applicable impoundment fees as set forth in the contract then in effect between the City and the facility providing the sheltering services. 
    All fees required by this section shall be payable to the City, and no animal shall be released until the animal's owner proves that the animal, if a dog or cat, is currently immunized against rabies, is properly licensed pursuant to Article V of this chapter, and all impoundment and board fees have been paid in full to the City. Rabies immunization and licensing are not required until the animal is over four (4) months of age. If said animal is over four (4) months of age and is not currently immunized against rabies and licensed as required, then the owner may be issued citations for failure to license an animal and for failure to provide proof of rabies immunization. The citations will be marked to indicate that if the animal owner brings proof of current rabies immunization to the Police Department and completes the annual licensing process within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the citations, then the citations will be voided. 
    Any owner or keeper of a dog or cat who wishes to forfeit or otherwise terminate their ownership of said animal may bring the animal to the Lansing Police Department for surrender. At such time, the owner shall complete a written statement (including the animal's behavioral history and medical records, if available) irrevocably surrendering ownership of the animal and shall at that time pay a $100.00 surrender fee to the City. The City expressly reserves the right to refuse to accept custody of any dog or cat offered for surrender. 
(Memo of 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 2-309. - Filing complaint; enforcement. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the animal control officer, or anyone having the authority of an animal control officer, including but not limited to law enforcement officers, to enforce the terms and provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 2-2008, and other lawful authority, the animal control officer is authorized to issue citations to the owner of and/or impound any dog, cat or other animal found in violation of the terms of this chapter. The Chief of Police may appoint persons to be known as animal control officers, whose duties it shall be to assist in the enforcement of this article as defined by K.S.A. 12-4113(j) and to work under the immediate supervision and direction of the Police Department. 
    Any person having personal knowledge of the violations of any of the provisions of this article may make a verified complaint of the facts showing a violation of this article before the Municipal Court Judge and upon the filing of such a complaint, the Municipal Court Judge may issue proper legal process to enforce the penalties provided herein 
(Memo of 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 2-310. - Damage to private property. 
    The owner of any animal shall be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties prescribed herein if any such animal damages private property not belonging to the animal owner. 
Sec. 2-311. - Tranquilizer/stun gun/lethal force. 
    The Chief of Police or his/her designate shall be authorized to use a tranquilizer gun or Taser in the enforcement of this chapter. He/she shall be authorized to tranquilize/stun an animal which is impractical or impossible to catch or capture. In circumstances where the officer or another human being is in threat of great bodily harm from an animal, or an animal has been critically injured, lethal force maybe employed against the animal. 
Sec. 2-312. - Animal bites, communicable disease; quarantine. 
A.  OWNER KNOWN: Upon receipt of notification from any person, including but not limited to the state-required notice given by a duly licensed practitioner of medicine or registered nurse, that an animal bite incident has occurred, or upon the receipt of reliable and verifiable information that an animal is believed to have rabies or some other serious communicable disease, an officer shall make reasonable efforts to contact the owner of the animal involved in the incident. The owner shall be advised that a ten (10) day quarantine period shall be required at one (1) of the following locations, as determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee: 
1.  The residence of the dog, cat or ferret; 
2.  In a veterinary hospital; or 
3.  At a facility holding a current state pound and shelter license. 
At the conclusion of the quarantine period, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall determine whether or not the dog, cat or ferret is suffering from rabies. If not, then conditional upon the owner's compliance with the requirements for ownership of a dangerous animal pursuant to Article 4 of this chapter, then the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall authorize the release of the dog, cat or ferret upon payment of all applicable boarding fees by the owner. 
If the dog, cat or ferret is quarantined at the residence of the owner, the owner shall allow the Chief of Police or his/her designee access to the animal during the quarantine period to verify its status. 
If the dog, cat or ferret is quarantined in a veterinary hospital, upon quarantine the owner shall notify the Chief of Police or his/her designee of the name, address and phone number of the veterinary hospital. 
B.  FAILURE TO COMPLY: Any owner who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section, within twenty-four (24) hours or one (1) business day of notification, shall be deemed in violation of this article and the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall take such animal into custody and commit it for the above described confinement period. 
C.  DISCOVERED OWNER: If an unknown owner of a suspected dog, cat or ferret becomes known during the quarantine period and seeks to claim the animal, the provisions of subsection (A) shall govern the quarantine of the animal. 
D.  STRAY OR UNCLAIMED ANIMAL: Dogs, cats or ferrets exhibiting outward indicia of rabies infection may be sacrificed immediately and the head of the animal submitted for laboratory examination. 
E.  The management of horses, cattle and sheep shall be determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
F.  Mammals other than dogs, cats, ferrets, horses, cattle or sheep, including the offspring of wild species cross-bred with domestic dogs and cats, skunks, foxes, raccoons, coyotes, bats and other species known to be involved in the transmission of rabies, whether owned or unowned, shall be sacrificed immediately and the head of the animal submitted for laboratory examination for evidence of rabies infection. Any mammal that has been vaccinated may be sacrificed and tested if the period of virus shedding is unknown for that species. 
G.  Mammals, including rabbits, hares, gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, rats, squirrels, chipmunks, and other species not known to be involved in the transmission of rabies need not be sacrificed and submitted for laboratory examination for evidence of rabies infection, unless the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines that the circumstances of the potential exposure to rabies indicate otherwise. 
H.  The disposition of mammals that are not known to be involved in the transmission of rabies and that are maintained in zoological parks shall be in accordance with the judgment of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
I.  Quarantine of mammals exposed to rabies by a known or suspected rabid mammal shall be as follows: 
1.  Stray or unclaimed dogs, cats or ferrets shall be sacrificed immediately. 
2.  Dogs, cats or ferrets that have an owner, are wanted by that owner, and are not immunized against rabies shall be quarantined for six (6) months at one of the following locations, as determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee: 
a.  The residence of the owner of the dog, cat or ferret; 
b.  In a veterinary hospital; or 
c.  At a facility holding a current state pound and shelter license. 
These dogs, cats or ferrets shall be immunized against rabies one (1) month before release from quarantine. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall authorize the release of the dog, cat or ferret after the required quarantine period upon payment of all applicable boarding fees by the animal owner. 
3.  Dogs, cats, ferrets, horses, cattle and sheep that have an owner and are wanted by that owner, and for which the owner produces rabies vaccination certificates that contain the following information shall be immediately revaccinated and kept under the owner's control and observed for forty-five (45) days: 
a.  The expiration date of the rabies vaccination; and 
b.  Positive identification for each of these mammals showing that the mammals are currently vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with an approved vaccine for that species. 
4.  Horses, cattle and sheep not vaccinated with an approved vaccine for that species shall be sacrificed immediately or quarantined for six (6) months under conditions satisfactory to the Chief of Police or his/her designee. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall authorize the release of the horse, cow or sheep after the required quarantine period upon payment of all applicable boarding fees by the animal owner. 
5.  Other mammals shall be sacrificed immediately, except for those mammals currently vaccinated with an approved vaccine for that species. Mammals that have been appropriately vaccinated may be immediately re-vaccinated and quarantined for at least ninety (90) days under conditions satisfactory to the Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
(Memo of 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 2-313. - Breaking pound. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break open, or assist, counsel or advise the breaking open of the City pound, or to take or let out any animal placed therein by the impounding officer. This section shall not apply to any officer duly authorized to handle animals impounded. 
Sec. 2-314. - Penalty. 
    Unless otherwise specified herein, upon a first conviction for a violation of any section of this article, a defendant shall be fined $90.00, plus applicable court costs. A second or subsequent violation of any section of this article shall be a municipal offense for which a mandatory court appearance is required, and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $110.00 nor more than $500.00, plus applicable court costs, and/or imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days. Each consecutive day's violation shall constitute a separate punishable offense. Any costs associated with the impoundment of the animal shall be assessed against the convicted person and shall be in addition to any fines or other penalties imposed. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 2-401. - Prohibitions. 
    Except as provided elsewhere in this article, no person shall own, keep, or harbor any Dangerous Animal, as defined in Section 2-102C. of this chapter, in the City of Lansing. 
Sec. 2-402. - Exceptions; permit and registration requirements. 
    The prohibition on Dangerous Animals in Section 2-401 of this article shall NOT extend to the following situations, provided that any person or organization desiring to own, harbor or have charge, custody, control or possession of a Dangerous Animal pursuant to the following subsections has first secured a permit pursuant to Article V of this chapter: 
A.  The keeping of such animals in zoos, bona fide educational or medical institutions, museums or any other place where they are kept as live specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction or study; 
B.  The keeping of such animals for exhibition to the public of such animals by a circus, carnival or other exhibit or show; 
C.  The keeping of such animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary hospital for treatment; 
D.  Commercial establishments possessing such animals for the purpose of sale or display; 
E.  The keeping of a Dangerous Animal as defined in Section 2-102C.2. herein or wolf-hybrids as defined in Section 2-102C.4. herein, provided that the following additional requirements are met for each such animal to be kept pursuant to this subsection: 
1.  Each animal shall at all times be securely confined in one of the following manners: 
a.  Indoors, inside a residence or structure equipped with windows and doors that prevent the animal from exiting the structure on its own volition; or 
b.  Outdoors, in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel having: secure sides, which are either anchored to a secure floor or embedded at least two (2) feet into the ground; a secure top attached to the sides; and access controlled by a keyed or combination lock. Said structure must comply with all City building and zoning regulations and must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition; or 
c.  Outdoors, outside its kennel or pen but securely restrained with 1) a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from biting persons or other animals, and 2) a leash no longer than four (4) feet in length. Said leash must at all times be under the physical control of a person and shall not be attached to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. 
1.  The owner, keeper or harborer of an animal under this subsection shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." In addition, a similar sign shall be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. 
2.  Each animal owned, kept or harbored pursuant to this subsection shall be registered with the City according to the requirements of Article V of this chapter. 
3.  The owner, keeper or harborer of an animal under this subsection shall, within ten (10) business days of receiving approval from the City for ownership of such animal, provide proof to the Chief of Police of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $300,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. This shall require a special insurance rider. At the time of application for permit renewal, the owner, keeper or harborer must show proof of insurance for the present registration period and proof that there was insurance coverage throughout the period of the prior registration year. 
a.  In the event said liability insurance is canceled, lapsed, or for any other reason becomes non- enforceable, said owner, keeper, or harborer shall be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance and subject to the penalties provided herein. 
4.  The owner, keeper or harborer of an animal pursuant to this subsection shall, within ten (10) business days of receiving approval from the City for ownership of such animal, provide to the Chief of Police two color photographs of the registered animal clearly showing the color and approximate size of the animal. 
5.  The owner, keeper or harborer of an animal pursuant to this subsection shall, within ten (10) days of the occurrence of any of the following events, report such event to the Chief of Police in writing: 
a.  Death of the animal; 
b.  Birth of offspring of the animal; or 
c.  The new address of the animal owner should the owner move within the corporate City limits. 
Any animal found to be the subject of a violation of any of the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment and shall be delivered to a place of confinement, which may be with any organization which is authorized by law to accept, own, keep or harbor such animals. In addition, failure to comply will result in the revocation of the license for such animal and the permit providing for the keeping of such animal resulting in the immediate removal of the animal from the City, and may result in criminal penalties against the owner of such animal as provided for elsewhere in this chapter. 
F.  The keeping of any snakes of the species boa constrictors, Madagascar ground boas, green and yellow anacondas, Cuban boas, Indian pythons, reticulated pythons, African rock pythons, Amethystine pythons, Boelen's pythons and all members of the family pythonidae that exceed six feet in length; provided, these animals shall be kept under the following mandatory conditions. 
1.  In consideration of the right of the public not to be unexpectedly exposed to snakes, these animals will not be openly displayed in a public setting outside of established forums for such practices to include herpetological shows, educational displays, pet stores and other special displays whereby members of the public are forewarned that a snake(s) may be displayed in the open. 
2.  Snakes shall be transported in a manner that precludes escape. At a minimum snakes shall be placed in a sturdy cloth bag free of holes or tears and the bag placed in a box or similar container. The box or container must be locked or sealed during transportation. 
3.  Snakes shall be housed in secure cages with hinged tops or doors or a sliding glass front which includes a locking mechanism. The cage shall be kept in a room modified to prevent snake escapes and which has a door which shall be kept shut or locked when not occupied by the owner. 
4.  Snakes requiring permits shall not be sold to minors. 
5.  Pet stores or other vendors or sellers of snakes requiring permits are required to provide a copy of this ordinance to all prospective purchasers of such snakes. 
6.  Snakes will not be fed or in any fashion provided any live or living creature while observable by any member of the public or in any manner which may otherwise violate the humane laws of the City. 
7.  It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this subsection, for any person to not comply with the standards set forth herein. 
Sec. 2-403. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the transportation of such animals through this City, when such transporter has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public and has notified the local law enforcement agency of the proposed route of transportation and the time thereof and shall not apply to dogs kept by law enforcement agencies. 
Sec. 2-404. - Notice of keeping dangerous animals. 
    Upon the written complaint of any person, or the personal observation of an officer or animal control officer, that a person owns or is keeping or harboring a Dangerous Animal in violation of this chapter in the City, the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative shall forthwith cause the matter to be investigated; and if after investigation the facts indicate that such person named in the complaint is in fact the owner or is keeping or harboring any such Dangerous Animal in the City, the Chief of Police shall forthwith send written notice to such person requiring such person to safely remove said animal from the City within 48 hours of the date of said notice. Notice as herein provided shall not be required where such Dangerous Animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person or has escaped and is at large in which case the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative shall cause said animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person. 
Sec. 2-405. - Temporary permits; powers. 
    The Chief of Police or a person under his/her authority may, following application for a permit pursuant to Article V of this chapter and pending final disposition of the same, grant a temporary permit for the maintenance within the City of any such animal upon such conditions as he/she shall, in his/her sole discretion, require when, in his/her opinion, there is no reasonable doubt as to the consistency thereof with the public health, safety and general welfare, but no such animal shall be otherwise kept or maintained within this City or permitted to occupy any premises within this City except while such a regular or temporary permit is in full force and effect. 
Sec. 2-406. - Commercial establishments. 
A.  Commercial establishments possessing such animals for the purpose of sale or display may replace the same with others of the same kind, but the number of each shall not be in excess of the number thereof allowed by the terms of such permit. Such establishments may, in the discretion of the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative, be granted a permit for those such numbers of each kind of animal as do not exceed the maximum number such establishment estimates will be maintained by it in this City at any one time during the period of the permit. Such permit shall require the immediate notification of the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative upon the acquisition of any animal having a prior history of any incident involving the public health or safety, or resulting in any bodily injury or property damage. 
B.  Upon the sale of any dangerous animal, said commercial establishment shall immediately send notification of said sale along with the name and address of the buyer, the method of transporting the animal, the path of travel of such transportation, and the destination to the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative. 
Sec. 2-407. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. 
Sec. 2-408. - Violations and penalties. 
    Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision of this article shall be a municipal violation for which a mandatory court appearance shall be required. Upon conviction in the Municipal Court, a defendant shall be fined not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus applicable court costs, per offense. In addition to the fine imposed, the Court may sentence the defendant to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. In addition, the Court shall order the registration of and permit for the subject animal revoked and the animal removed from the City. Should the defendant refuse to remove the animal from the City, the Municipal Court Judge shall find the defendant owner in contempt and order the immediate confiscation and impoundment of the animal. Each day that a violation of this ordinance continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this ordinance shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this ordinance. 
Sec. 2-409. - Costs to be paid by responsible parties. 
    Any reasonable costs incurred by the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative in seizing, impounding, confining or disposing of any dangerous or wild animal, pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be charged against the owner, keeper, or harborer of such animal and shall be collected by the Chief of Police. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS AND LICENSING 

Sec. 2-501. - Permit required for more than four animals. 
    Any person or organization wishing to own, keep or harbor more than four dogs, cats or other non-prohibited animals or combination of non- prohibited animals at the same address or on the same premises shall be required to obtain a City permit for said ownership.. 
A.  An application for any permit required pursuant to this section shall be made to the City Clerk in writing and upon a form furnished by the City Clerk. Said application shall be verified by the person who desires to have, keep, maintain or have in his/her possession or under his/her control, in the City, the animals for which a permit is required, and shall set forth the following: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  The applicant's interest in such animals and justification why such number of animals should be allowed in the City. 
3.  The proposed location, and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of such location, and of the lessee, if any. 
4.  The number and general description of all animals for which the permit is sought. 
5.  Any information known to the applicant concerning vicious or dangerous propensities of all such animals. 
6.  The housing arrangements for all such animals with particular details as to safety or structure, locks, fencing, etc. 
7.  Safety precautions proposed to be taken. 
8.  Noises or odors anticipated in the keeping of such animals. 
9.  Prior history of incidents involving the public health or safety involving any of said animals. 
10.  Proof of insurance to cover those who may be injured or killed by said animal. 
11.  A statement, signed by the applicant, indemnifying the City and its agents and employees for any and all injuries that may result from said animal. 
12.  Any additional information required by the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative at the time of filing such application or thereafter. 
In addition, the applicant shall allow the Chief of Police or his designated representative the ability to inspect the animals and/or property where the animals are to be kept. 
B.  The fee for a permit application shall be $25.00 per permit. The fee is nonrefundable. Said fee shall be payable to the City Clerk at the time of filing the permit application. 
C.  Upon the submission of a fully and properly completed application for permit and fees, the City Clerk shall forward the permit application to the Governing Body. The matter shall be set for hearing on a regularly scheduled council meeting not later than 45 days after submission and acceptance of a fully and properly completed application for permit and the appropriate fees. 
D.  No permit shall be granted except upon an explicit finding by the Governing Body of Lansing that the issuance of a permit will not be contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare. The Governing Body may consider, but is not limited to the following factors in making its determination: the possible impact on neighbors and the surrounding area; the possibility of harm to the general public; detriment to the health of the animal(s) or neighboring animals; public nuisance, sanitary or offensive conditions; the noises from the animals and possible odors; the number of animals; planning and zoning requirements; etc. The Governing Body may attach requirements and conditions to the issuance of the permit which the applicant will be required to comply with. The decision of the Governing Body is final. 
Sec. 2-502. - Permits; other. 
    Any permit which is required under the provisions of this chapter, except for the permits specified in Section 2-501 and Section 2-601, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A.  An application for such permit shall be made to the Chief of Police in writing and upon a form furnished by the Chief of Police. Said application shall be verified by the person who desires to have, keep, maintain or have in his/her possession or under his/her control, in the City, the animal for which a permit is required, and shall set forth the following: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  The applicant's interest in such animal and justification why such prohibited animal should be allowed in the City. 
3.  The proposed location, and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of such location, and of the lessee, if any. 
4.  The number and general description of all animals for which the permit is sought. 
5.  Any information known to the applicant concerning vicious or dangerous propensities of all such animals. 
6.  The housing arrangements for all such animals with particular details as to safety or structure, locks, fencing, etc. 
7.  Safety precautions proposed to be taken. 
8.  Noises or odors anticipated in the keeping of such animals. 
9.  Prior history of incidents involving the public health or safety involving any of said animals. 
10.  Proof of insurance to cover those who may be injured or killed by said animal. 
11.  A statement, signed by the applicant, indemnifying the City and its agents and employees for any and all injuries that may result from said animal. 
12.  Any additional information required by the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative at the time of filing such application or thereafter. 
In addition, the applicant shall allow the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative the ability to inspect the animal and/or property where the animal is to be kept. 
B.  The fee for a permit application shall be $25.00 per permit. The fee is nonrefundable. Said fee shall be payable to the Chief of Police at the time of filing the permit application. 
C.  Upon the submission of a fully and properly completed application for permit and fees, the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative shall begin an investigation to determine whether or not the permit should be issued. 
D.  No permit shall be granted except upon an explicit finding by the Chief of Police that the issuance of a permit will not be contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare. The Chief of Police may consider, but is not limited to the following factors in making his/her determination: the possible impact on neighbors and the surrounding area; the possibility of harm to the general public; detriment to the health of the animal(s) or neighboring animals; public nuisance; sanitary or offensive conditions; the noises from the animals and possible odors; the number of animals; planning and zoning requirements; etc. The Chief of Police may attach requirements and conditions to the issuance of the permit which the applicant will be required to comply with. 
Sec. 2-503. - Permit, term and renewal. 
    No permit required by this chapter shall be granted for a period in excess of one year. An application for renewal of any permit shall be made not less than 45 days prior to the expiration thereof, and shall be accompanied by a $25.00 renewal fee. 
Sec. 2-504. - Permit; inspections, investigations, and issuance of renewal. 
    Prior to the annual renewal of any permit issued hereunder and at least once, not more than six (6) months after the issuance of any such permit or after its renewal, the Chief of Police, animal control officer or a designated representative shall inspect the premises subject to such permit to determine whether the person to whom it has been issued is complying or continuing to comply with all of the conditions specified in this article. In addition, the officer or representative shall investigate the past history of the permit holder to determine whether during the past permit period the permit holder was in compliance with all of the conditions specified in this article. The investigation may include a review of department records and interviews with the permit holder and neighbors. If the officer or representative determines during any such inspection and investigation that any of the conditions therein specified are being violated or have been noted during the past permit period, he/she shall recommend denial of a renewal of any such permit, and/or he/she shall recommend revocation of such permit in the event that such violation is not corrected within such period of time as she/he shall direct. Upon completion of the investigation and review process provided herein, the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative shall, in the case of a multiple animal permit, recommend to the City Clerk that the permit be renewed or that the renewal application be denied, and in the case of any other permit required pursuant to this chapter, either renew or deny the permit. 
Sec. 2-505. - Permit; revocation and suspension. 
    The Chief of Police may, for good cause, revoke any permit or modify any terms or provisions thereof and may, in the event it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat or danger to the public health or safety, suspend any permit or portion thereof without hearing. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered good cause for revocation or suspension of a permit. 
Sec. 2-506. - Appeals; fee. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by or dissatisfied with any of the decisions, rulings, actions or findings by the Chief of Police or his designated representative in regards to a denial, revocation or suspension of a permit may, within ten (10) days thereafter, file a written notice or statement of appeal from said decision, ruling, action or finding to the Lansing Governing Body. 
B.  An administrative fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the City Clerk and is required for each appeal to the Lansing Governing Body, and no appeal shall be set for hearing until such fee has been paid. No appeal shall be set for hearing if it is filed more than ten (10) days after said action, decision, ruling or findings of the Chief of Police or his designated representative from which the party is appealing. 
C.  An appeal shall be scheduled for hearing within forty-five (45) days after the request and fees are received by the City Clerk. 
D.  The filing of an appeal under this subsection shall not stay any action taken pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  The decision of the Governing Body to either affirm or reverse the determination previously made by the Chief of Police regarding the issuance of a permit shall be final. 
Sec. 2-507. - Licensing; vaccination. 
    No person shall own or have custody of any dog or cat over four months of age unless such dog or cat is licensed as herein provided. 
A.  Before a license will be issued, the animal owner must produce satisfactory evidence that the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies with either of the following: 
1.  Killed tissue vaccine (also known as "one-year" vaccine) within the 12 months previous to the date of the issuance of the license. 
2.  Modified live virus vaccine (also known as "three-year" vaccine) within the 36 months previous to the date of the issuance of the license. 
B.  The license fee shall be $15.00 for each dog or cat; however, if spayed or neutered the license fee shall be $7.50 for each dog or cat. 
C.  All licenses shall be valid from the date of issuance through the last day of the month containing the one-year anniversary of the date of issuance. The office of the Chief of Police is authorized to issue dog and cat licenses. 
D.  Each person shall, upon purchase of the required license, cause such animal to wear a durable tag furnished by the police department for the particular animal for which the license is issued, and bearing the animal's assigned number. In case of the loss of any tag, the police department shall, upon presentation of the original receipt, issue a duplicate tag at no charge. No person shall place upon any animal a City-issued tag other than the one given for the particular animal for which it is issued. 
E.  Failure of an owner or keeper of an animal required to be registered pursuant to this chapter to either: 
1.  Procure and maintain current rabies vaccination(s) on said animal; and/or 
2.  Purchase the annual City license for said animal, shall be a municipal offense and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of $90.00, plus applicable court costs. 
Sec. 2-508. - Violations and penalties. 
    Unless otherwise stated herein, the failure to obtain any permit required pursuant to this article shall be a municipal violation for which a mandatory court appearance shall be required. Upon conviction in the Municipal Court, a defendant shall be fined not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus applicable court costs, per offense. In addition to the fine imposed, the Court may sentence the defendant to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. In addition, the Court shall order the registration (if any) of the subject animal revoked and the animal removed from the City. Should the defendant refuse to remove the animal from the City, the Municipal Court Judge shall find the defendant owner in contempt and order the immediate confiscation and impoundment of the animal. 
ARTICLE VI. - KENNELS 

Sec. 2-601. - Kennels; license required. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall operate a kennel commercially or for profit within the City, unless such person, firm or corporation shall have first obtained a license from the City Clerk and has complied with and been approved by the state for all state licensing requirements, said proof to be furnished to the City Clerk. 
B.  Licenses shall be valid for a period of five (5) years from the date of issuance. 
C.  Outdoor Kennels shall only be permitted in areas zoned as A-1. Indoor Kennels shall be permitted in any zoning area except residential. 
D.  No permit shall be issued, and if a permit has been issued then it shall be revoked, if the Governing Body finds that the kennel is being kept in a manner that is: 
1.  Offensive. 
2.  Unsanitary. 
3.  Detrimental to the health of the people in the neighborhood. 
4.  Detrimental to the health of the animal(s) or neighboring animals. 
5.  A public nuisance. 
6.  In violation of applicable City ordinances (i.e. running at large, failure to license, etc.), zoning regulations or laws and regulations of the State of Kansas. 
7.  Not within the specifications set out within the issued permit. 
Sec. 2-602. - Same; fee. 
    The fee for a license to operate a kennel shall be $25.00 per year. 
Sec. 2-603. - Same; vaccination. 
    No license shall be issued without a certificate of immunization for each animal as set out in Section 2-502 of this chapter. 
Sec. 2-604. - Zoning regulations. 
    No license shall be issued for the establishment of a kennel within an area zoned for residential use within the City. 
Sec. 2-605. - Penalties. 
    Violation of any provision of this article shall be a municipal offense for which a mandatory court appearance is required. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of this Code, shall be punished by a fine not less than $90.00 nor more than $500.00, plus any applicable court costs. 
CHAPTER 3 - BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-101. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section. 
    Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol but does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol. 
    Alcoholic liquor means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include any cereal malt beverage. 
    Caterer means an individual, partnership or corporation which sells alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, and provides services related to the serving thereof, on unlicensed premises which may be open to the public, but does not include a holder of a temporary permit selling alcoholic liquor in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
    Cereal malt beverage means any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed or made from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute, but does not include any such liquor which is more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
    Class A club means a premises which is owned or leased by a corporation, partnership, business trust or association and which is operated thereby as a bona fide nonprofit social, fraternal or war veterans' club, as determined by the State of Kansas, for the exclusive use of the corporate stockholders, partners, trust beneficiaries or associates (hereinafter referred to as members), and their families and guests accompanying them. 
    Class B club means a premise operated for profit by a corporation, partnership or individual, to which members of such club may resort for the consumption of food or alcoholic beverages and for entertainment. 
    Club means a Class A or Class B club. 
    College or university means an educational institution providing general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the state board of education. 
    Drinking establishment means premises that may be open to the general public, where alcoholic liquor by the individual drink is sold. 
    General retailer means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail for consumption on the premises. 
    Licensee means the person who has been properly issued a license, including a temporary permit, to sell alcoholic liquor within the corporate limits of the City. 
    Limited retailer means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail only in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises. 
    Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership or association. 
    Place of business means any place at which cereal malt beverages or alcoholic beverages or both are sold. 
    Retailer means any person who sells at retail, or offers for sale at retail, alcoholic liquors in the original package for consumption off of and away from the premises. 
    School means any public or parochial school containing any of the grades from kindergarten through twelfth grade. 
    Temporary permit means a permit, issued in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, which allows the permit holder to offer for sale, sell or serve alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage, which may be open to the public. 
    Wholesaler or distributor means any individuals, firms, co partnerships, corporations and associations which sell or offer for sale any beverage referred to in this chapter, to persons, co partnerships, corporations and associations authorized by this chapter to sell cereal malt beverages at retail. 
Sec. 3-102. - Restrictions on location. 
A.  No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or served by a person holding a license or permit from the City, at a place of business or other premises located within 400 feet of any school, college, or church. The distance to be measured along the public rights of way, by the shortest route by which a pedestrian would normally walk, from the nearest property line of the school or church, to the primary public entrance to the building, or part thereof, occupied by the place of business or other premises. 
B.  The distance limitation of subsection A. above shall not apply to a place of business or premises for which a license had been issued by the City prior to the publication of this article, and for which a license has been in effect at all times since the publication of this article. Any temporary lapse of the license not exceeding sixty (60) days in length shall be disregarded in applying this paragraph. 
C.  The distance limitation of subsection A. shall not apply when the licensee or license applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation from the Governing Body of the City. The Governing Body shall grant such waiver only following public notice and hearing and a finding by the Governing Body that the proximity of the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or safety. At least thirty (30) days prior to such hearing, the City Clerk shall give notice of such hearing by first class mail to all churches and schools located within 400 feet of the place of business or premises for which a waiver is sought. 
D.  No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor if the building or use does not meet the zoning ordinance requirements of the City or conflicts with other City laws, including building, fire or health codes. 
E.  In no event shall a retailer's license be issued for a premises which is located within 400 feet of any school or college or church, except that if any such school, college or church is established within 400 feet of any licensed premises after the premises have been licensed, the limitation imposed by this subsection E. shall not apply to such premises. 
Sec. 3-103. - Removal from premises prohibited. 
    No person shall remove any drink of alcoholic liquor or any open container of cereal malt beverage from any premises licensed as a private club, drinking establishment or cereal malt beverage retailer. Violation of this section by a person is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
Sec. 3-104. - Consumption of alcoholic liquor and cereal malt beverage in public places prohibited; exceptions. 
A.  No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage on City-owned public property. However, this prohibition shall not apply to the Lansing Community Center, which is property owned by the City. Any person granted use of the Lansing Community Center must abide by the regulations and submit the fees set forth in the Community Center Policy. 
B.  No person shall sell, dispense, serve, consume or possess an open container of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, roads, highways, or public parking lots as otherwise provided for in the City Code. 
C.  No person shall sell, dispense, serve, or consume alcoholic liquor or possess an open container of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, roads, highways, or public parking lots, except when permitted by K.S.A. 8-1599, as amended. 
D.  No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage on private property except: 
1.  On premises where the sale of liquor or cereal malt beverage by the individual drink is authorized by the Club and Drinking Establishment Act, K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq., and amendments thereto, or by the Cereal Malt Beverage Act, K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq., and amendments thereto, and by the City licensing requirements, Chapter 3: Beverages, and amendments thereto; 
2.  Upon private property by a person occupying such property as an owner or lessee of an owner and the guests of such person (and only with such person's permission), if no charge is made for the serving or mixing of any drink or drinks of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage or any substance mixed with any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage and if no sale of alcoholic liquor in violation of K.S.A. 41-803, and amendments thereto, or K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq., and amendments thereto, or Lansing City Code Chapter 3, Beverages, and amendments thereto, takes place; or 
3.  In a lodging room of any hotel, motel, or boarding house by the person occupying such room and by the guests of such person, if no charge is made for the serving or mixing of any drink or drinks of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage and if no sale of alcoholic liquor in violation of K.S.A. 41-803, and amendments thereto, or K.S.A. 41- 2701 et seq., and amendments thereto, or Lansing City Code Chapter 3: Beverages, and amendments thereto, takes place; or 
4.  In a private dining room of a hotel, motel, or restaurant, if the dining room is rented or made available on a special occasion to an individual or organization for a private party and if no sale of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage in violation of K.S.A. 41-803 et seq., and amendments thereto, or K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq., and amendments thereto, or Lansing City Code Chapter 3: Beverages, and amendments thereto, takes place; or 
5.  On the premises of a micro brewery or farm winery, if authorized by K.S.A. 41-308a or K.S.A. 41-308b, and amendments thereto. 
E.  No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor on public property except: 
1.  Upon real property leased by the City to others, under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1740 to 12-1749, inclusive, and any amendments thereto, if such real property is actually being used for hotel or motel purpose or purposes incidental thereto; 
2.  In any state-owned or operated building or structure, and upon the surrounding premises, which is furnished to and occupied by any state officer or employee as a residence; 
3.  Upon property exempted from the provisions of subsection D. 
4.  That cereal malt beverages, beer and wine, as those terms are defined in this article, may be sold, served, dispensed and consumed at any City-sponsored event as appointed by the Governing Body. 
5.  That any licensed caterer selling, serving and dispensing alcohol on public property listed herein must receive authorization from the Kansas Alcohol Beverage Control and the Governing Body. An application must be obtained and submitted to the City Clerk for approval from the Governing Body. 
F.  Violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
Sec. 3-105. - Retail liquor establishments: Hours of sale. 
A.  The sale at retail liquor establishments of alcoholic liquor on Sundays shall only occur between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
B.  The sale of retail alcoholic liquor shall not occur on Easter. 
C.  On all other days except Sunday, the sale at retail liquor establishments of alcoholic liquor shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
D.  Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day sales shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Charter Ordinance No. 1-2003. 
Sec. 3-106. - Habitual public nuisances prohibited. 
A.  A drinking establishment or private club is a habitual public nuisance when it operates in a manner that habitually harms the public health, safety or welfare of the general public, neighboring properties or occupants of neighboring properties, or patrons. Habitual public nuisances are hereby prohibited. 
B.  A habitual public nuisance as defined by subsection A. shall only be determined to exist if the Governing Body makes the following findings: 
1.  The harm to the public health, safety or welfare can be fairly attributed to the operation of the private club or drinking establishment. The proximity of other licensed premises or similar facilities shall be considered by the Governing Body in making this finding. 
2.  The harm to the public health, safety or welfare is of a habitual nature, and not limited to isolated incidents of an infrequent occurrence. 
C.  In determining the penalty for a drinking establishment or private club that is a habitual public nuisance, the Governing Body shall consider: 
1.  Whether the owners and operators of the drinking establishment or private club have taken actions to mitigate or eliminate the harm to public health, safety or welfare; and 
2.  Whether the harm to public health, safety or welfare includes violations of law on the part of the private club or drinking establishment owners, operators, employees, or patrons. 
D.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted as penalizing a drinking establishment or private club, or the owner or employees of such drinking establishment or private club, solely for requesting assistance or reporting an incident to the police department. The City encourages drinking establishments and private club owners and employees to promptly report to the police department harmful or potentially harmful acts or conduct on the part of patrons. 
Sec. 3-107. - Penalty provision. 
    Unless otherwise provided, the penalty provided for violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 3-108. - Licenses required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor within the City without first obtaining a local license from the City Clerk in addition to a license granted by the State of Kansas. 
Sec. 3-109. - Licenses required; fees. 
A.  There is hereby levied a license fee every two years in the amount fixed by the Fee Schedule on each Caterer, Class A Club, Class B Club, Drinking Establishment, and Alcoholic Liquor Retailer. There is hereby levied a license fee for each day of an event in the amount fixed by the Fee Schedule on each Temporary Permit Holder. Such fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five (5) days after any renewal of a state license and thereafter in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-302. The completed and executed written application for such license shall be filed with the City Clerk at the time such fee is paid. 
B.  All applications for new or renewal City licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, payment of the City license fee and filing the completed license application, the Governing Body shall issue a City license if the applicant complies with all applicable provisions of this article, the City Zoning Ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the City. 
C.  Every licensee shall cause the City license to be placed in plain view next to or below the state license, in a conspicuous place on any licensed premises. 
D.  All fees paid for any annual license fee under this section shall be non-refundable. 
Sec. 3-110. - Qualification for private club or drinking establishment. 
A.  The Governing Body of the City shall, if the applicant is qualified by law, issue a license to the applicant. 
B.  A City license shall not be issued to an applicant unless such applicant is in compliance with the provisions of K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq. 
C.  A City license shall not be issued to an applicant unless such applicant is in compliance with the provisions of Section 3-111. 
Sec. 3-111. - Additional requirements for City licensure for private clubs and drinking establishment. 
A.  The Governing Body may require additional conditions for the issuance of a City license or continued retention of existing City license for a private club or drinking establishment, upon a finding that the public health, safety, or welfare require such conditions. The City Administrator shall recommend conditions for licensure, as appropriate. Such conditions of licensure may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Exterior lighting requirements; 
2.  Exterior fencing requirements; 
3.  Appropriate structural additions, deletions or changes to the premises to: reduce loitering by patrons outside the premises, reduce noise from the premises, and reduce littering by employees and patrons, or such other structural changes that may be necessitated in the interest of public health, safety or welfare. 
4.  Posting in the premises or outside the premises appropriate notices or signs advising patrons to leave the area after closing, respect property rights of neighbors and other appropriate notices and signs which the Governing Body may require. 
5.  Reduced hours of operation from those provided in Section 3-113. 
6.  Such other conditions as may be appropriate for the protection and preservation of public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  Additional requirements for City licensure of a private club or drinking establishment as set out in subsection A. shall only be imposed after the license holder or applicant has been mailed, to the address on the license or application, by certified mail, return-receipt requested, notice of the proposed conditions. After the posting of the certified mail, the license holder or applicant shall have ten (10) days to submit a written request to the City Clerk for a hearing before the Governing Body on the proposed conditions. 
C.  The Governing Body may issue a City license conditioned upon the licensee complying with all requirements within thirty (30) days after license issuance of such time as established by the Governing Body. 
D.  During the duration of a City license, the Governing Body may require additional conditions on a City license, under procedures and requirements set forth under this section. 
Sec. 3-112. - Revocation or suspension of City license for private club or drinking establishment. 
    The Governing Body may revoke or suspend the license of a private club or drinking establishment under this chapter for any one or more of the following reasons: 
A.  Suspension or revocation of State license. 
B.  Violation of any provisions of K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq. 
C.  Violation of any provisions of this article. 
D.  Habitual violations of occupancy limits established by the City, which shall be defined as three (3) or more violations within a twelve (12) consecutive month period. Revocation or suspension of a license for habitual violations of occupancy limits shall require a finding by the Governing Body that the occupancy limit violations represented a substantial threat, in either the number of violations or the excess above the occupancy limit, to the safety of club or establishment employees and patrons. 
E.  Determination that private club or drinking establishment is a habitual public nuisance as defined by Section 3-106. 
Sec. 3-113. - Business regulations; alcoholic liquor. 
A.  No person shall have any alcoholic liquor in his or her possession while in the place of business, unless the premises are currently licensed under a license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control; 
B.  No one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall consume or be served alcoholic liquor and a sign so stating shall be prominently posted in all such places; 
C.  No licensee, or his or her agent or employee, shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on his or her premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day. 
D.  Cereal malt beverage may be sold on the premises licensed for retail sale of cereal malt beverage for on-premises consumption at any time when alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises. 
E.  No licensee, or his or her agent or employee, shall sell, give, trade, or permit the sale, give or trade of any alcoholic liquor to any person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
Sec. 3-114. - Caterers; notice to Chief of Police. 
    Prior to any event at which a caterer shall sell or serve alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, a caterer shall provide written notice to the Chief of Police at least seven (7) days prior to the event if the event will take place within the City. The notice shall contain the location, name of the group sponsoring the event, and the exact date and time the caterer will be serving. 
Sec. 3-115. - City temporary permit. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an event under a state-issued temporary permit without first applying for a local temporary permit at least seven (7) days before the event. Written application for the local temporary permit shall be made to the City Clerk and shall clearly state: 
1.  Name of the applicant; 
2.  The group for which the event is planned; 
3.  The location of the event; 
4.  The date and time of the event; 
5.  Any anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services. 
B.  Upon presentation of a state temporary permit, payment of the City's temporary permit fee and a written application as provided for in subsection A., the City Clerk shall issue a local temporary permit to the applicant if there are no conflicts with any zoning or other ordinances of the City. 
C.  The City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever a temporary permit has been issued and forward a copy of the permit and application to the Chief of Police. 
Sec. 3-116. - Penalties. 
    If any licensee violates any of the provisions of this article, the Governing Body of the City, upon ten (10) days written notice to the licensee, may, upon hearing, permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than six (6) months the license; or, in the alternative, the individual holding the license may be charged in the municipal court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor laws of the City and upon conviction shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor. 
ARTICLE II. - CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-201. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of words defined in Section 3-101 of this Code shall apply to this chapter unless a contrary definition is provided herein. In addition thereto, the following definitions shall apply in this article: 
    Licensee means the person who has been properly issued a license to sell cereal malt beverage within the corporate limits of the City. 
    Place of business shall mean any place where cereal malt beverages are sold. 
    Retailer means any person who sells or offers for sale any cereal malt beverage for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. 
Sec. 3-202. - Consumption of cereal malt beverage in public places prohibited; exceptions. 
A.  No person shall drink or consume cereal malt beverage or possess an open container of cereal malt beverage on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, roads, highways, or public parking lots. 
B.  No person shall drink or consume cereal malt beverage or possess an open container of cereal malt beverage inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, roads, highways, or public parking lots, except when permitted by K.S.A. 8-1599, as amended. 
C.  No person shall drink or consume cereal malt beverage on public or private property except as permitted by Section 3-104; 
Sec. 3-203. - Licenses required of retailers. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any cereal malt beverage at retail without a license for each place of business where cereal malt beverages are to be sold at retail. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person, having a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail only in the original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises, to sell any cereal malt beverage in any other manner. 
State Law reference- K.S.A. 41-2702. 
Sec. 3-204. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license shall make an application to the Governing Body of the City and accompany the application by the required license fee for each place of business for which the person desires the license. The application shall be verified, and upon a form prepared by the attorney general of the State of Kansas, and shall contain: 
A.  The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she has resided within the State of Kansas; 
B.  The particular place for which a license is desired; 
C.  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of business is located; 
D.  The names and addresses of all persons who hold any financial interest in the particular place of business for which a license is desired. 
E.  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and not less than 21 years of age and that he or she has not within two years immediately preceding the date of making application been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or been adjudged guilty of drunkenness, or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States; 
The application shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by the applicant, authorizing any governmental agency to provide the City with any information pertinent to the application. One copy of such application shall immediately be transmitted to the chief of police of the City for investigation of the applicant. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such applicant to determine whether he or she is qualified as a licensee under the provisions of this chapter. The chief shall report to the Governing Body not later than five working days subsequent to the receipt of such application. The application shall be scheduled for consideration by the Governing Body at the earliest meeting consistent with current notification requirements. 
Sec. 3-205. - License application procedures. 
    No person shall sell any cereal malt beverages at retail without having first secured a license for each place of business as herein provided. All applications for the renewal of annual licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk on or before November 15, preceding the calendar year for which the renewal of license is sought. All new or change of ownership applications must be submitted to the City Clerk fifteen (15) days in advance of the date sought for such issuance. 
    The application shall be verified and upon a form prepared by the Attorney General of the State and shall contain: 
A.  The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she resided within the State of Kansas, County of Leavenworth and City of Lansing; 
B.  The particular place for which the license is desired; 
C.  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of business is located; 
D.  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and not less than twenty-one (21) years of age, and that he or she has not within two (2) years immediately preceding the date of making application, been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude or being adjudged guilty of drunkenness or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or alcohol; or, the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States. 
E.  All applications shall indicate whether the applicant will sell or offer for sale cereal malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises, or primarily for sale, use and consumption on the licensed premises. 
F.  All applications shall indicate whether the license shall be permanent or temporary, and if temporary the date(s) and time(s) of the event. 
G.  The licensee shall submit payment of the fees as provided for in Section 3-206. 
H.  The licensee shall submit any state licenses as required under K.S.A. 41-2702, prior to any City license being issued. 
    The Clerk's office shall provide copies of all applications to the Police Department and Community Development Division when they are received. A records check will be run on all applicants; and Community Development Division will inspect the premises in accord with Chapters 7 and 8 of this Code. The Police Department and Community Development Division will then recommend approval, or disapproval, of applications within five working days of the receipt of the application. 
    The Governing Body will not consider any application for a new or renewed license that has not been submitted to the City Clerk 15 days in advance and been reviewed by the above City departments. 
    An applicant who has not had a cereal malt beverage license in the City shall attend the Governing Body meeting when the application for a new license will be considered. 
Sec. 3-206. - License classification and fees. 
    All applications for cereal malt beverage licenses shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated herein, and no application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid. The full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of the year in which the application is made, and the licensee shall only be authorized to operate a license for the remainder of the calendar year in which the license is issued. The license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business. All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nontransferable. 
    The classification of licenses and fees for each shall be as follows: 
A.  Cereal Malt Beverage for consumption on premises - $200.00 plus $25.00 for the State Stamp Tax. 
B.  Cereal Malt Beverage license for the sale of cereal malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on any license premises - $50.00 plus $25.00 for the State Stamp Tax. 
C.  Cereal Malt Beverage Temporary Licenses - $50.00 plus $25.00 for the State Stamp Tax. 
Sec. 3-207. - Licenses granted; denied. 
A.  The journal of the Governing Body shall show the action taken on the application. 
B.  If the license is granted, the City Clerk shall issue the license which shall show the name of the licensee and the year for which issued. 
C.  No license shall be transferred to another licensee. 
D.  If the license shall be denied, the license fee shall be immediately returned to the person who has made application. 
Sec. 3-208. - Same; approval; disqualification. 
A.  The Governing Body of the City shall, if the applicant is qualified as provided by law, issue a license to the applicant. 
B.  No license shall be issued to: 
1.  A person who is not a resident of the county in which the place of business covered by the license is located, has not been a resident of such county for at least six months or has not been a resident in good faith of the State of Kansas; 
2.  A person who has not been a resident of this state for at least one year immediately preceding application for a retailer's license; 
3.  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which the person resides; 
4.  A person who is not a citizen of the United States; 
5.  A person who, within two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application, has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, drunkenness, driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States; 
6.  A partnership, unless all the members of the partnership are otherwise qualified to obtain a license; 
7.  A corporation, if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock of such corporation, would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than the citizenship and residency requirements; 
8.  A corporation, if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock of such corporation, has been an officer, manager or director, or a stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock, of a corporation which: (A) has had a retailer's license revoked under K.S.A. 41-2708 and amendments thereto; or (B) has been convicted of a violation of the drinking establishment act or the cereal malt beverage laws of this state; 
9.  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses all the qualifications of a licensee; 
10.  A person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a retailer's license for any reason other than citizenship, residence requirements or age, except that this subsection B.10. shall not apply in determining eligibility for a renewal license; 
11.  Any person, until after the premises for which application has been made has been inspected by the Health Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief, the Chief of Police, or their duly authorized representatives and found to be in compliance with all laws, regulations and ordinances applicable thereto; 
12.  A person who has not presented for inspection, at the time of making the application, a bona fide deed, lease or other satisfactory written evidence that the applicant and prospective licensee is the owner of the place for which a license is desired or is the person to whom the owner of such place has been given in good faith the possession and control of such premises. 
Sec. 3-208. - Licenses to be posted. 
    Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which the license is issued. 
Sec. 3-209. - Restrictions on location. 
A.  No cereal malt beverage shall be sold or served by a person holding a license or permit from the City, at a place of business or other premises located within 400 feet of any school, college, or church. The distance shall be measured along the public rights of way, by the shortest route by which a pedestrian would normally walk, from the nearest property line of the school or church, to the primary public entrance to the building, or part thereof, occupied by the place of business or other premises. 
B.  The business limitation of subsection A. shall not apply to a place of business or premises for which a license had been issued by the City prior to the publication of this article, and for which a license has been in effect at all times since the publication of this article. Any temporary lapse of the license not exceeding sixty (60) days in length shall be disregarded in applying this paragraph. 
C.  The distance limitation of subsection A. shall not apply when the licensee or license applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation from the Governing Body of the City. The Governing Body shall grant such waiver only following public notice and hearing and a finding by the Governing Body that the proximity of the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or safety. At least thirty (30) days prior to such hearing, the City Clerk shall give notice of such hearing by first class mail to all churches and schools located within 400 feet of the place of business or premises for which a waiver is sought. 
Sec. 3-210. - Suspension of license. 
    The Chief of Police, upon five days' written notice, shall have the authority to suspend such license for a period not to exceed 30 days, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other laws pertaining to cereal malt beverages, which violation does not in his or her judgment justify a recommendation of revocation. The licensee may appeal such order of suspension to the Governing Body within seven days from the date of such order. 
Sec. 3-211. - License suspension/revocation by governing body. 
    The Governing Body of the City, upon five days' written notice, to a person holding a license to sell cereal malt beverages shall permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than 30 days such license for any of the following reasons: 
A.  If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false information in the application therefore; 
B.  If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, has become ineligible to obtain a license under this article or the licensee has violated any of the provisions K.S.A. 41-2701 et. seq., and amendments thereto; 
C.  Drunkenness of a person holding such license, drunkenness of a licensee's manager or employee while on duty and while on the premises for which the license is issued, or for a licensee, his or her manager or employee permitting any intoxicated person to remain in such place selling cereal malt beverages; 
D.  The sale of cereal malt beverages to any person under the legal age for consumption of cereal malt beverage; 
E.  For permitting any gambling in or upon the licensee's place of business licensed under this article; 
F.  For permitting any person to mix drinks with materials purchased in any premises licensed under this article or brought into the premises for this purpose; 
G.  For the employment of any person under the age established by the State of Kansas for employment involving dispensing or selling cereal malt beverages; 
H.  The employment or continuation in employment of a person in connection with the sale, serving or dispensing of cereal malt beverages if the licensee knows such person has been, within the preceding two years, adjudged guilty of a felony or of any violation of the intoxicating liquor laws of the State of Kansas, another state or the United States; 
I.  The sale or possession of, or permitting any person to use or consume on the licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor; 
J.  The nonpayment of any license fees; 
K.  If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under this chapter; 
L.  The provisions of subsections F. and I. shall not apply if such place of business is also currently licensed as a private club or a drinking establishment pursuant to the Club and Drinking Establishment Act. 
M.  The licensee has been convicted of a violation of the Beer and Cereal Malt Beverage Keg Registration Act; or 
N.  There has been a violation of K.S.A. 21-4106 or 21-4107, and amendments thereto, in or upon the licensee's place of business. (K.S.A. 41-2708) 
Sec. 3-212. - Same; procedure. 
A.  Whenever any law enforcement officer has reason to believe that a licensee has violated the provisions of section 3-208A. or B., that officer shall cause a written complaint to be filed with the Governing Body. Such complaint shall sufficiently define the charges against the licensee and the grounds upon which his or her license is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
B.  On receipt of such complaint, the Governing Body shall set a hearing upon the complaint and shall give written notice of such hearing to the licensee. A copy of the complaint shall accompany the notice. The hearing shall be initially scheduled during a regular meeting of the Governing Body and shall be at least ten (10) days from the date the notice is sent. 
C.  At the hearing, evidence shall be presented in support of the complaint by the City Prosecutor and the licensee shall have the right to be present and represented by counsel, the right to cross-examine witnesses, and the right to present witnesses and evidence on his or her own behalf. A continuance of such hearing may be granted by the Governing Body for good cause shown. 
D.  The Governing Body shall decide whether the allegations in the complaint are true by a majority vote of those members present at the meeting. If they find any allegations to be true, such finding shall constitute one violation and the Governing Body shall proceed to determine the disposition of the matter. 
Sec. 3-213. - Same; authorized disposition. 
A.  The Governing Body, upon finding that an allegation based upon 3-211A.-N. is true shall revoke the licensee's license. 
B.  The Governing Body, upon a finding that an allegation based upon any other subsection of 3-211 is true shall make the following dispositions: 
1.  Upon a licensee's first violation within a three (3) year period, suspend his or her license for not less than one day nor more than ten (10) days; 
2.  Upon a licensee's second violation within a three (3) year period, suspend his or her license for not less than five (5) days nor more than two (2) months; 
3.  Upon a licensee's third or subsequent violation within a three (3) year period, suspend his or her license for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months or may revoke the licensee's license. 
C.  The decision and disposition of the Governing Body shall be reduced to writing and the dates of any suspension shall be stated therein. A copy of such decision shall be forthwith sent to the licensee and any such suspension or revocation may begin immediately. 
Sec. 3-214. - Same; appeal. 
    The licensee, within 20 days after the order of the Governing Body revoking any license, may appeal to the district court of Leavenworth County and the district court shall proceed to hear such appeal as though such court had original jurisdiction in the matter. Any appeal taken under this section shall not suspend the order of revocation of the license of any licensee, nor shall any new license be issued to such person or any person acting for or on his or her behalf, for a period of six months thereafter. (K.S.A. 41-2708) 
Sec. 3-215. - Change of location. 
    If a licensee desires to change the location of his or her place of business, he or she shall make an application to the Governing Body showing the same information relating to the proposed location as in the case of an original application. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00. If the application is in proper form and the location is not in a prohibited zone and all other requirements relating to such place of business are met, a new license shall be issued for the new location for the balance of the year for which a current license is held by the licensee. 
Sec. 3-216. - Wholesalers and/or distributors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler and/or distributor, his, her or its agents or employees, to sell and/or deliver cereal malt beverages within the City, to persons authorized under this article to sell the same within this City unless such wholesaler and/or distributor has first secured a license from the director of revenue, state commission of revenue and taxation of the State of Kansas authorizing such sales. (K.S.A. 41-307:307a) 
Sec. 3-217. - Samples for testing. 
    Any person engaged in retailing cereal malt beverages under the terms of this article shall upon demand by the Chief of Police or the Chief's agent or any police officer; furnish samples of any cereal malt beverages in their possession for the purpose of testing the alcoholic content thereof. 
Sec. 3-218. - Business regulations. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe the following regulations. 
A.  The place of business licensed and operating under this article shall at all time have a front and rear exit unlocked when open for business. 
B.  The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police and health officers of the City, county and state. 
C.  Except as provided by subsection D., no person shall sell at retail cereal malt beverage: 
1.  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.; 
2.  In the original package before 12:00 noon [or] after 8:00 p.m. on Sunday; 
3.  On Easter Sunday; or 
4.  For consumption on the licensed premises on Sunday, except in a place of business which is licensed to sell cereal malt beverage for consumption on the premises, which derives not less than 30% of its gross receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the licensed premises and which is located in a county where such sales on Sunday have been authorized by resolution of the board of county commissioners of the county or in a City where such sales on Sunday have been authorized by ordinance of the Governing Body of the City. 
D.  No private rooms or closed booths shall be operated in a place of business, but this provision shall not apply if the licensed premises also are licensed as a club pursuant to the club and drinking establishment act. 
E.  Cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on premises which are licensed pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq., and licensed as a club by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
F.  The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at all times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club under a license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall be open to the police and not to the public. 
G.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the licensee to become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license has been issued. 
H.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license has been issued. 
I.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell or permit the sale of cereal malt beverage to any person less than 21 years of age. 
J.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any gambling in the place of business for which such license has been issued. 
K.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any person to mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in said place of business or brought in for such purpose. 
L.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall employ any person less than 21 years of age in dispensing cereal malt beverages. No licensee shall employ any person who has been judged guilty of a felony. 
Sec. 3-219. - Cereal malt beverage retailers-For off-premises consumption: Hours of sale. 
A.  Pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2704, the sale at retail of cereal malt beverage in the original package for off premises consumption, is allowed within the City on any Sunday, except Easter, between the hours of 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m. 
B.  Pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2704, on all other days except Sunday, the sale at retail of licensed cereal malt beverage in the original package for off premises consumption, shall only occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
C.  Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day sales shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
Sec. 3-220. - Business regulations; cereal malt beverage-On-premises consumption. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe the following regulations. Noncompliance shall constitute a misdemeanor: 
A.  The place of business licensed and operating under this article shall at all times have a front and rear exit unlocked when open for business; 
B.  The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police and health officers of the City, County and State; 
C.  Except as provided by subsection D., no cereal malt beverages may be sold or dispensed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or consumed between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., or on Sunday, except in a place of business which is licensed to sell cereal malt beverage for consumption on the premises, which derives not less than thirty percent (30%) of its gross receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the licensed premises. Closing hours for clubs shall conform to K.S.A. 41-2614, and any amendments thereto; 
D.  Cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on premises, which are licensed pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq., and licensed by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control; 
E.  The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at all times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club pursuant to the Kansas Club and Drinking Establishment Act shall be open to the police at any time; 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the licensee to become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license has been issued; 
G.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license has been issued; 
H.  No person shall remove or carry out from the licensee's place of business, any open container of cereal malt beverage, and a sign so stating shall be prominently posted in all such places of business; 
I.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell, give, trade or permit the sale, give or trade of any cereal malt beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
J.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any gambling in the place of business for which such license has been issued. This provision shall not apply to the State Lottery. 
K.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any person to mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in the place of business or brought in for such purpose unless such licensee also holds a license for such place of business pursuant to Article I of this chapter; 
L.  No licensee shall employ any person who has been adjudged guilty of a felony; 
M.  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall employ any person under the legal age established by the State of Kansas for employment involving dispensing cereal malt beverages; and 
N.  In a place of business which derives more than twenty percent (20%) of gross sales from the sale of cereal malt beverages, no person, except the licensee and his or her employees for that establishment or independent contractors hired by the licensee, shall remain or be found in such premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The licensee may request special permission from the Governing Body to extend the 2:00 a.m. closing; 
O.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 3-221. - Prohibited conduct on-premises. 
    The following conduct by a cereal malt beverage licensee, manager or employee, or agent, or any person under the direction and control of a licensee, occurring on the licensed premises, is deemed contrary to public welfare and is prohibited: 
A.  Remaining or permitting any person to remain in or upon the premises who exposes to view any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of males/females pubic hair, anus, buttocks or genitals; 
B.  Permitting any employee on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals of any other employee or any patron; 
C.  Encouraging or permitting any patron on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva, or genitals of any employee; 
D.  Performing or permitting any person to perform on the licensed premises acts of or acts which simulate: 
1.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, or any other sexual act which is prohibited by law; or 
2.  Touching, caressing or fondling such persons' breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
E.  Using or permitting any person to use on the licensed premises, any artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the acts prohibited by paragraph (d) of this section. 
F.  Showing or permitting any person to show on the licensed premises any motion picture, film, photograph, electronic reproduction, or other visual reproduction depicting: 
1.  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
2.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the buttocks, anus, genitals or the female breasts; 
3.  Scenes in which a person displays the buttocks, anus, genitals or the female breasts. 
G.  As used in this section, the term premises means the premises licensed by the City as a cereal malt beverage establishment and such other areas, under the control of the licensee or his or her employee or employees, that are in such close proximity to the licensed premises that activities and conduct of persons within such other areas may be viewed by persons on or within the licensed premises. 
Sec. 3-222. - Sanitary conditions required. 
    All parts of the licensed premises including furnishings and equipment shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, free from flies, rodents and vermin at all times. The licensed premises shall have at least one restroom for each sex easily accessible at all times to its patrons and employees. The restroom shall be equipped with at least one lavatory with hot and cold running water, be well lighted, and be furnished at all times with paper towels or other mechanical means of drying hands and face. Each restroom shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities which shall be of sanitary design and readily cleanable. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing and toilet paper at all times shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste material and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered. The restrooms shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition and free of offensive odors and shall be at all times subject to inspection by the City health officer or designee. 
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR 

Sec. 3-301. - State licenses required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale, or expose for sale or sell any alcoholic liquor as defined by the "Kansas liquor control act" without first having obtained a license to do so. 
B.  The holder of a license for the retail sale in the City of alcoholic liquors by the package issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control shall present such license to the City Clerk when applying to pay the occupation tax levied in section 3-302 and the tax shall be received and a receipt shall be issued for the period covered by the state license. 
Sec. 3-302. - Occupation taxes levied. 
    Any licensee holding a license for any of the purposes hereafter mentioned issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control and within the corporate limits of the City, shall pay an annual occupation tax to the City as follows: 
A.  To manufacture alcohol and spirits-$2,500.00; 
B.  To manufacture beer and wine: 
1.  Beer (regardless of alcoholic content) 
a.  1 to 100 barrel daily capacity or any part thereof-$200.00; 
b.  100 to 150 barrel daily capacity-$400.00; 
c.  150 to 200 barrel daily capacity-$700.00; 
d.  200 to 300 barrel daily capacity-$1,000.00; 
e.  300 to 400 barrel daily capacity-$1,300.00; 
f.  400 to 500 barrel daily capacity-$1,400.00; 
g.  500 or more barrel daily capacity-$1,600.00. 
2.  Wines-$500.00. 
Provided, that the words "daily capacity," as used herein shall mean the average barrel production for the previous 12 months of manufacturing operation. And, provided further, that if no such basis for comparison exists, the manufacturing license shall pay, in advance, for the first year's operation a tax of $1,000.00. 
C.  Alcoholic liquor distributor for the first and each additional distributing pale of business operated in this City by the same licensee and wholesaling and jobbing alcoholic liquors, except beer-$1,250.00; 
D.  Beer distributor, for the first and each additional wholesale distributing place of business operated in this City by the same licensee and wholesaling or jobbing beer, containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight, only-$150.00; 
E.  Retailers: Alcoholic liquors (including beer containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight), for consumption off the premises (sales in the original package only)-$600.00; 
F.  Non-beverage user (K.S.A. 41-102(12)): 
Class 1 (not to exceed 100 gallons)-$10.00; 
Class 2 (not to exceed 1,000 gallons)-$50.00; 
Class 3 (not to exceed 5,000 gallons)-$100.00; Class 4 (not to exceed 10,000 gallons)-$200.00; 
Class 5 (in excess of 10,000 gallons)-$500.00. 
The tax shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license within 10 days after the renewal of a state license. (K.S.A. 41-101 et seq.) 
Sec. 3-303. - Posting of receipt. 
    Every licensee under this article shall cause the City alcoholic liquor retailer's occupation tax receipt to be placed in plain view, next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
Sec. 3-304. - Hours of sale. 
    No person shall sell at retail any alcoholic liquor: 
A.  On Sunday before 12:00 noon or after 8:00 p.m.; 
B.  On Easter Sunday, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; or 
C.  Before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on any day when the sale is permitted. (K.S.A. 41-712) 
Sec. 3-305. - Business regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for a retailer of alcoholic liquor to: 
A.  Permit any person to mix drinks in or on the licensed premises; 
B.  Employ any person under the age of 21 years in connection with the operation of the retail establishment; 
C.  Employ any person in connection with the operation of the retail establishment who has been adjudged guilty of a felony; 
D.  Furnish any entertainment in his or her premises or permit any pinball machine or game of skill or chance to be located in or on the premises; or 
E.  Have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, cask, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in the original package. 
F.  Sell, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver, or permit the sale, gift or procuring of any alcoholic liquor to or for any person less than 21 years of age. 
Sec. 3-306. - Restrictions on location. 
    No person shall knowingly or unknowingly sell, give away, furnish, dispose of, procure, exchange or deliver, or permit the selling, giving away, furnishing, disposing of, procuring, exchanging or delivering of any alcoholic beverage in any building, structure or premises, for consumption in such building or upon such premises if such consumption is within 400 feet from the nearest property line of any existing hospital, school, church or library. (K.S.A. 41-710.) 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 3-401. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person granted a private club license by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license within the City without first obtaining a local license from the City Clerk. 
Sec. 3-402. - License fee. 
A.  An annual license fee is hereby levied upon all corporations, partnerships or individuals operating a club within the City in the amount of $600.00. The licensee shall operate under the license for a period of 24 months from the date of its issuance and shall be renewable every two years. No rebate or return of any portions of the license fee shall be made in case the license is revoked for any cause provided under this article or in the event that the club ceases to function prior to the completion of its 24-month period. 
B.  All applications for new or renewal City licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the City license fee and the license application, the City Clerk shall issue a City license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the City. 
C.  The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason. 
D.  Every licensee shall cause the City club license to be placed in plain view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
Sec. 3-403. - Business regulations. 
    No club licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day. 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS ON ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 3-501. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Licensed premises shall mean a Class A Club, Class B Club, Drinking Establishment, Caterer or an establishment licensed to sell cereal malt beverages, as defined in Articles 1 and 2 of this chapter. 
    Licensee shall mean a person who has been properly issued a license to operate a licensed premise within the corporate limits of the City. 
    Nude or partially nude shall mean less than completely or opaquely covering and exposing to view any portion of the human pubic area, anus, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof, or any female breast area below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Sec. 3-502. - Nudity prohibited in licensed premises. 
    No licensee shall engage, permit, or allow an employee, agent, or independent contractor, of the licensee to be nude or partially nude in the licensed premises. No licensee shall allow or permit any nude or partially nude person to remain in the licensed premises. 
Sec. 3-503. - Penalty and revocation of license. 
    If any licensee violates any of the provisions of this article, the Governing Body of the City, upon ten (10) days written notice to the licensee, may, upon hearing, permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than six (6) months the license; and the individual holding the license may be charged in municipal court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor laws of the City and upon conviction shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor. 
CHAPTER 4 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 4-101. - Minimum standards. 
    This article, including the International Building Code, 2003 Edition, incorporated by Section 4-102 shall constitute the minimum standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City. 
Sec. 4-102. - International Building Code and Appendix; adoption. 
    The code known as the International Building Code, 2003 Edition, including Appendixes are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this article, except such parts or portions thereof as are specifically changed, omitted, or added to in this article, for the City of Lansing. 
    Section 1: That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Lansing, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2003 edition, including Appendix Chapters C, D, E, F, H, J and I (see International Building Code Section 101.2.1, 2003 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Lansing, in the State of Kansas for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the City of Lansing are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 4-103. - Enforcement. 
    The International Building Code of the City shall be enforced by the Community Development Superintendent. 
Sec. 4-104. - Amendments. 
    The amendments to the International Building Code adopted by this article shall be as set out in this section. All references to section and chapter numbers in the text of this division shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the International Building Code" unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
Section 101.1: Shall read 101.1 Title . 
These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Lansing hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 101.4.1 Electrical shall read: 
The provisions of the 2002 National Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto 
Section 105.2 shall read 105.2 Work exempt from permit. 
Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
A.  Building: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2). 
2.  Oil derricks. 
3.  Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. 
4.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
5.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
6.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy, as applicable in Section 101.2, which are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep and located in rear yard only. 
7.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems. 
8.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
B.  Electrical: 
1.  Repairs and maintenance: A permit shall not be required for minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
C.  Gas: 
1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
3.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
D.  Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
8.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
Section 108.3 shall read 108.3 Building permit valuations. 
Any applicant applying for a remodeling or addition permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the Community Development Superintendent, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the Community Development Superintendent. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the Community Development Superintendent 
Section 112.1.1 is amended as follows: 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, and to provide for a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of five members, who shall serve for a period of three years, who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as Secretary to said Board, but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, which appointment shall be subject to the approval of the Government Body. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy of the Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent. The decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to review by the governing body of the City upon request of any involved party. The fee for an application for an appeal to the Board shall be $25, no part of which is refundable. The Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent shall be responsible for the collection of the application fee. Any issues to be brought before the Board of Appeals shall be presented in writing to the Community Development Superintendent. The Community Development Superintendent shall convene the Board within three weeks of written appeal request. 
Section 112.3.1 is deleted in its entirety Chapter 2. Alley, is amended as follows: 
Alley-Any public space or thoroughfare designated as such by subdivision plats as filed with the City which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use. 
Chapter 2. Sleeping Room, is added as follows: 
Sleeping room-Any room in a building or structure that generally may be used for sleeping purposes, with a closet adjacent and a two or more fixture bathroom available on that level. 
Detached garage-An accessory structure with a separate foundation and no connecting walls to an R-1 or R-3 occupancy. 
Section 1612.3 shall read 1612.3 is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 3410.2: Shall read 3410.2 Applicability. 
Structures existing prior to adoption of this code, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the provisions of Sections 3403 through 3407. The provisions in Sections 3410.2.1 through 3410.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, M, R, S and U. These provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H or I. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sec. 4-201. - International Residential Code incorporated by reference. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference the "International Residential Code, 2003 Edition," published by the International Code Council. No fewer than three copies of the "International Residential Code, 2003 Edition," marked or stamped "Official Copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. _______," to which shall be attached a copy of this incorporating ordinance, and shall be filed with the City clerk and open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. 
Sec. 4-202. - IRC deletions. 
    Section R103 of the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, are hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Sec. 4-203. - IRC Section R101.1 amended. 
    Section R101.1 of the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R101.1 Title. 
These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Lansing, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
Section R105.2 of the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
A.  Building: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures, provided the exterior dimensions area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
2.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
3.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep and located in rear yard only. 
4.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one or two-family dwelling. 
5.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
B.  Electrical: 
1.  Repairs and maintenance: A permit shall not be required for minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
C.  Gas: 
1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
3.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
D.  Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
8.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
Sec. 4-204. - IRC Table R301.2(1) amended. 
    Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
TABLE R301.2(1) 
R404.1.3 shall be amended to read; A design in accordance with accepted engineering practice shall be provided for concrete or masonry foundation walls when any of the conditions listed below exist. Where applicable, a standard design approved by the City may be used in lieu of a design from the design professional. 
Sec. 4-205. - IRC Section P2603.6.1 amended. 
Section P2603.6.1 of the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P2603.6.1 Building Sewer depth. Shall be 12" and 42".. 
Sec. 4-206. - IRC Section P3103.1 amended. 
Section P3103.1 of the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P3103.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes which extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 6 inches above the roof or 2 inches above the anticipated snow accumulation, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof. 
Section E3802.11 be amended to read as follows: Bedroom Outlets All branch circuits that supply 125-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20- ampere outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms shall be protected by an arc-fault circuit interrupter listed to provide protection of the entire branch circuit. 
Exception: Smoke detectors shall not be installed on branch circuits which are protected by an arc-fault circuit interrupter. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 4-301. - Minimum standards. 
    This article, including the International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, incorporated by reference, shall constitute the minimum standards for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing, gas piping, or drainage systems in the City. 
Sec. 4-302. - International Plumbing Code; adoption. 
    The code known as the International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, and its appendix A, B, C, D, E, F, G it published by the International Code Council is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this article, the same as if fully set forth herein, except such parts or portions thereof as are specifically changed, omitted, or added to in this article. 
Sec. 4-303. - Number of copies. 
    There shall be not less than three copies of the International Plumbing Code kept on file in the office of the City clerk and made available for inspection by the public at all reasonable hours. The file copies of the code shall be marked or stamped, "Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted clearly marked to show any such omission, or showing the sections, articles, parts or portions that are incorporated as the case may be and to which shall be attached a copy of this article. 
Sec. 4-304. - Amendments. 
    The amendments to the International Plumbing Code adopted by Section 4-302 shall be as set out. All references to section and chapter numbers in the text shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the International Plumbing Code," unless clearly indicated in the contrary. 
Section 101.1 Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of City of Lansing hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
Section 103.1.1 , shall be amended as follows: 
The Community Development Superintendent or his or her designee is hereby authorized to enforce all provisions of this code. 
Section 106.6.2 Insert fee schedule. 
Section 106.6.3 Fee refunds ; Refunds shall not exceed 50% of the fee paid and all other refunds shall be pro rata as determined by the Director of Public Works or his or her authorized designee. 
Section 108.4 Violations Penalties ; Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $150.00 and a maximum fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 108.4 Violations and Penalties , shall be amended to add the following: 
A.  Working without a license. 
1.  First Offense : Double the license fee and all work must immediately cease until proper licensing is obtained. 
2.  Second Offense : Charges shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the City. 
B.  Working without a permit. 
1.  First Offense : Fine equal to double the permit fee, plus the regular permit fee. 
2.  Second Offense : Fine equal to triple the permit fee, plus the regular permit fee. 
3.  Third Offense : Charges shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the City. 
Chapter 3 General Provisions, shall be added as follows: 
A.  The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of plumbing or drainage systems installed to replace existing equipment or fixtures serving an occupied portion of the building in the event a request for inspection of such equipment or fixture has been filed with the Community Development Superintendent not more than 72 hours after such replacement work is commenced, and before any portion of such plumbing or drainage system is concealed by any permanent portion of the building. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, carry on, or engage in the business of plumbing or act in the capacity as a plumbing contractor without first having had issued to him/her a valid plumbing contractor's license, nor shall any person, advertise for plumbing work in the City without such contractor's license. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to labor at the trade of plumbing without first having been issued a current license by the City certifying that this person is working as an employee of a licensed plumbing contractor in the City. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, carry on, or engage in the business of gas fitting or act in the capacity as a gas contractor without first having issued to him/her a valid gas contractor's license. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person to labor at the trade of gas fitting without first having issued to him/her a valid gas fitter's license. 
F.  An apprentice plumber shall be permitted to work at the plumbing trade only when accompanied by and under the supervision of a licensed plumbing contractor, master plumber, or journeyman plumber. Apprentice plumbing licenses shall be renewed annually for a period of not less than two years and not more than four years except when extended by the Plumbing Board. After the maximum time period, the apprentice plumber shall take the journeyman plumber examination as set forth herein. 
Chapter 2 Definitions shall add the following Definition of Contractors, Plumbers, and Gas Fitters. 
A.  Plumbing Contractor -A person who may conduct, carry-on, or engage in the business of plumbing and who holds a current Lansing, Kansas, master plumber license. 
B.  Master Plumber -A person who may conduct, carry on, or engage in the business of plumbing in a shop where there is a plumbing contractor. A master plumber may labor at the trade of gas fitting as an employee of a gas contractor. 
C.  Journeyman Plumber -A person who labors at the trade of plumbing as an employee of a plumbing contractor. A journeyman plumber may labor at the trade of gas fitting as an employee of a gas contractor. 
D.  Apprentice Plumber -A person who labors at the trade of plumbing as an employee under direct supervision and in the immediate presence of a plumbing contractor, master plumber, or journeyman plumber. The number of apprentices at the job site shall be limited to two apprentices for each licensed plumbing contractor, master plumber, or journeyman plumber. 
E.  Gas Contractor -A person who may conduct, carry on, or engage in the business of gas fitting and who holds a current Lansing, Kansas, gas fitter's license. 
F.  Master Gas Fitter -A person who may conduct, carry on, or engage in the business of gas fitting in a shop where there is one gas contractor. 
G.  Journeyman Gas Fitter -A person who labors at the trade of gas fitting as an employee of a master gas fitter or plumbing contractor. 
Chapter 1 104.9 shall add Issuance of Certificate of Qualification. 
A.  The Plumbing Board or Community Development Superintendent shall issue a trade license pursuant to the following provisions: 
1.  Plumbing contractor license shall be issued to every person who makes application for such in conformance with Section 104.9, pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Master Plumber Examination by an approved testing agency, acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each contractor needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
2.  Master plumber license shall be issued to every person who makes application for such, pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Master Plumber Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each master needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
3.  Journeyman plumber license shall be issued to every person who makes application for such, pays the required fee, and successfully passed the Journeyman Plumber Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each journeyman needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
4.  Apprentice plumber license shall be issued to every person who makes application for such, pays the required fee, and meets the additional requirement set forth herein. 
5.  Gas contractor license shall be issued to every person who makes application for such in conformance pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Master Gas Fitter Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction, or the Master Mechanical Examination by an approved testing agency, with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each contractor needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
6.  Master gas fitter license shall be issued to every person who makes application for such, pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Master Gas Fitter Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, or the Master Mechanical Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each master needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
7.  Journeyman gas fitter license shall be issued to every person who makes application for such, pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Journeyman Gas Fitter Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, or the Journeyman Mechanical Examination by an approved testing agency, with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each journeyman needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
Section 109 Means of Appeal shall be amended to read as follows: 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, to provide for a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this code, and act as Board of Appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the administrative authority, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the administrative authority, there shall be and hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of five members, who shall serve for a period of three years, and who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to plumbing and drainage construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent shall be an ex-officio member of and shall act as secretary to said Board, but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, which appointment shall be subject to the approval of the Government Body. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent. The decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to review by the governing body of the City upon request of any involved party. The fee for an appeal to the Board shall be $25, no part of which is refundable. The Community Development Superintendent or designated agent shall be responsible for the collection of the application fee. Any appeal to be brought before the Board of Appeals shall be presented in writing to the Community Development Superintendent. The Community Development Superintendent shall convene the Board within three weeks of written appeal request. 
109.2 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
109.2.1 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
109.2.6 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
109.6.1 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Chapter 1 Section 109.10 Application for License. 
A.  License. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a plumbing contractor or gas contractor without first having had issued to him a valid plumbing contractor or gas contractor license by the City. 
B.  Bond. Each plumbing contractor and gas contractor shall file a surety bond with the City in the sum of $5,000 before any permit authorized by this ordinance shall be granted to perform any work for which a permit is required under the City ordinances, and indemnifying and saving harmless the City from all suits or actions of every character and description brought against it for, or on account of, any injuries, or damages received, or sustained by any part or parties to whom such permit is issued, his or their servants or agents in the performance or prosecution of the work thereunder. 
C.  Insurance. Each plumbing contractor and gas contractor, further, shall file an insurance certificate with the City certifying public liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for any one accident or more, and property damage and products liability in the amount of $1,000,000. Notice in writing shall be given to the City at least 30 days before the date of cancellation or expiration of any of the insurance policies, and new certificates shall be issued immediately upon the issuance of new or renewed policies. A plumbing contractor or gas contractor license is not transferable, and right of a firm, partnership, or corporation to do business under a plumbing or gas contractor license depends upon the retention of the person holding the license as an acting member or officer of the firm, partnership, or corporation. 
D.  Yearly Fees. 
Plumbing Contractor $100.00 Master Plumber 25.00 Journeyman Plumber 10.00 Apprentice Plumber 5.00 Gas Contractor 100.00 Master Gas Fitter 25.00 Journeyman Gas Fitter 10.00  
All licenses shall be issued on a yearly basis and shall expire on December 31st of the year the license is issued. No license shall be renewed more than 90 days after the expiration date until the applicant has paid appropriate fees and penalty assessment for late renewal of $50.00. 
E.  Exception to Licensing Requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work covered by this ordinance without proper licensing except in accordance with the following conditions: 
1.  The work is done in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarter in connection with such buildings, and; 
2.  The person doing the work is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and the same are occupied or will be occupied by the owner for a minimum of one year immediately following the completion of the work, and; 
3.  The owner / occupant shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. 
Part 1, Administration , Section 30.4, Permits and Inspections, Fees. Table No. 3-A shall be amended as follows: 
For Issuing Each Permit $15.00 -IN ADDITION- For each plumbing fixture or trap or set of fixtures on one trap (including water, drainage piping and backflow protection therefore) 2.00 For each building sewer and each trailer park sewer 5.00 Rainwater systems-per drain (inside building) 2.00 For each cesspool 5.00 For each private sewage disposal system 10.00 For each water heater and/or vent 2.00 For each gas piping system of one to four outlets 2.00 For each gas piping system five or more, per outlet .50 For each industrial waste pre-treatment interceptor, including its trap and vent, excepting kitchen type grease interceptors functioning as fixture traps 2.00 For installation, alteration or repair of water piping and/or water treating equipment 2.00 For repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping 2.00 For each lawn sprinkler system on any one meter, including backflow protection devices therefore 2.00 For vacuum breakers or backflow protective devices on tanks, vats, etc. or for installation on unprotected plumbing fixtures, including necessary water piping-one to four 2.00 Five or more, each .50  
Section 305.6.1 Sewer Depth shall be 12" and 42" inches. 
Section 504.3 Shutdown. A means for disconnecting an electric hot water supply system from its energy supply shall be provided in accordance with the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, 2002 Edition. A separate valve shall be provided to shut off the energy fuel supply to all other types of hot water supply systems. 
Section 904.1 Roof Extensions. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six inches (6") above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least seven feet (7') above the roof. 
Section 608.1 shall have the addition of Cross Connection Control, Lawn Sprinkler System, shall read as follows: 
All lawn sprinkler systems to have a double check valve installed. (c)(2), shall be amended to read: 
This inspection shall include an air pressure test, at which time the gas piping shall stand a pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square inch (68.9 kpa) gauge pressure, for a period of no less than 20 minutes, measured on all new structures as part of the rough-in inspection, and on any structure where the gas has been shut off for six months or longer. This inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be covered or concealed are so concealed and before any fixtures, appliances, or shutoff valve has been attached thereto. 
ARTICLE IV. - NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE REQUIREMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 4-401. - Minimum standards. 
    This article, including the National Electrical Code, 2002 Edition, of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA No. 70-2002) including Article 80 and the International Administrative Code provisions for the National Electrical Code, 2002 Edition, incorporated by reference, shall constitute the minimum standards for all electrical work done or performed under the provisions of this article, except as herein after provided. 
Sec. 4-402. - National Electric Code and International Administrative Code provisions; adoption. 
    The code known as the National Electric Code and the Administrative Code Provisions for the National Electric Code, 2002 Edition, is hereby incorporated by reference and made part of this article, the same as if fully set forth herein, except such parts or portions thereof as are specifically changed, omitted, or added to in this article. 
Sec. 4-403. - Number of copies. 
    There shall be not less than three copies of the National Electrical Code and the Administrative Code Provisions for the National Electric Code, 2002 Edition, kept on file in the office of the City clerk and made available for inspection by the public at all reasonable hours. The file copies of the code shall be marked or stamped, "Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted clearly marked to show any such omission, or showing the sections, articles, parts or portions that are incorporated as the case may be and to which shall be attached a copy of this article. 
Sec. 4-404. - Amendments. 
    The amendments to the National Electrical Code (NEC) and the Administrative Code Provisions of the NEC, 2002 Edition, adopted by Section 4-402 shall be as set out. All references to section and chapter numbers in the text shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the National Electrical Code," or "the Administrative Code Provisions," unless clearly indicated in the contrary. 
    Shall be amended as follows: 
A.  General-Add the following paragraphs: 
The Community Development Superintendent, or his or her designee, may authorize deviations from the requirement of the National Electrical Code in hardship and exception cases and shall keep a record of any such deviations he/she has authorized. 
The Community Development Superintendent shall assist the Fire Chief in making an inspection of any electrical wiring which is considered dangerous or hazardous, when called upon to do so by the Fire Chief. 
B.  Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergencies shall be amended to read as follows: 
When inspection of electrical wiring, installations, fixtures, appliances or other equipment reveals any condition which the Community Development Superintendent believes is imminently hazardous to life, limb, or property, the Community Development Superintendent is authorized to enter upon the premises and to cause said hazardous wiring, installations, fixtures, appliances, or other equipment to be removed, repaired, disconnected, or otherwise made safe without delay and without prior notice to the owner or occupant of the property. The Community Development Superintendent shall, whenever possible, notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or electrical system or equipment, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall notify the serving utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure or building service equipment, in writing, of the disconnection immediately thereafter. 
C.  Authority to Condemn Electrical System and Equipment shall be amended to read as follows: 
When inspection of such electrical wiring, installation, fixtures, appliances, or equipment reveals any condition which, in the opinion of the Community Development Superintendent, is or has been installed or his being used in violation of the provisions of this article, the Community Development Superintendent shall cause written notice by certified mail to be served upon the agent, representative, or employee of the owner of such premises having control thereof, to correct such condition within 48 hours or within such longer time as the Community Development Superintendent may deem reasonable. 
The Community Development Superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to cause notice to be served by certified mail upon any person furnishing electric current to defective wiring, installations, fixtures, appliances, or other equipment to cease to supply current to the same until such time as the Community Development Superintendent notifies said person in writing that current may again be furnished. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or supplier of electric energy to furnish, connect, or cause to be connected, electric current to any wiring, installations, fixtures, appliances, or other equipment which has been condemned or disconnected or rendered inoperative, or where final inspection has not been made or approved by the Community Development Superintendent, or to use such wires, installations, fixtures, appliances, or other equipment as a part of any electrical system until the same has been repaired and the repairs approved in writing by the Community Development Superintendent. 
Whenever, under the provisions of this article, it shall be necessary for the Community Development Superintendent to enter upon any premises and to cause hazardous conditions found therein to be corrected and made safe, the costs of correcting the same shall be borne by the owner of the electrical equipment concerned. 
Section 80.19, Permit Fees , shall be amended to add the following: 
EXCEPTION: The fee for new construction Group R, Division 3 Occupancy, shall be in accordance with the fee schedule approved by the Governing Body. 
Section 80.19 Inspections, General , shall be amended to add the following paragraph: 
The issuance of permits or certificates of approval as required by this article shall not be construed as relieving any person from liability for damages to person or property in connection with the operation, control, and installation of any electrical equipment, and the City shall not be held as assuming any liability by reason of the issuance of permits or certificates of approval. The intention of the provisions of this article are to afford the public safety to life and property in so far as such safety can be provided by law. 
Section 100 shall add the following: 
ADDITIONAL ELECTRICAL WIRING AND APPARATUS REGULATIONS. 
A.  Minimum Service Entrance Size. 
1.  New and existing one and two family dwellings with floor area not exceeding 1,000 square feet - 100 amperes . 
2.  New and existing one and two family dwellings with floor area exceeding 1,000 square feet - 150 amperes . 
3.  Commercial buildings shall not have less than 100 amperes . 
B.  All electrical service entrance switches and panels, both rough-in and finished, shall bear a label or tag with name and telephone number identifying the contractor doing the work. All new installation of service switches and meter locations shall be provided with simple identification tags or marks indicating their capacity. When major repairs are made to old installations, similar identifications shall be provided. 
C.  All gasoline stations, garages, and businesses employed in the dispensing of volatile liquids shall be so wired that all conduit leaving the main feed panel shall contain seal-off fittings in addition to those required by the NEC. (All conduit must be rigid.) 
D.  Where the size of a service is increased, all wiring installed in conjunction with the new service shall conform to the minimum standards as set forth in section 4-401. 
E.  All new meter installations to one and two family dwellings shall be installed in a weatherproof-type outdoor metal box or meter fitting approved by the utility company for such purposes and located on the outside of the building; location to be designated by the public utility furnishing the service. The disconnecting means to control all circuits and devices, except meters, high impedance shunt circuits (such as potential coils of meters and control circuits to time switches), surge protective capacitors, and circuits for emergency lighting and fire alarms may be connected on the supply side of the disconnecting means. 
F.  Aluminum wire or copper clad wire must be 60 amperes or larger and used only for service entrance or panel feeders. 
Sec. 4-405. - Enforcement. 
    The NEC and all provisions provided for herein, shall be enforced by the Community Development Superintendent. 
Sec. 4-406. - Definitions. 
    Electrical Contractor shall mean a person who may conduct, carry-on, or engage in the business of electrical work and who holds a current Lansing, Kansas, master electrician license. 
    Master Electrician shall mean a person who may conduct, carry- on, or engage in the business of electrical work in a shop where there is an electrical contractor. 
    Journeyman Electrician shall mean person who labors at the trade of electrical work as an employee of an electrical contractor. 
    Apprentice Electrician shall mean a person who labors at the trade of electrical work as an employee under direct supervision and in the immediate presence of an electrical contractor, master electrician, or journeyman electrician. The number of apprentices at the job site shall be limited to two apprentices for each licensed electrical contractor, master electrician, or journeyman electrician. 
Sec. 4-407. - Issuance of trade license. 
    The Electrical Board or the building inspector shall issue a trade license pursuant to the following provisions: 
A.  Electrical Contractor License shall be issued to every person who makes application for such in conformance with section 4- 410 pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Master Electrician Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, with a minimum test score of 75 percent. Each contractor needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
B.  Master Electrician License shall be issued to every person who makes application for such, pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Master Electrician Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each Master needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
C.  Journeyman Electrician License shall be issued to every person who makes application for such, pays the required fee, and successfully passes the Journeyman Electrical Examination by an approved testing agency acceptable to the jurisdiction having authority, with a minimum score of 75 percent. Each journeyman needs to submit (12) twelve hours of trade specific continuing education credit hours biannually pursuant to state statutes. 
Section 80.15 shall be amended to read: ELECTRICAL BOARD/BOARD OF APPEALS. 
A.  In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, to provide for a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this code, and act as Board of Appeals in making a correct decision of any appeal arising from actions of the administrative authority, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of five members, who shall serve for a period of three years, who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to the construction, installation, maintenance, or materials of electrical wiring and apparatus, and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said Board, but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the mayor, which appointment shall be subject to the approval of the Governing Body. 
B.  The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy of the Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent. The decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to review by the governing body of the City upon request of any involved party. The fee for an appeal to the Board shall be $25, no part of which is refundable. The Community Development Superintendent or his designated agent shall be responsible for the collection of the application fee. Any issues to be brought before the Board of Appeals shall be in writing to the Community 
Development Superintendent. The Community Development Superintendent shall convene the Board within three weeks of written appeal request. 
Items A, B, 1,3,C,D,G shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Sec. 4-408. - Application for license. 
A.  General. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as an electrical contractor without first having had issued to him or a firm's designated agent a valid electrical contractor license by the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
B.  License. It shall be unlawful for any person to labor at the electrical trade without first having been issued a current license by the City of Lansing, Kansas, certifying that this person is working as an employee of a licensed electrical contractor in the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
C.  Bond. Each electrical contractor shall file a surety bond with the City in the sum of $5,000.00 before any permit authorized by this article shall be granted to perform any work for which a permit is required under this code or other City ordinances, and indemnifying and saving harmless the City from all suits or actions of every character and description brought against it for, or on account of, any injuries or damages received or sustained by any party or parties to whom such permit is issued, his or their servants or agents in the performance or prosecution of the work thereunder. 
D.  Insurance. Each electrical contractor shall file an insurance certificate with the City certifying public liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for any one accident or more, and property damage and products liability in the amount of $1,000,000. Notice in writing shall be given to the City at least thirty days before the date of cancellation or expiration of any of the insurance policies, and new certificates shall be issued immediately upon the issuance of new or renewed policies. An electrical contractor license is not transferable, and right of a firm, partnership, or corporation to do business sunder a contractor license depends upon the retention of the person holding the license as an acting member or officer of the firm, partnership, or corporation. 
E.  Fees. 
Electrical Contractor $100.00 Master Electrician 25.00 Journeyman Electrician 10.00 Apprentice 5.00  
    All licenses shall be renewed on a yearly basis and shall expire on December 31st of the year the license is issued. No license shall be renewed more than 90 days after the expiration date until the applicant has paid appropriate fees and penalty assessment of $50.00 for late renewal. 
F.  Exception to licensing requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work covered by this article without proper licensing except in accordance with the following conditions: 
1.  The work is done in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory building and quarters in connection with such buildings, and; 
2.  The person doing the work is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and the same are occupied or will be occupied by the owner, and; 
3.  The owner/occupant shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. 
Section 80.23(3) PENALTIES. 
A.  Working without a license. 
1.  First Offense : Double the license fee and all work must immediately cease until proper licensing is obtained. 
2.  Second Offense : Charges shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the City. 
B.  Working without a permit. 
1.  First Offense : Fine equal to double the permit fee, plus the regular permit fee. 
2.  Second Offense : Fine equal to triple the permit fee, plus the regular permit fee. 
3.  Third Offense : Charges shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the City. 
Section 80.27. Deleted in its entirety. 
ARTICLE V. - INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 4-501. - Minimum standards. 
    This article, including the International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, incorporated by reference in Section 4-502, shall constitute the minimum standards for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other heat-producing appliances. 
Sec. 4-502. - International Mechanical Code and Appendix; adoption. 
    The code known as the International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, including Appendix A and B, published by the International Code Council, is hereby incorporated by reference and made part of this article, the same as if fully set forth herein, except such parts or portions thereof as are specifically changed, omitted, or added to in this article. 
Sec. 4-503. - Number of copies. 
    There shall be not less than three copies of the International Mechanical Code 2003 Edition, kept on file in the office of the City clerk and made available for inspection by the public at all reasonable hours. The file copies of the code shall be marked or stamped, "Official Copy and Incorporated by the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted clearly marked to show any such omission, or showing the sections, articles, parts or portions that are incorporated as the case may be and to which shall be attached a copy of this article. 
Sec. 4-504. - Amendment. 
    The amendments to the International Mechanical Code adopted by Section 2 shall be as set out. All references to section and chapter numbers in the text shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the International Mechanical Code," unless clearly indicated in the contrary. 
Section 101.1 Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of City of Lansing, hereinafter referred to as "this code" 
Add a Section 102.10 State Boiler Inspector. Where permits are issued and portions of the work require inspections and approval of boilers, water heaters of 80 gallon capacity or larger, and pressure vessels by the state of Kansas, those portions of the work will comply with the state requirements in lieu of compliance with the technical provisions of this code. Contact the State Boiler Inspector at the State Department of Human Resources for complete information regarding state requirements. State approval is generally required for all boilers that require permits. 
Exceptions: 
A.  Boilers serving individual dwelling units and their accessory structures. 
B.  Boilers serving apartment houses with less than five (5) families. 
C.  Pressure vessels that do not exceed 15 cubic feet and 250 psi. 
Section 106.5.1 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Section 106.5.2 Fee schedule shall be in accordance with the fee schedule approved by the Governing Body. 
Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds ; Refunds shall not exceed 50% of the fee paid and all other refunds shall be pro rata as determined by the Director of Public Works or his or her authorized designee. 
Section 108.4 Violations Penalties ; Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $150.00 and a maximum fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 109.2 , shall be amended to read as follows: 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, and to provide for a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of five members, who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to HVAC construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The mechanical inspector or his designated agent shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as Secretary to said Board, but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the mayor to serve for a period of three years, which appointment shall be subject to the approval of the Government Body. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the mechanical inspector or his designated agent. The decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to review by the governing body of the city upon request of any involved party. The fee for an application for an appeal to the Board shall be $25, no part of which is refundable. The mechanical inspector or his designated agent shall be responsible for the collection of the application fee. Any issues to be brought before the Board of Appeals shall be presented in writing to the mechanical inspector. The mechanical inspector shall convene the Board within three weeks of written appeal request 
Section 109.2.1 is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 109.2.2 is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 109.2.6 is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 109.6.1 is deleted in its entirety. 
Chapter 1 Administration , Section 101.1 Title shall be amended as follows: 
These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Lansing, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 106.5.2. 
Section 106.5.3 shall insert 
Chapter 2, Definitions Section 202, the following definition shall be added: 
Section 201.3 shall read: "...National Electrical Code..." 
Chapter 3 GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Section 306.3.1 shall read: "... National Electrical Code..." 
Section 301.7 is amended to read: Electrical wiring, controls and connections to equipment and appliances regulated by this code shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code, 2002 Edition. 
Section 1305.1 shall add Drain condensate line shall be 5/8" to 3/4" line. 
Sec. 4-505. - Administration, definitions. 
    Mechanical Contractor: Person who may conduct, carry on, seek, or engage in the business of mechanical systems installation, replacement, or service and is also a Master Mechanical. 
    Master Mechanical: Person who has successfully passed an examination with a minimum passing score of 75% by a testing agency which has been approved by the governing authority of this code. 
    Mechanical Installer: Person who works at the mechanical trade as an employee of a mechanical contractor. 
Sec. 4-506. - Same; general provisions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a mechanical contractor without first having had issued to him a valid mechanical contractor's license by the City. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to labor at the mechanical trade as an installer without first having been issued a current identification card by the City certifying that this person is working as an employee of a licensed mechanical contractor in the City. 
Sec. 4-507. - Same; application for license. 
A.  Any person who is required by this code to possess a mechanical contractor's license or mechanical installer's license shall make application to the City. 
B.  Each mechanical contractor shall file a surety bond with the City in the sum of $5,000.00 before any permit authorized by this article shall be granted to perform any work for which a permit is required under the City ordinances, and indemnifying and saving harmless the City from all suits or actions of every character and description brought against it for, or on account of any injuries, or damages received, or sustained by any party or parties to whom such permit is issued, his/her or their servants or agents in the performance or prosecution of the work thereunder. 
C.  Each mechanical contractor, further, shall file an insurance certificate with the City certifying public liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for any one accident or more, and property damage and products liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00. Notice in writing shall be given to the City at least 30 days before the date of cancellation or expiration of any of the insurance policies referred to in required certificates, and new certificates shall be issued immediately upon the issuance of new or renewed policies. A mechanical contractor's license is not transferable, and right of a firm, partnership, or corporation to do business under a mechanical contractor's license depends upon the retention of the person holding the license as an acting member or officer of the firm, partnership, or corporation. 
D.  The name of the business and the address of each business shall be included with the application for license. 
E.  Trade specific continuing education credit hours must be submitted biannually in the amount of (12) twelve hours for each contractor/master for this trade in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 4-508. - Same; yearly license fees. 
A.  The yearly license fee shall be as follows: 
Mechanical Contractor ..... $100.00 
Mechanical Master ..... 25.00 
Mechanical Installer ..... 10.00 
B.  All licenses shall be renewed on a yearly basis and shall expire on December 31st of the year the license is issued. No license shall be renewed more than 90 days after the expiration date until the applicant has paid appropriate fees and penalty assessment of $50.00 for late renewal. 
Sec. 4-509. - Same; exception to licensing requirement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work covered by this article without proper licensing except in accordance with the following conditions: 
A.  The work is done in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings. 
B.  The person doing the work is the bona fide owner of such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and the same are occupied or will be occupied by the owner. 
C.  The owner/occupant shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. 
Sec. 4-510. - Same; enforcement. 
A.  Working without a license. 
1.  First Offense: Double the license fee and all work must immediately cease until proper licensing is obtained. 
2.  Second Offense: Charges shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the City. 
B.  Working without a permit. 
1.  First Offense: Fine equal to double the permit fee, plus the regular permit fee. 
2.  Second Offense: Fine equal to triple the permit fee, plus the regular permit fee. 
3.  Third Offense: Charges shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the City. 
4.  If no offense has been committed within a 12 month period, the next subsequent offense shall be treated as a first offense. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 4-601. - Permit necessary. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move, haul or transport, any house, building, derrick or other structure of the height of 16 feet or over, or of a width of 15 feet or more upon, across or over any street or alley in this City without first obtaining a permit therefore as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 4-602. - Application for permits. 
A.  All applications for permits to move houses, buildings, derricks or other structures mentioned in Section 4-601 shall be made in writing to the building inspector, at least 48 hours prior to move, not including weekends and/or holidays, specifying the day and hour said moving is to commence and the route through the City's streets over which said building or structure shall be moved. If it shall be necessary to cut down and move, raise, or in any manner interfere with any wires or poles, the application shall state the name of the owners of said wires and poles, the time and place, when and where the removal of said poles and the cutting, raising, or otherwise interfering with said wires will be necessary. Said application shall include letters of confirmation from all utility companies owning or operating wires, cables, poles, or other aerial equipment along the route, that any cutting, moving, raising of any wires cables, poles, or other aerial equipment will be completed before the moving shall begin. No permit for moving shall be issued until all utility disconnect notices have been returned to the office of the building inspector. 
B.  The following information must be submitted with and as a part of the permit application: Overall width and overall transported height of the load; Total length of load(s), tractor(s), and truck(s); Gross weight of loaded truck(s) and tractor(s); diagram showing spacing of all axles center to center, and width of axles center to center of wheels, and tread width of tires; Anticipated date of move; Hours of move beginning to end in Lansing; Current Kansas Manufactured Housing Program certification must be submitted by all persons making connections to utilities. (K.S.A. 58-4219) 
C.  The Public Works Director may refuse to issue a permit if the load capacity of any bridge or roadway on the route applied for is insufficient for the load as configured, and may require the applicant to provide for a structural analysis by a Kansas Licensed Structural Engineer if his determination is disputed. 
Sec. 4-603. - Fees for permits. 
    Before a permit to move any house, building, derrick or other structure is granted under the provisions of this article, the applicant for said permit shall pay to the City, which shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the City, the sum as set forth by the current fee schedule approved by the Governing Body. 
Sec. 4-604. - Notice to owners. 
A.  Upon issuance of a moving permit the applicant shall give not less than 15 days written notice to any person owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment along the proposed route of the intent to move the structure, giving the time and location that the applicants moving operation shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or interfering of any wires, cables or other aerial equipment. 
B.  The notice provision of subsection A. shall not apply where the person owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment has waived their right to advance notice. 
C.  Should the moving operation be delayed, the applicant shall give the owner or his or her agent not less than 24-hours advance notice of the actual operation. (K.S.A. 17-1916) 
Sec. 4-605. - Duty of owners of poles or wires. 
    It shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation owning or operating said poles or wires after service of notice, as required in Section 4-604 to furnish competent workmen or linemen to remove such poles or raise or cut such wires, as will be necessary to facilitate the moving of such house, building, derrick or other structure. The necessary expense which is incurred thereby shall be paid by the holder of the moving permit. 
Sec. 4-606. - Unlawful to molest wires. 
    No person engaged in moving any house, building, derrick or other structure shall raise, cut, or in any way interfere with any such poles or wires unless the persons or authorities owning or having control of the same shall refuse to do so after having been notified as required in Section 4-604 and then only by competent workmen as specified in Section 4-605. In such case the necessary and reasonable expense shall be paid by the owners of the poles and wires handled and the said poles and wires shall be promptly replaced and the damages thereto promptly repaired. 
Sec. 4-607. - Duty of building inspector. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector, from time to time, to inspect the progress of moving of any building, house or other structure and to see that said house, building or other structure is being moved in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 4-608. - Duty of mover. 
    It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation moving any of the structures mentioned in Section 4-601 to display red lanterns thereon in such a manner as to show the extreme height and width thereof from 30 minutes before sunset to 30 minutes after sunrise. 
Sec. 4-609. - Mover to furnish bond. 
    It shall be the duty of any person at the time of making application for a permit as provided in Section 4-601 to execute in the favor of the City a good and sufficient cash or surety bond indemnifying the City against any loss or damage to streets or public property resulting from the failure of such person to comply with the provisions of this article or from their negligence. The amount of the cash or surety bond shall be in the amount of $5,000.00. The moving company shall also furnish the City with a certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 naming the City as additional insured to indemnify the City against any loss or damage suit resulting from the failure of such person to comply with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 4-610. - Duty to repair damages. 
    If in the moving of any structure under this article, any person shall cause damage to any street, avenue, alley, or public place, or to any building, bridge, or other property belonging to the City, the same shall be immediately repaired under the direction and supervision of the City's Director of Public Works. 
ARTICLE VII. - FENCES 

Sec. 4-701. - Permit required; fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or install anywhere in the City fencing without first obtaining a permit from the Community Development Division of the Public Works Department. Applications for permits that contain unusual requests or invoice disputes of property lines shall be referred to the governing body for approval prior to a permit being issued. Applications for fence permits must be made to the Community Development Division. A site plan showing the property lines, any improvements on the lot, and the proposed fence location shall be submitted with the permit application. Prior to review and processing of the application by the Community Development Division the applicant shall locate or have located, and mark with a lathe or pin flag all property corner pins for the lot, and the proposed location of each end post and corner post, along with the proposed location of each post of any fence to be built on a curve. Once the locations noted above have been located and clearly marked, the applicant shall notify the Community Development Division for an on-site inspection. No post or fence installation may proceed prior to inspection, approval, and processing of the permit. Approval of the permit is contingent upon the field review finding that the proposed fence location complies with all regulations, and that all other requirements of this article are met. Providing that the inspection fee is paid, a satisfactory site plan has been submitted, and the application is complete, a field review will be made within 1 business day of notification that the property lines and proposed fence location has been marked per these requirements. 
    Permit fee for fence installation shall be as listed in the Schedule of Fees. 
Sec. 4-702. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Open fences are those constructed of wood, masonry, metal woven wire, or other material whose surface area is greater than 50 percent open. 
    Solid fences are those constructed of wood, masonry, metal, or other material whose surface area is or may become less than 50 percent open. 
Sec. 4-703. - Residential zones; permitted fencing. 
    Fences in residential areas of the City shall be either of open or solid type construction. 
Sec. 4-704. - Same; prohibited fencing. 
A.  Barbed wired. No person shall construct, keep, or maintain any barbed wire fence, or fence any part of which is composed of barbed wire, within a residential area of the City. 
B.  Electric fence. No person shall construct, keep, or maintain an electrically charged fence within a residential area of the City. 
Sec. 4-705. - Residential fences; standards. 
A.  Front yard: 
1.  No solid fence shall be constructed or reconstructed beyond the front building line of residential property. 
2.  Open fences may be constructed in the front yard but shall not exceed 48 inches in height above the natural contour of the ground. 
B.  Side or rear yards: 
1.  No solid fence located in a side or rear yard of residential property shall be constructed to a height greater than 48 inches above the natural contour of the ground; provided that the City inspector may issue a permit to authorize a solid fence to be constructed to a height not to exceed seven feet around paved patios and swimming pools, the fence shall not extend beyond the building setback lines as established by the platting and zoning regulations. 
2.  No open fence located in a side or rear yard shall be constructed to a height greater than 72 inches above the natural contour of the ground 
3.  All fences shall remain 12 inches off property line unless written permission of the adjacent property owner to install fence on property line, is on file with the Community Development Division as part of the permitting process. 
Sec. 4-706. - Fences in commercial districts. 
A.  Fences in commercial areas of the City shall be either of open or solid type construction. 
B.  Commercial fences shall be not less than six feet not more than eight feet in height. 
C.  Fencing of the chain link type in commercial areas may be topped with barbed wire on slanted arms. Where slanted arms are used they shall be upward at an angle of not less than 45 degrees and shall be slanted to the interior when located within three feet of a sidewalk or pedestrian way. 
D.  Commercial fences shall be constructed under a permit issued by the City inspector. Permits shall be renewable every five years upon certification by the building inspector that the fence is in good repair. 
Sec. 4-707. - Fences in agricultural districts. 
A.  The term agricultural fences shall apply only to areas conforming to the requirements of the zoning regulations for areas used for the growing of crops or pasture for livestock. 
B.  Agricultural fences shall be either of open or solid construction. 
C.  Agricultural fences shall not exceed four feet in height above the natural contour of the ground. 
D.  The use of barbed wire in the construction, deconstruction, or maintenance of agricultural fence shall be by a special permit issued by the City inspector. The permit shall not be given or renewed if the fence forms a boundary with any property zoned as residential. 
Sec. 4-708. - Fence height restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, cause to be erected or cause to be installed any property line fence unless written permission is obtained from the owner of the private property adjacent to the fence location. 
Sec. 4-709. - Same; hedges or evergreens. 
A.  The owner of any hedge or evergreen fence along the side of any street, avenue, or alley, shall not permit any such hedge or evergreen fence to grow to exceed four feet in height. 
B.  The owner of any hedge or evergreen fence along the side of any street, avenue, or alley, shall on 30 days' notice in writing given by the City inspector be required to trim such hedge or evergreen fence to conform to the requirements of subsection A. 
Sec. 4-710. - Penalty. 
    Any fence work done in part or whole prior to receipt of an approved fence permit is considered a violation, and is grounds for a citation. Each day of non-compliance is considered a separate violation. A person convicted of violating any of the conditions of this article shall be guilty of a public offense and subject to the penalty of a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not more than 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 4-801. - Definition. 
    The term swimming pool shall mean any receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment thereto, regardless whether said receptacle is totally above the ground, partially in the ground or totally in the ground. 
Sec. 4-802. - Compliance required, permit. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming pool in the City except in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances, within the City unless permits therefore shall have first been obtained from the building inspector. 
Sec. 4-803. - Location. 
    No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance less than eight feet from any side or rear property line, or building line. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations and appurtenant equipment, shall be located at a distance not less than eight feet from any side property line. All pools shall be located in the rear yards only. 
Sec. 4-804. - Approval of drawings, plans. 
A.  All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances shall first be presented to the building inspector for examination and approval as to the proper location and construction thereof. 
B.  All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot line, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk, and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the City building code. 
C.  All swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage system shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans and comply with other requirements of this code. (Health and Welfare) (Discharging of Pools) 
Sec. 4-805. - Swimming pool standards. 
A.  All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. 
B.  Swimming pool inside walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank and easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible. The side and end inside walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions: 
1.  The pool wall may be vertical for 30 inches from the water level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point equal to the difference between the depth at that point, and 30 inches. 
2.  To a depth of six feet, except as in [subsection] 1. above, the wall's slope shall not be less than one foot horizontal and six feet vertical. 
Sec. 4-806. - Same; structural design. 
    Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,200 pounds per square foot. The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet in depth shall not be more than one foot in each 10 feet. The maximum slope where water is five feet or more in depth shall not exceed one foot in two feet. 
Sec. 4-807. - Same; fences, gates. 
    All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of five-feet (5') as measured at the fence itself. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates and shall be a minimum of five-feet (5') as measured at the gate itself. The fence may be constructed of wire, wood, vinyl, wrought iron materials, or any other materials approved by city staff. In the event that wire is used for the fence to enclose the pool area, the fence shall be constructed of a minimum number eleven and one-half gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material. In the event the fence is constructed of wood, the wooden materials shall be of not less than one-half inch in thickness with spacing's of no greater than three inches in width. All gates shall be equipped with closing and latching devices capable of being locked with a padlock and the gate shall be locked with a padlock during the absence of the owners or tenants of the real property whereon the swimming pool is situated. All fence posts shall be decay or corrosion-resistant and shall be set in a concrete base at a depth of not less than two and one-half feet, and no farther than 10 feet apart. 
(Ord. No. 1012,  1, 11-15-2018) 
Sec. 4-808. - Same; ladders, steps. 
    One or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all swimming pools. 
Sec. 4-809. - Same; electrical equipment. 
A.  All electrical installations provided for, installed, and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools, shall be in conformance with the provisions of this code regulating electrical installations. 
B.  No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within 15 feet of such pools. 
C.  All metal fences, enclosures, or railings near or adjacent to swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. 
Sec. 4-810. - Inspections. 
    The building inspector periodically shall inspect all swimming pools to determine whether or not the provisions of the ordinances regarding safety applicable thereto are being complied with. 
Sec. 4-811. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a permit for the erection or construction or re-construction or construction of a swimming pool shall be $20.00 for pools of less than 1,000-gallon capacity, or $100.00 for pools of more than 1,000-gallon capacity. An additional $5.00 fee shall be charged for in-ground electrical pools, or $17.00 for above ground electrical pools. 
Sec. 4-812. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any amount not less than $150.00 and shall not exceed $500.00 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or shall both be so fined or imprisoned. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEMOLITION 

Sec. 4-901. - Permit necessary. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, hereinafter referred to as contractor, to demolish any house, building, derrick, or other structure greater than 120 square feet in the City without first obtaining a permit as stated below. 
Sec. 4-902. - Application for permits, and fees. 
    All applications for permits to demolish any house, building, derrick, or structure as mentioned in Section 4-901 shall be made in writing to the code enforcement officer, and no work shall begin until such demolition permit has been issued. The term of the permit will be 90 days with one opportunity to petition the Governing Body for an extension of 90 days for just cause. Fee for permit shall in accordance with the fee schedule approved by the Governing Body. 
Sec. 4-903. - Performance bond. 
    A performance bond executed by the contractor in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or one hundred (100) percent of the bid price, whichever is the greater, shall be submitted with the executed contract or permit application. The bond may be in the form of a surety bond or a cashier's check. No bank letters will be accepted as performance bonds. This bond shall be a guarantee (a) for the faithful performance and completion of the work and (b) for any repair or replacement cost resulting from any damage or failure of the contractor to properly restore the site. Such instruments will be returned thirty days after satisfactory completion of the work. 
Sec. 4-904. - Insurance. 
    Any contractor proposing to engage in the act of demolishing any house, building, derrick, or other structure in this City shall furnish the building inspector with a certificate of insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), naming the City as co-insured to indemnify the City against any loss or damage suit resulting from the failure of such person to comply with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 4-905. - Disconnection of utilities. 
    No work will be performed until all utilities have been properly disconnected and acknowledged as follows: 
A.  Sewer Lines. The sewer lines will be capped in accordance with the International Plumbing Code;, work is to be done by a plumbing contractor licensed by the City of Lansing and inspected and acknowledged by the City Community Development Superintendent. 
B.  Gas Service. Kansas Gas Service will disconnect the gas service lines as acknowledged by the chief foreman or gas service manager. 
C.  Electric Service. Westar Energy will disconnect the electric service lines as acknowledged by the chief foreman or electric service manager. 
D.  Water Lines. A licensed plumber shall disconnect the water service line as acknowledged by Lan-Del Water District service foreman or manager. 
E.  Cable Television. Time Warner Cable Company shall disconnect the cable television lines as acknowledged by the chief foreman or manager. 
F.  Telephone Service. AT&T shall disconnect the telephone service lines as acknowledged by their engineer. 
Sec. 4-906. - Notification. 
    Unless the Community Development Superintendent has determined that the structure is in a hazardous condition and must be removed immediately, the contractor will notify the building inspector before starting to demolish any structure. The contractor shall give a five (5) day notice to the adjacent property owners so they may protect their property in any way necessary from the wrecking process. 
Sec. 4-907. - Wrecking and demolition. 
    Rules and regulations concerning the wrecking and demolition of structures in the City shall be as follows: 
A.  Wrecking. No material shall be placed on a floor of any building in the course of demolition; the brick, timbers, and other parts of such story shall be lowered to the ground immediately upon displacement. The materials to be removed shall be properly wet to prevent dust incidental to their removal. When any building has been wrecked, the contractor shall immediately clear the property and adjacent streets and alleys of all rubbish, refuse, and loose materials from such wrecking. 
B.  Barriers and Protective Closures. The contractor shall barricade the project site or erect protective closures whenever any building exceeds one (1) story in height, or is within ten feet (10') of any street or alley property line. A roof for the entire length of the project shall be provided over any permanent sidewalk from the time the wrecking starts until it reaches the level of the first story. 
Sec. 4-908. - Blasting, general. 
    Blasting shall be allowed in accordance with Section 5100 of the Technical Specifications for Public and Private Improvements of the City of Lansing, Kansas (For additional information refer to Chapter 7). 
Sec. 4-909. - Disposal of hazardous materials. 
    Disposal of hazardous materials such as asbestos will be accomplished in accordance with Kansas State statutes. The contractor shall determine the presence of such materials, estimate the cost of removal, and secure the necessary State permit for removal and proper disposal of all hazardous materials. 
Sec. 4-910. - Disposal of materials. 
A.  All clear rubble, brick, broken concrete, masonry, roofing materials, roof felt, tar paper, asphalt shingles, lumber, timber, brush, and other materials, may be disposed of at a State certified rubble fill site. Contractor must furnish the City a plan for disposal of this material and location of proposed sites. All disposal sites must be approved by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment. 
B.  All perishable, non-burnable, or non-rubble fill materials must be disposed of properly at contractor's expense. 
Sec. 4-911. - Basement filled. 
    All wood, metal, and material that will rot or decay will be removed from the basement prior to filling. All basement openings will be filled with rock, brick, or clean fill and covered with at least eighteen inches (18") of dirt. No wood, metal, or materials that will rot or decay will be used as fill material. All fills will be dozer packed so that sink holes will not develop. The contractor will notify the building inspector before filling in the basement so that an inspection can be made of the excavation and of the fill materials to be used. 
Sec. 4-912. - Damage to adjacent structures, equipment and signs. 
    The contractor will be held responsible for any damage to adjacent structures, sidewalks, streets, or signs resulting from his/her operation and shall repair or replace any such damaged structures, streets, walks, or signs to the satisfaction of, and at no additional cost to the City of Lansing. 
Sec. 4-913. - Final inspection. 
    Upon completion of all work, the building inspection department will perform a final inspection and issue a certificate of completion to conclude the file documentation by the City. 
Sec. 4-914. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or neglect to comply with any provision herein. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall neglect to comply with the terms herein, shall be fined a sum of not less than $150.00 nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or imprisoned for 180 days, and the violation of each separate provision of this article shall be a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE X. - ANTENNAS 

Sec. 4-1001. - Antennas; prohibited. 
    Except as provided herein no antenna shall be erected, constructed, altered or maintained on any lot within the City. 
Sec. 4-1002. - Same; definitions. 
    Antenna as used herein means any shape antenna for communications or for receiving television signals from a satellite. 
Sec. 4-1003. - Same; requirements. 
    All type antennas located outside of the building shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  A building permit and payment of a $15.00 fee. 
B.  Maximum number per residential lot - one. 
C.  Minimum setback from all property lines of lot - 10 feet. 
D.  No antenna may be located in a front or side yard. 
E.  All cables and lines serving the antenna shall be located underground. 
Sec. 4-1004. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of this article shall be deemed to be a violation of this code and upon conviction for each and every offense be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100.00. Each day continued violation of this article, after written notice thereof, shall constitute a separate violation. 
Sec. 4-1005. - Prohibitions; waived. 
    The prohibition of some sections of this article may be waived by the governing body upon a showing by the landowner that compliance would cause the landowner undue hardship and that a waiver of some sections of this article would not be detrimental to the welfare of the surrounding community. 
ARTICLE XI. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-1101. - [Generally]. 
    All business entities wishing to engage in residential or commercial construction by contract or for hire must first obtain from the office of Community Development an occupational license to perform such work. The license fee will be paid annually beginning January 1 and expiring December 31 of each calendar year. The established fee for this license will be $100.00 per business per year. This licensure does not take the place of obtaining the required permits needed for the construction being completed. Occupations required to be licensed under this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  General Contractors-Class A, General Contractor: A Class A License shall entitle the holder thereof to construct, remodel, repair, and demolish any structure. 
B.  Building Contractors-Class B, Building Contractor: A Class B License shall entitle the holder thereof to construct, remodel, repair, and demolish all structures not exceeding three stories in height. A Class B License shall also entitle the license holder to perform non-structural remodeling, tenant-finish, and repairs of all structures. 
C.  Residential Contractor-Class C, Residential Contractor: A Class C License shall entitle the holder thereof to construct, remodel, repair, and demolish single family or duplex residences and buildings accessory thereto. 
D.  Fire Protection Contractor-Class D-FP Fire Protection: A Class D-FP License shall entitle the holder thereof to install, maintain, repair, service, test, and inspect automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems for all structures, including all spray and deluge, carbon dioxide, foam, dry chemical, and inert gas systems, and all related lines, tanks, fire control systems, and appurtenances to any of the foregoing. Such contractor shall be responsible for the training and oversight of all tradesmen in its employment as well as the means, method, and manner of the fire protection installation including construction, improvement, renovation, repair, and maintenance on a construction project. 
E.  Roofing Contractor-Class D-R Roofing: A Class D-R License shall entitle the holder thereof to install, maintain, repair, replace, and remove the roof assembly of any structure, including the roof deck, vapor retarder, substrate, thermal barrier, insulation, and roof coverings of all types. All roofers applying for an occupational license will be required to provide a copy of the State of Kansas Roofing Registration before occupational licenses or permits will be issued. 
HB 2024 
F.  Swimming Pool Contractor-Class D-P Swimming Pool Contractor: A class D-P Swimming Pool license shall entitle the holder thereof to install outdoor or indoor, above ground, or below ground swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs, including installations of solar heating and appurtenant equipment associated with such construction. 
G.  Fence Contractor-Class D-F Fence Contractor: A class D-F Fencing license shall entitle the holder thereof to install fencing in accordance with the current approved code on fencing. 
H.  Siding and Windows Contractor-Class D-S Siding Contractor: A class D-S Siding and Windows license shall entitle the holder thereof to install, maintain or repair siding, windows, guttering related to the weatherproofing of a structure. 
I.  Lawn and Irrigation Contractor-Class D-I Irrigation Contractor: A class D-I Lawn Landscape and Irrigation license shall entitle the holder thereof to install, maintain or repair systems with the approved permits for the system being installed. 
J.  Deck/Handyman Contractor-Class D-D Deck Contractor: A class D-D Deck/Handyman license shall entitle the holder thereof to build, maintain, or repair decks and minor issues of the structure. Such issues might include but not limited to expansion of decks, fixing stairs, small repairs damaged by elements, patios, or roofing/siding repairs. This will not include any engagement of Plumbing, Electrical, or HVAC installations or repairing of systems. 
K.  Miscellaneous Construction Contractor-Class D-M Miscellaneous Contractor: A class D-M Miscellaneous Construction includes all contractors not specified in aforementioned licensure categories yet are working in the construction trade. The following is included under this category but not limited to; painters, sheet rockers, bricklayers, insulators, carpet layers, or any other occupations engaging/doing business in the construction industry. 
ARTICLE XII. - OIL AND GAS 

Sec. 4-1201. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish uniform and reasonable limitations, safeguards, and controls of oil and gas operations based on the following criteria: 
A.  Aiding those owners of land in the economic utilization of their mineral rights in a safe and reasonable manner. 
B.  Protecting existing residential and commercial areas from incompatible land use activities. 
C.  Providing for the orderly growth and development of lands consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
D.  Minimizing any risks to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. 
E.  Maintaining the City's character and economic viability. 
F.  Providing for the cost of administering the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 4-1202. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise stated herein, the definitions set out in K.S.A. 55-150 and amendments thereto, and K.A.R. 82-3-10 shall apply to this article. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Abandoned well shall mean (1) each well in which no production casing has been run, and for which drilling or testing operations have ceased for 30 consecutive days, or (2) any other well for which there is no current City permit. 
    Artificial production shall mean the raising to the surface of the earth, by means of other than natural flow, petroleum or natural gas. 
    City shall mean the municipality of Lansing, Kansas. 
    City Administrator shall mean the chief administrative officer of the City. 
    Corporation Commission shall mean the Kansas Corporation Commission. 
    Deleterious substances shall mean any chemical, salt water, oil field brine, waste oil, waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substance(s) produced or used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and process of oil, gas or condensate. 
    Enhanced recovery shall mean an operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom. 
    Government Body shall mean the governing body of the City. 
    Mayor shall mean the chief elected official of the City. 
    Natural production shall mean the raising to the surface of the earth, by means of natural flow, petroleum or natural gas. 
    Oil and gas inspector shall mean that person, firm, or corporation qualified and employed by the City to enforce the provisions of this article, or by his or her authorized representative. 
    Permittee shall mean the person to whom is issued a permit or permits under the terms of this chapter. 
    Person shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, trust, cooperative, or other type of organization. 
    Pollution shall mean the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of any natural waters of the City, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any waters of the City as well or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety, or welfare to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other beneficial uses; or to livestock, animals or aquatic life. 
    Pressure maintenance shall mean an operation by which gas, water, or other fluids are injected into a supply of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery. 
    Salt water as used in this article shall mean any water containing more than 500 mg/1 chlorides. 
    State shall mean the State of Kansas, its branches, departments, agencies, boards or the officers thereof. 
    Treatable water shall mean surface and subsurface water in its natural state which may or may not require treatment to be useful for human consumption, and contains less than 10,000 ppm total dissolved solids and/or 5,000 ppl chlorides. 
    Water, waters of the City or City water shall mean all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the City or any portion thereof. 
    Well shall mean, unless specifically qualified, any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied petroleum matter or deleterious substance(s). 
    All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry; 
Sec. 4-1203. - Permit required. 
    No person shall drill an oil or gas well within the City limits of the City until that person has obtained a drilling permit, issued by the Government Body as set forth in this article. 
A.  A separate permit shall be required prior to each well drilling for oil and/or gas. 
B.  No person may apply for a drill permit as required in this article until a conditional use permit, as authorized by the City zoning code, permitting the desired use has been granted to the parcel on which the drilling is to take place. 
C.  In case special conditions are applied to the conditional use permit, those conditions shall apply in addition to any conditions set forth in this article. In case of conflict, the more restrictive conditions shall apply. 
D.  The rights granted under the permit as required by this article are nontransferable. 
Sec. 4-1204. - Application and filing fee. 
A.  Every application for a permit to drill an original well or to re-enter an abandoned well shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or some person duly authorized to sign same on his or her behalf, and it shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector and be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by the Government Body. No application shall request a permit to drill more than one well. The application shall contain full information required by the oil and gas inspector, including the following: 
1.  Name and address of applicant and date of application. 
2.  Where applying for a proposed original well: 
a.  A block map of the forty (40) acres surrounding the drill site, including thereon topographical contour lines, the location of the proposed access road, the location of the proposed well, and distance therefrom to all existing dwelling-houses, streets, alleys, public areas, utility easements, abandoned wells and other structures whether designed for human occupancy, animals or otherwise, adjoining the leased and the proposed drill site, and the proposed location of transmission lines from the proposed drill site to the point or points where the transmission lines exit the property, within one thousand (1,000) feet of any such well, and the location of all existing oil, gas or fresh water wells within the forty (40) acre tract. The block map for plat shall also show the one hundred (100) year flood plain on the entire lease or the forty (40) acres surrounding the drill site, whichever is greater 
3.  A drilling prognosis, to specify in detail the amount, weight, and size of conductor pipe and surface pipe and the procedures to be used for cementing such. Plugging procedures to be used in the event production is not established shall also be specified. 
4.  A statement of the provisions for water for the drilling rig. 
5.  A written plan for disposal of deleterious substances produced during the drilling operations and any deleterious substances produced as a result of production from the well. This plan shall include the method of transportation and name of transporter or transport contractor for the deleterious substances and the name and location of permitted disposal site, including a copy of the permit for the disposal site and a contract with the owner of the permitted site for the disposal of the deleterious substances, or in the alternative, provide proof of ownership of the permitted disposal site. The permittee shall provide monthly reports to the City of the amount of salt water and other deleterious substances produced, along with receipts for disposal of same. 
6.  The name and address of the person within the State of Kansas upon whom service of process upon applicant may be made within this State; and in the case of any non-resident person who has no such service agent within this state, there shall be attached to the application the designation of such a service agent within this state. 
There shall be attached to the application the designation of such a service agent resident in Leavenworth County, Kansas, and a consent that service of summons may be made upon such person in any action to enforce any of the obligations of the applicant hereunder. 
7.  A verification of the above information by the applicant hereunder. 
8.  Satisfactory evidence that applicant possesses a valid lease agreement by persons owning at least 51 percent of the mineral interest upon and under the real estate described in the application and upon which the oil and gas well proposed in the application to be drilled. 
9.  A written undertaking of the applicant that, in the event a well is either nonproductive or abandoned, within thirty (30) days after the determination thereof or in connection with the drilling, completion, production or maintenance of the well shall be removed; that the premises will be fully restored to its original condition as soon as practicable and in no case more than thirty (30) days after such determination. 
10.  A written undertaking of the applicant that if such well is productive and completed, only the tools, machinery, structures and equipment necessary for the normal daily operation thereof shall be maintained at the well site and that the premises surrounding the immediate well site shall be restored to its original condition as nearly as practicable and in no case more than thirty (30) days after the completion of the well. Provided, however, that the permittee may apply for an extension if, in his or her opinion, weather does not permit compliance. 
11.  A fire prevention and protection plan. The applicant shall submit a plan to the City clerk and such plan should include safety procedures and equipment used by the applicant, the type of drilling and its relationship to nearby structures and activities and a contingency plan should a fire occur. The Leavenworth County Fire District #1 fire inspector shall review and approve, in writing, such plans and amendments for compliance with this article. Amendments shall be made to the plan as necessary to retain a comparable level of safety for any change, addition or intensification of drilling or production activities, whether in design, location, construction, installation, operation, or maintenance. Plan amendments shall be approved in the same manner as described above. The applicant shall implement any such approved plan and amendment for the design, location, construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of all equipment related to drilling or production. 
12.  An emergency procedures plan shall be furnished. The plan shall be designed to minimize to be commensurate with the risk to persons, property, and the community welfare from a fire or fire hazard by having available or having procedures and access to persons and equipment capable of controlling and eliminating the fire or fire hazard. Such procedures shall be posted at the drilling or production site. 
13.  A plan showing in detail the proposed screening of the site in the event the well becomes a producing well. 
B.  A copy of the approved drilling permit from the corporation commission, any orders issued by the corporation commission, and a copy of the staking plat shall be filed with the City prior to issuance of the municipal permit. 
C.  Where the application is one for the re-entry of an abandoned well, the application shall contain all the information required by Section 4-1204A. above, with the exception that the oil and gas inspector may vary the requirements thereof to suit the application before him or her. Provided, that such an application for a permit to re-enter an abandoned well shall provide the following information in every case: 
1.  A statement of: 
a.  The then condition of the well; 
b.  The depth to which it is proposed such well shall be deepened; 
c.  The proposed casing program to be used in connection with the proposed deepening; and 
d.  Evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings currently passed the same tests that are required in the case of the drilling of an original well. 
D.  The drilling permit applicant shall deposit the filing fee with the City clerk which is to be held in a special drilling permit account and earmarked for each specific drilling permit application. Out of the deposit will be paid all the direct fees and costs incurred by the City of administering, regulating and enforcing the ordinance as to that specific well for which the drilling permit was issued. If the costs to the City of administering, regulating and enforcing the ordinance exceed the amount of the fee, including the cost of litigation over the nonpayment of the filing fee, then the permittee must put into the account an amount equal to the amount by which the costs exceed the fee amount. 
1.  All fees and costs including but not limited to administration, engineering, technical, accounting and legal will be directly billed or debited to the account of each specific permitted well. Following the final inspections and approval of plugging and abandonment procedures by the oil and gas inspector, any remaining balance of the account shall be returned to the permittee, minus the amount of the annual fee to operate provided for elsewhere in this article. 
2.  Upon permittee request, the permit accounts shall be open to audit at any reasonable time during Lansing's business hours. 
3.  Permittee shall be sent a copy of all invoices or statements of directly billed administration, regulation or legal costs by whomever such work is performed or completed simultaneously with billing Lansing by claim. All such invoices or statements shall be itemized on a time basis, if billing is done on a time basis. 
E.  If the permittee objects to the reasonableness of any or all items in a billing or claim, the permittee may protest to the Government Body prior to approval of the same at the next regularly scheduled City council meeting. 
1.  During the period of protest, the permittee may submit the issue of whether the amount of the bill or claim is reasonable to arbitration with the permittee to pay the arbitrator's fees in all cases. The parties to such arbitration will be permittee and the person or organization presenting the bill or claim. 
2.  The arbitrator's decision shall be presented to the City at the next regularly scheduled City council meeting for the council's consideration as to whether or not the billing or claim or any amount thereof is reasonable or any amount thereof shall be approved. Only the arbitrator's decision shall be considered by the council at this City council meeting. 
3.  If the parties to arbitration cannot agree on an arbitrator, the method of appointment set forth in K.S.A. 5-201 et seq. shall be used. 
Sec. 4-1205. - Issuance or refusal of permit and permittee's insurance and bond. 
A.  The oil and gas inspector's office, within 30 business days after the filing of an application for a permit under this article shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article and applicable federal and state law, and, if it does, shall recommend to the mayor and Government Body that the permit be issued. Each permit issued under the terms of this article shall: 
1.  By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this article with the same force and effect as if this article were copied verbatim therein; 
2.  By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of applicable state law and the rules, regulations and standards adopted in accordance therewith relating to the protection of human beings, animals, and natural resources; 
3.  Specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of six (6) months from the date of approval; 
4.  Specify the conditions imposed by the oil and gas inspector as are by this article authorized; 
5.  Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved the required bonds and certificate of insurance in the appropriate amounts as provided for elsewhere herein. 
B.  If the permit be issued, it shall, in two originals, be signed by the mayor and the permittee, and when so signed shall constitute the permittee's license to drill and operate in the City and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, such bonds as are required and applicable to state law, rules, regulations, standards and directives. One executed original copy of the permit shall be kept available for inspection by any City or state law enforcement official who shall demand to see same. 
C.  If the permit be refused, or if the applicant notifies the oil and gas inspector, in writing, that he or she does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his or her application, or if the bonds of the applicant be not approved, then upon the happening of any of the events, the cash fee filed with the application shall be refunded to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the City the sum of $200.00 as a processing fee. 
D.  The permit fee provided in Section 4-1204A. shall be paid not later than ninety (90) days after approval by the Government Body of the drilling application, or prior to commencement of any drilling operations, whichever event occurs first. If the permit fee is not paid within such time, the permit shall not be issued, and approval shall be automatically canceled and a new drilling application shall be required. The Government Body may extend the time for payment beyond ninety (90) days for good cause shown. 
E.  In the event a permit shall be issued by the oil and gas inspector, no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the City bonds and a certificate of insurance as follows: 
1.  A bond in the principal sum of at least $100,000.00. The bond shall be executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with the applicant as principal, running to the City for the benefit of the City and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the operation of the well for either natural or artificial production, injection or disposal. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the City and remain in force and effect for at least twelve (12) months subsequent to the expiration of the permit term, and in addition, the bond will be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of his or her breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this article, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the City which may be disturbed or damaged in permittee's operations, to their former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all equipment, letter, trash, waste, and other substances, and will, within thirty (30) days after abandonment, grade, level and restore the property to the same surface condition, as practicable as is possible, as existed prior to commencing operation; and further that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit. 
If, after the completion of a producing well, permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this article, such as removing derrick and clearing the premises, he or she may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have the bond reduced to a sum of not less than $50,000.00 for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. 
2.  In addition to the bond required in paragraph (1) of this section, the permittee shall obtain a bond in the principal sum of at least $2,000,000.00. The bond shall be executed by a reliable insurer licensed to do business in the state, as surety, and with applicant as principal, all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with every applicable federal and state law, rule, regulation, standard or directive relating to the maintenance of the safe and beneficial physical, chemical and biological properties of any natural waters of the City; that the permittee shall obtain the necessary permits from the City and state with regard to any operations which have the potential of rendering such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety and welfare; that the permittee shall bear all the costs necessary and incidental to the correction of any pollution to the waters caused by the permittee or permittee's agents, servants, employees, subcontractors or independent contractors; that the permittee shall pay all fines, penalties, assessments or judgments resulting directly or incidentally from the permittee's activities and which result in pollution of City waters; that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all liability resulting from the pollution of City waters. 
a.  In lieu of the $2,000,000.00 bond, the permittee may provide a certificate of insurance, naming the City as additional insured and specifically stating the coverage is in the amount of $2,000,000.00 and covers all perils as set forth in this section. 
3.  In addition to the bonds required in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section, the permittee shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the City, issued by an insurer authorized to do business within the state, the policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverage: 
a.  Bodily injuries, $100,000.00 per person; $300,000.00 per accident. 
b.  Property damage, $200,000.00. 
    Permittee shall file with the City certificates of the insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof of the oil and gas inspector who shall act thereon promptly after the date of such filing. 
    The insurance policy or policies shall not be cancelled without written notice to the oil and gas inspector at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event the policy or policies are cancelled, the permit granted shall immediately thereupon terminate without any action on the part of the oil and gas inspector, and permittee's rights to operate under the permit shall cease until permittee files additional insurance as provided herein. 
    If, after completion of a producing well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this article, such as removing derricks, clearing premises, and the like, he or she may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have the insurance policy or policies reduced as follows: Bodily injuries, $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident; and property damage, $50,000.00. 
Sec. 4-1206. - Fencing. 
A.  Fencing of drilling area. The entire drilling rig for any oil or gas well, together with its equipment, shall be enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height. The fence shall remain until either replaced by the fence required in Section 4-1206B., or until the land is restored according to Section 4-1204A.9. of this article. 
B.  Fencing and screening of pumping units. Pumping units of oil or gas wells shall be surrounded or enclosed with a six (6) foot chain link fence. Within thirty (30) days of completion of the installation of the pumping unit and its required fence, a hedge row or such other means of screening the pumping unit and fence from public view shall be established by the pump owner. 
Sec. 4-1207. - Storage of oil. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any tank or tank battery for the storage of crude oil within the City limits. 
Sec. 4-1208. - Noise impact. 
    No activity shall be commenced or continued which will generate a noise level that exceeds 60 dbl measured at the tract line, for sustained length of time or at repeated intervals and all related activities not on the tract, such as transporting of oil and maintenance, should occur in such a manner as to minimize noise and obtrusiveness to the surrounding community. 
Sec. 4-1209. - Disposal of salt water. 
A.  Every permittee under this article shall be responsible for the same disposal of salt water or other deleterious substances which he or she may bring to the surface of the earth and shall provide a plan for such disposal as required in Section 4-1204A.5. Such disposal shall not result in pollution of the waters of the City and shall not result in any other environmental hazard, and shall incorporate the best available techniques and equipment. 
B.  In the event of any leakage or spillage of any pollutant or deleterious substance, whatever the cause thereof, the permittee shall cause the oil and gas inspector to be notified thereof promptly. If, in the judgment of the oil and gas inspector, such leakage or spillage represents a potential environmental hazard, he or she may issue whatever corrective orders he or she deems appropriate, and additionally may require the appropriate testing of the surface and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of such test or tests to be borne by the permittee. 
C.  No person shall dispose of salt water or other deleterious substances within the City limits of the City. 
D.  No person shall inject any salt water or other deleterious substance in the annulus between the inside of the surface casing string and the next inside casing string. 
E.  No person shall use soil farming, or any other technique disposing of waste by integration into soil, for non-commercial or commercial purposes, within the City limits. 
Sec. 4-1210. - Hours of operation. 
    Drilling operations on a parcel of land shall not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; however, continuous auguring, fluid circulation or other sufficient techniques to prevent explosive conditions during the ceasing of drilling operations shall be employed. 
Sec. 4-1211. - Duration of drilling operations. 
    All exploration and drilling operations shall be complete within one hundred eighty (180) days at any one well after the date of the issuance of the drilling permit, and the permit shall become void after that time. 
Sec. 4-1212. - Drilling operations; equipment. 
    All drilling, re-entry and operations at any well performed under this article shall be conducted in accordance with the best practices of the reasonably prudent operator. All casing, valves, and blowout preventers, drilling fluid, tubing, bradenhead, christmas tree and well head connections shall be of a type and quality consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Setting and cementing casing and running drill system tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Any permittee under this article shall observe and follow the recommendations or regulations of the American Petroleum Institute and the corporation commission, except in this instance that are specifically addressed by this article. A copy of all logs associated with the surface casing shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
Sec. 4-1213. - Moving of drilling rig. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to move or cause to be moved the drilling rig from a well until the hole has been cased or properly plugged unless written permission to do so is obtained from the oil and gas inspector. 
Sec. 4-1214. - Fracture and acidizing. 
    In the completion of an oil and gas well where the acidizing or fracturing processes are used, no oil, gas or other deleterious substances or pollutants shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. 
Sec. 4-1215. - Swabbing and bailing. 
    In swabbing, bailing or purging a well, all deleterious substances removed from the bore hold shall be placed in appropriate tanks and no substances shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. 
Sec. 4-1216. - Rupture in surface casing. 
    In the event a rupture, break or opening occurs in the surface or production casing, the permittee or the operator or drilling contractor shall take immediate action to repair it, and shall report the incident to the oil and gas inspector promptly. 
Sec. 4-1217. - Depositing oil products. 
    No person shall deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon, any oil or oily liquid with petroleum content or any mud, rotary mud, sand, water or salt water, or in any manner permit by seepage, overflow, deliberate release or otherwise, any of such substances to escape from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person and flow or be carried into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake, or lagoon within the City. 
Sec. 4-1218. - Safety precautions. 
    Persons drilling, operating or maintaining any well shall use all necessary care and take all precautions which shall be reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the public. The provisions of this article shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, and compliance with the terms hereof shall not be deemed to relieve any persons of any additional duty imposed by law. 
Sec. 4-1219. - Water for muds. 
    In the event a fresh water supply well is drilled to provide water for drilling muds, upon the completion of operations for which such well is required, such well shall be plugged by cementing top to bottom, after notice of intention to do so is provided to the oil and gas inspector, who may supervise the operation. 
Sec. 4-1220. - Oil and gas inspector. 
A.  The Government Body shall employ a qualified person as an oil and gas inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article. 
B.  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue such orders or directives as are required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure to abide by any such order or directive shall be a violation of this article. 
C.  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to go upon and inspect any premises covered by the terms of this article to ascertain whether this article and the applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state are being complied with. Failure to permit access to the oil and gas inspector shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
D.  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, specified in this article, relating to the status or condition of any well or project or the appurtenances thereof within the City. Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
Sec. 4-1221. - Service companies. 
    Upon request of the oil and gas inspector, service companies or other persons shall furnish and file reports and records showing perforating, hydraulic fracturing, cementing, shooting, chemical treatment and all other service operations on any site covered by this article. Such furnished material shall remain confidential where such confidentiality is usually granted by the state. Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
Sec. 4-1222. - Accumulation of vapor. 
    The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to require the immediate shutting in or closing of any well if he or she finds that there exists, within a one hundred (100) foot radius of any well, any gas or gasoline vapor in a quantity sufficient to constitute, in his or her judgment, or in the judgment of the Leavenworth County Fire District #1 fire department inspector, a fire hazard. The well shall remain shut or closed in until the hazard and its cause are removed. 
Sec. 4-1223. - Inspection of pressure lines. 
    The oil and gas inspector shall inspect all pressure lines in use at any well or at any project to assure that tubing, fittings, equipment or connections are reasonably tight, safe and free from leaks. 
Sec. 4-1224. - Order to cease operations. 
A.  If the oil and gas inspector finds that, in his or her judgment, a hazard to life or nature resources exists, he or she shall order immediate rectification of the cause. If the permittee takes no immediate measure to reduce the hazard, or if the situation be so perilous as to constitute an imminent threat to safety, then in either of these events, he or she may order the prompt cessation of activity and, if necessary, the clearance of the premises. 
B.  The oil and gas inspector shall apply to the City administrator for a hearing upon such order, which hearing shall be held not longer than twenty-four (24) hours after the issuance of the order by the oil and gas inspector. The City administrator shall determine if proper cause existed and, if not, shall order the permittee's activity to resume without delay. If the City administrator determines that proper cause did not exist for the order to cease activity to issue, then he or she shall make whatever ruling is proper to assure rectification of the cause of peril. Such ruling and compliance with it by the permittee of any liability for any violation of this article for any damage or injury caused thereby. 
Sec. 4-1225. - Appeals. 
    Any permittee aggrieved by any order, directive, or ruling issued by the oil and gas inspector, or by any ruling by the City administrator, may appeal the same to the Governing Body which shall hear the matter at its next scheduled meeting. The lodging of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. The council, upon hearing the matter, may issue whatever ruling or order is appropriate, provided that such ruling or order be keeping with the spirit and purpose of this article. 
Sec. 4-1226. - City council review of permit recommendation. 
    Upon the consideration of any application for a permit required by the terms of this article, the oil and gas inspector shall recommend approval or disapproval thereof to the mayor and Government Body, who shall review the matter at a regularly scheduled meeting, and thereupon uphold or reverse the recommendation with or without the addition of any conditions thereto. 
Sec. 4-1227. - Conduits on streets and alleys. 
A.  No permittee shall make any excavations or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water or minerals on, under or through the streets and alleys of the City without first having obtained a permit therefor upon application to the Government Body. 
B.  The Government Body shall prescribe the forms to be used for such application and the information to accompany it. 
C.  Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in an amount established by the Government Body. 
D.  The Government Body shall, within twenty (20) days of receipt of the properly executed application, either grant or deny the request. 
E.  The granting of any such permit shall not be construed to be the granting of a franchise. 
F.  For permits within ROWs for streets and sidewalks, refer to Chapter 14 for additional information. 
Sec. 4-1228. - Annual fee for conduits. 
A.  The permittee, under Section 4-1239 of this article, shall pay to the City an annual renewal and inspection fee in the amount established by the Government Body. 
B.  The Government Body shall appoint a representative who shall inspect such conduits to assure the public safety. No permit issued under Section 4-1243 of this article shall be renewed if the conduit or any part thereof covered by such permit is in an unsafe condition. 
Sec. 4-1229. - Surface casing. 
A.  Surface casing shall be installed to a depth of at least three hundred (300) feet below the surface of the earth or fifty (50) feet below any ground water, subject to approval by the oil and gas inspector. Surface pipe shall have a centralizer on the shoe joint, and centralizers within fifty (50) feet of the shoe joint, and centralizer no more than two hundred (200) feet apart above the second centralizer. 
B.  Surface pipe shall be cemented by attempting to circulate good cement to surface by normal displacement practices. If cement cannot be circulated to surface due to washed-out hole or lost circulation, the existing cement shall not be overdisplaced and a plug shall be left in the bottom of the casing string to be drilled out once the surface is set. The remaining open hole behind the surface pipe shall be cemented by running a tubing string between the conductor string and the surface pipe until the top of the cement is tagged. The remaining uncemented annular space will then be cemented until good cement is circulated to the surface. No further drilling shall be accomplished until the cement has set for at least 24 hour or, in the alternative, until samples of the cement have passed independent laboratory tests satisfactory to the oil and gas inspector. 
Sec. 4-1230. - Electric motors. 
    Only electric motors shall be used for operating plumping equipment. 
Sec. 4-1231. - Abandonment and plugging. 
    Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a two hundred (200) foot cement plug in the bottom of the surface casing, with the bottom of the plug one hundred (100) feet below the surface casing section; and to set fifty (50) foot cement plug in the top of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of casing may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations, it will be the obligation of the permittee and operator to flood the well with mud-laden fluid weighing not less than nine pounds per gallons, and to circulate this mud until stabilized, and the well shall be kept filled to the top with mud-laden fluid of the weight herein specified, at all times; mud-laden fluid of the above specifications will be left in the well bore below and between cement plugs. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the corporation commission of the state, in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well, shall be complied with by the permittee. 
Sec. 4-1232. - Natural gas. 
    Natural gas shall not be allowed to escape into the air or be burned off. An odorizer shall be attached to each producing gas well. 
Sec. 4-1233. - Location. 
A.  Well Location. No permit shall be issued for the drilling of an original well or the re-entry of an abandoned well at any location which is (1) nearer than one thousand (1,000) feet of any permanent residence or commercial building; (2) closer than three hundred (300) feet of a public road right-of-way; (3) closer than three hundred (300) feet of a producing fresh water well; or (4) within a platted subdivision or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundary of a platted subdivision. 
B.  Access Road Location. The location of any access road necessary for the drilling of an original well or the re-entry of an abandoned well shall be subject to review by the oil and gas inspector. 
C.  Exceptions allowing well location closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from a permanent residence or commercial building may be granted at the discretion of the Government Body, only if written approvals and releases are obtained from the person(s), in the following enumerated paragraphs, having an interest in the permanent residences or commercial buildings being located 1,000 feet or less from the well location, and the approvals and releases are filed with the offices of the oil and gas inspector for the City and the county clerk of Leavenworth County. Approvals and releases shall be obtained from: 
1.  Any owner of the permanent residence or commercial building; 
2.  Any life tenant or remaindering of the permanent residence or commercial building; 
3.  Any lessee or tenant of the permanent residence or commercial building; and 
4.  Any mortgagee of the permanent residence or commercial building. 
D.  Exceptions allowing well locations closer than three hundred thirty (330) feet from a public road right-of-way may be granted at the discretion of the Government Body. 
E.  Exceptions shall not be granted allowing a well location to be closer than (1) three hundred (300) feet of a producing fresh water well; (2) within a platted subdivision; or (3) one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundary of a platted subdivision. 
F.  All wells hereafter commenced or drilled within the City limits of the City shall be drilled as nearly as practicable on a location consisting of at least ten (10) acres, more or less. Provided, that the governing body of the City at the time of the granting of a permit as hereinbefore provided, may permit such variations as may be deemed necessary in the amount of acreage required, the location of the drill site, and the shape of the location, depending upon geographical factors, and topographical features of the land embraced by the location. 
Sec. 4-1234. - Pits. 
    Stell, mud, circulating, or reserve pits shall be used. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within fifteen (15) days after completion of the well. Earthen pits will be allowed only as temporary emergency pits and/or as catch basins. 
    Catch basin pits shall be used only for the purpose of catching any deleterious substance runoff and shall be no greater than three hundred twenty (320) cubic feet. Such catch basins will be equipped with a liquid level activated pump designed to keep fluids pumped out of such catch basin pit. All such earthen pits must be lined and approved in writing by the oil and gas inspector. Emergency pits shall be emptied as soon as the emergency is over and all such pits shall be emptied and then leveled within 15 days after completion of the well. 
Sec. 4-1235. - Save the City harmless statement. 
    The property user or lessee shall submit a written agreement to the City, holding and saving the City harmless from all claims, damages, expenses and losses arising out of the drilling or production of oil or gas from the leased premises. The City shall be named as an insured in the policy or policies of insurance required in Section 4-1205E. hereof. 
Sec. 4-1236. - Facilities. 
    All lease equipment shall be painted and maintained in a good state of appearance. A sign will be posted at the entrance to the drilling site stating the operator's name, the name and address of the resident agent for service of process, emergency telephone number and the City permit number before spudding the well. Within thirty (30) days after the completion of any producing oil or gas well, a sign shall be posted and maintained at the location showing the operator of the well, the operator's emergency telephone number, name of farm, number of the well, legal description of the well, and identifying number of the permit issued by the City. Information supplied on the sign shall be kept current. The sign shall be no smaller than 2' 2' and shall be no larger than 3'  3'. 
Sec. 4-1237. - Public roads; access. 
    Adequate precaution will be taken by the driller and the lessor to prevent mud being tracked onto public roads and to assure access of emergency equipment to the well site at all times. 
Sec. 4-1238. - Forms. 
    The City administrator and City clerk shall develop and make available to applicants a set of forms and guidelines to facilitate compliance with this article. 
Sec. 4-1239. - Annual fee for production wells; renewal of insurance. 
    The holder of any permit on which there is a production well shall pay an annual fee of $400.00 and, at the same time, shall file documentation of insurance renewal with the City clerk as required by this article. All fees will be deposited in the general fund and used for expenses of inspection and other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the City, as described in Section 4-1204D. 
Sec. 4-1240. - Informal complaints. 
    If, upon information or inspection, it is found that a permittee is violating any portion of this article or causing damage or pollution to any surface or underground treatable water, the oil and gas inspector shall file a written administrative complaint with the City administrator, a copy of which shall be delivered or mailed to the permittee or his or her agent. If, upon subsequent inspection, it is determined that the permittee has taken the corrective actions specified, the complaint may be dismissed; otherwise, formal application will be made to the Government Body for an order revoking the permit, and for any other appropriate remedy; pending the outcome of the final determination of the Government Body on the formal application the oil and gas inspector shall, after an on site inspection, have the authority to shut down those operations where conditions appear obvious that surface or underground pollution is occurring. 
Sec. 4-1241. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provisions hereof, irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section hereof contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this article, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof, shall be fined a sum not more than $1,000.00 and/or imprisoned for one hundred eighty (180) days, and the violation of each separate provision of this article and of the permit, and of the bond, shall be a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the Government Body, at any regular or special sessions or meetings thereof may, provided ten (10) days notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this article and under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted in the event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of the period, the bond, in this article. In the event the permit be revoked, the permittee may make application to the oil and gas inspection for the re-issuance of such permit, and the action of the City thereon shall be final. Any continuing offense shall be considered a public nuisance, the remedies for which, under law, shall be in addition to those hereinbefore enumerated. 
Sec. 4-1242. - Applicability to existing conditions. 
    Operating permits for producing wells in operation on the effective date of this article shall be issued by the oil and gas inspector following the payment of the annual operating fees applicable to that well, posting the required bonds and insurance. Failure to pay the applicable fees within thirty (30) days of receipt of notification will be considered a rejection of the permit by the operator, and will constitute a violation of this article. Council approval is not needed for permits issued to operators of wells in operation on or before the effective date of this article. 
Sec. 4-1243. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City that the several provisions of these regulations are severable, in accordance with the following rules: 
A.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of these regulations to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of these regulations. 
B.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of these regulations to a particular property or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of the provisions to any other property or structure. 
ARTICLE XIII. - BUILDING AND HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 4-1301. - Duty of owners: Notice. 
    It is hereby the duty of all persons owning or occupying buildings fronting on any public street, avenue or public grounds of the City, to cause the same to be numbered in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 4-1302. - Method of numbering generally. 
    All streets of the City shall be so named and numbered as will best suit public safety and achieve an efficient manner of locating addresses for public travel and commerce. 
Sec. 4-1303. - North, south, east, west streets; dividing line. 
A.  It is hereby declared necessary to number the City, and for that purpose Main Street shall constitute the base for a grid of all streets running east and west, and Kansas Avenue shall constitute the base for a grid of all street running north and south. All streets shall be numbered according to a north-south and east-west grid map adopted as part of this article and to be kept on file in the office of the Community Development Superintendent. 
B.  All parts of streets running north or northerly from Kansas Avenue shall be designated respectively by the prefix "North" to the names of such streets, and all parts of streets running south or southerly from Kansas Avenue shall be designated respectively by the prefix "South" to the names of such streets. 
C.  All streets running north and south which do not intersect with Kansas Avenue shall be numbered according to the grid map and contain a prefix only when needed. 
D.  All parts of streets running east or easterly from Main Street shall be designated respectively by the prefix "East" to the names of such streets, and all parts of streets running west or westerly from Main Street shall be designated respectively by the prefix "West" to the names of such streets. 
E.  All streets running east and west which do not intersect with Main Street shall be numbered according to the grid map and contain a prefix only when needed. 
Sec. 4-1304. - Method of numbering. 
A.  East of Main Street. For all streets which run east and west, odd numbers shall be given to all buildings on the north side of the streets and avenues and even numbers shall be given to those on the south. The numbering shall commence with the number 100 at the first lot east of Main Street on the south side and increasing to the east and alternating on the north and south so that the odd numbers shall be on the north and even numbers on the south. 
B.  West of Main Street. For all streets which run east and west, odd numbers shall be given to all buildings on the south side of the streets and avenues and even numbers shall be given to those on the north. The numbering shall commence with the number 100 at the first lot west of Main Street on the north side and increasing to the west and alternating on the north and south so that odd numbers shall be on the south and even numbers on the north. 
C.  North of Kansas Avenue. For all streets which run north and south, odd numbers shall be given to all buildings on the west side of the streets and avenues, and even numbers shall be given to those on the east. The numbering shall commence with the number 100 at the first lot north of Kansas Avenue on the east side and increasing to the north and alternating to the east and west so that odd numbers shall be on the west and even numbers on the east. 
D.  South of Kansas Avenue. For all streets which run north and south, odd numbers shall be given to all buildings on the east side of the streets and avenues and even numbers shall be given to those on the west. The numbering shall commence with the number 100 at the first lot south of Kansas Avenue on the west side and increasing to the south and alternating to the east and west so that odd numbers shall be on the east and even numbers on the west. 
Sec. 4-1305. - Duty to place numbers; materials; size. 
    All buildings facing streets, now or hereafter erected or relocated, shall be numbered as herein before provided by the owner or occupant at their expense. All such numbers (or letters) shall be of such kinds or materials which shall be visible from the street and shall not be less than four inches in length. All such numbers shall be conspicuously placed on, above, or by the side of the door on the front of each building fronting on or adjacent to any street, avenue, or public ground. 
    Where such numbers are not visible from the street, they shall also be placed on a marker at the drive leading to a building whose property fronts on or is adjacent to any street, avenue, or public ground. 
Sec. 4-1306. - Master numbering plan. 
    The Community Development Superintendent, or such designee appointed by the City administrator, is authorized to prepare and maintain, in the appropriate office, a grid map of the City, showing the system of numbering buildings herein established. At the time a permit shall be issued for the construction or relocation of any building, a number shall be assigned to the applicant in accordance with such master plan. All such numbers shall be placed on such buildings before the occupancy permit is issued for that building. (For additional information reference Chapter 9, Minimum Housing/Property Maintenance). 
Sec. 4-1307. - Unlawful acts; general penalty. 
    Any person who shall place, affix, remove, destroy, carry away, or in any manner deface or disfigure any building or lot number placed or authorized by this article, except in conformity with the provisions thereof, shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to a fine in the minimum amount of $150.00 and a maximum fine not to exceed $500.00. 
CHAPTER 5 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSES 

Sec. 5-101. - Licenses required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person, whether as principal, officer, agent, servant or employee or otherwise, shall: 
A.  Conduct, pursue, carry on or operate within the corporate limits of the City any callings, trades, professions, businesses or occupations specified in this chapter without having first paid to the City Clerk an occupation tax, license tax or permit fee as prescribed in such Section and having first procured a license or permit to engage in and carry on such calling, trade, profession, business or occupation. 
B.  Fail to comply with all of the regulations provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 5-102. - License not transferable. 
    No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable or assignable, except by a resolution authorizing it passed by the Government Body, or as otherwise provided in this Code. 
Sec. 5-103. - Persons required to carry licenses. 
    All persons licensed under this chapter not having a permanent location are required to carry their licenses with them, and all such persons shall present their licenses for inspection when requested to do so by any officer of the City. 
Sec. 5-104. - License taxes levied; regulations; terms. 
    License taxes are hereby levied and regulations imposed upon the respective callings, trades, professions, businesses or occupations conducted, pursued, carried on or operated within the corporate limits of the City as specified and prescribed in this chapter. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire and terminate on the last day of December of each year, without regard to the date of issuance thereof. 
Sec. 5-105. - When due and payable. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all original annual licenses shall be due and payable immediately upon the commencement of the business, calling, trade, occupation or profession for which they are issued, and all renewals thereof on the first business day of January in each year. 
Sec. 5-106. - Exemption of farmers. 
    No producer or grower, or his or her agents or employees, selling in the City, farm or garden products or fruits grown by him or her in the state shall be required to pay any license fee or occupation tax imposed by any law of this City, and he or she, his or her agents or employees, are hereby exempt from the payment of any such fees or taxes, or the securing of a license. (K.S.A. 12-1617) 
Sec. 5-107. - Penalty. 
    Any person, corporation, partnership, or association violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any amount not to exceed $100.00 or be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 5-108. - Revocation. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be revoked by the City Clerk for the following reasons: 
A.  If a licensee has been obtained the license by submitting false information in the application; 
B.  If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation regulating the conduct of the particular calling, trade, profession, business or occupation covered by such license; 
C.  If a licensee is ineligible to obtain a license under this chapter; 
D.  For the nonpayment of any license fees required under this chapter; 
E.  For permitting any gambling or any violation of the intoxicating liquor laws of the State or of Chapter IV of this Code upon the licensed premises; 
F.  For the conviction of the licensee in any court for the violation of any laws of this state or ordinances of any City regulating such calling, trade, profession, business or occupation; or 
G.  For conviction of the licensee in any court of any offense against the laws of the state or ordinances of any City involving moral turpitude. Where any calling, trade, profession, business or occupation licensed under this chapter is governed by a specific Section of this Code containing an express provision for the revocation of such license, the terms of such specific Section of this Code containing an express provision for the revocation of such license shall supersede and take precedence over the revocation provisions contained in this article. In case a license is revoked on any of the grounds set out above, no new license to carry on such calling, trade, profession, business or occupation shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to the licensee for no less than six (6) months from the date that the revocation takes effect. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the Governing Body after seven (7) business days' written notice. 
Sec. 5-109. - Licenses issued; contents; City Clerk's records. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the City Clerk shall, upon receipt from the applicant for a license of the amount specified in the fee schedule, issue to such applicant a license, stating the kind or nature of the business to be carried on or transacted, to whom issued, the time when such license will expire, the amount paid, and the location, if any, of the applicant's place of business. The City Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued, showing their nature, date of expiration, to whom issued and the location of the business. The City Clerk shall also keep a record of any and all bonding requirements which may be required for any particular license. 
    Payment for a Business License and issuance of a Business License does not constitute permission by the City to conduct an activity. The business owner must comply with all applicable federal, state or City regulations and obtain all required permits. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSIENT VENDORS 

Sec. 5-201. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words as used herein shall be considered to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto: 
    Established place of business is any business operated from a permanent building or structure within the City for which the required deposits provided by the City have been made and which place of business is open for business during regular business hours. 
    Ice cream vendor is any vendor who does not have an established place of business within the corporate limits of the City who sells or offers to sell to the general public ice cream from a motorized vehicle, defined as a motor driven vehicle possessing two or more wheels, operating on the streets or on property within the City owned by another. 
    Other vendors operating from a motorized vehicle is any vendor who does not have an established place of business within the corporate limits of the City who sells or offers to sell to the general public goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever from a motorized vehicle, defined as a motor driven vehicle possessing two or more wheels, operating on the streets or on property within the City owned by another. 
    Peddler shall mean any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, or conveyance, and further provided, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler. 
    Residence shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied or residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
    Soliciting shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities: 
1.  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or 
2.  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or 
3.  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
    Solicitor or canvasser shall mean any individual, whether resident of the City or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. Such definition shall include any person, who, for himself, herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, or portion thereof, or any other place within the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
    Street salesman shall mean any person engaged in any manner in selling merchandise of any kind from a wagon or stand temporarily located on the public streets or sidewalks of this City as authorized by a permit. 
    Transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor are defined as any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the City or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within such City, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, or public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any street, alley or other place within the City, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. Such definition shall not be construed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
    Transient vendor is any person who does not have an established place of business within the corporate limits of the City who sells or offers to sell to the general public, goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever from a conveyance, stand, table, or other means set up or located on the streets or sidewalks of the City or on property within the City owned by another. 
Sec. 5-202. - Certificate of registration and license. 
    No transient vendor, merchant, solicitor, or peddler as defined in Section 5-201 of this article shall engage in such business within the within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a license therefore unless specifically excluded from the permit requirement under Section 5-203. Any applicant for a license under this article shall file with the City Clerk a sworn application on a form furnished by the City Clerk, which shall give the following information: 
A.  Name and date of birth of applicant. 
B.  State sales tax number. 
C.  Credentials from the person, firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents. 
D.  Physical description of the applicant. 
E.  Period of time for which the certificate and license is applied. 
F.  Address of the applicant's present place of residence. 
G.  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
H.  Location and zoning of any structure, building or vehicle to be used for the activities defined herein. 
I.  Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or any felony conviction. 
J.  Submit a copy of a paid personal property tax receipt from the Leavenworth County Treasurer or another county treasurer in the State of Kansas for all goods or merchandise brought into Leavenworth County from outside the State of Kansas to be sold or disposed of in a place of business temporarily occupied for their sale. 
Sec. 5-203. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
A.  Sales or displays at trade shows, expositions or conventions, fairs, festivals or shows operated primarily for amusement, entertainment, recreation or education. 
B.  Sales or displays at public sales or shows of crafts or items made by hand and sold, offered for sale, or displayed by the individual making such crafts or handmade items. 
C.  Persons soliciting for a charitable contribution, as long as the person soliciting charitable funds submits a letter to the City Clerk identifying the recipient of the funds, fund raising methods and the dates during which the funds will be collected. 
D.  Persons advertising or offering goods, wares, merchandise or services by the hanging of any flyer or handbill on any residence or business door provided that no contact or attempt at physical or verbal contact is made. 
E.  Persons advertising or offering goods, wares, merchandise or services by placing flyers or handbills on vehicles, however, in lieu of a permit, persons distributing handbills on vehicles located on private property must obtain prior permission of the property owner. 
F.  Federal, state, county or City census takers or political candidates or their agents. 
G.  Advertisements and solicitations delivered by the United States Post Office and newspapers filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by law or any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
H.  Persons distributing information for noncommercial purposes or proselytizing, poll-taking or other similar activity for noncommercial purposes. 
I.  Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of business; 
J.  Fairs and convention center activities conducted primarily for amusement or entertainment; 
K.  Any general fair, auction, or bazaar sponsored by any church, religious, or non-profit organization; 
L.  Garage sales held on premises devoted to residential use; 
M.  Sales of agricultural goods raised or produced by the seller and sold at an approved Farmer's Market; 
N.  School sponsored bazaars and sales, and concessions at school athletic events; and, 
O.  Promotional trade or hobby shows conducted within structures which are zoned and site planned for commercial use pursuant to Chapter 17 of the City Code. 
Sec. 5-204. - License required. 
    All persons defined in Section 5-201 and 5-301.A, except those excluded per Section 5-203, desiring to do business within the City shall apply to the City Clerk for a license authorizing such business. Applications for licenses shall be sworn and in writing and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name, date of birth, a copy of the applicant's state or federally issued photo identification card, and applicant's Kansas Sales Tax Certificate, if applicable, designating the City of Lansing as recipient of municipal sales taxes collected. 
B.  Address of applicant and address of location, if in a set location, where applicant intends to offer goods, wares, merchandise or personal property for sale. 
C.  A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted and the goods to be sold, and if the goods are farm or orchard products, a statement whether they are produced or grown by applicant, and if not, the name and address of the producer or grower. 
D.  If applicant is employed, name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing applicant's relationship to such employer. 
E.  Length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
F.  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the state vehicle license number carried on such vehicle. 
G.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has within two years prior to the date of the application been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance regulating transient vendors, and if so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
H.  If doing business from a set location, the application shall be accompanied by the written permission of the owner, or tenant in possession of the location described in the application, from which or in front of which the application intends to offer goods, services, merchandise or personal property for sale. 
(Memo of 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 5-205. - Licensing procedure. 
    No license shall be issued to conduct business within the City to any applicant who has within two years preceding the date of such application been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor, other than a traffic offense, or of violating any municipal law regulating vendors. All applications for licenses hereunder shall be approved by the City Clerk. Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall forthwith submit copies to the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative. In the absence of the City Clerk, the City employee then in charge of the business office of the City, shall investigate the qualifications of license applicants and approve or disapprove the issuance of licenses. 
Sec. 5-206. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon receipt of an application for certificate of registration and license, the City Clerk shall issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the licensee, the date of issuance and length of time the license shall be operative, and the nature of the business involved. 
    The City Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all such licenses issued. The solicitor shall carry the certificate at all times, and show it to any resident or officer of the City should they request to see it. The certificate may not be used as an endorsement of the City. 
Sec. 5-207. - License fees. 
A.  Transient vendor. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for each licensee and shall be valid for a period of not more than three consecutive days; or $60.00 for a period of one week (7 days); or $125.00 for a period of one month. 
B.  Ice cream vendor. A fee of $75.00 shall be charged for each licensee and shall be valid to December 31st of that year. In addition the current fee required to run a background check will also be charged by the City Clerk. 
C.  Food carts, food trucks, or other vendors operating from a motorized vehicle. A fee of $75.00 shall be charged for each licensee and shall be valid to December 31st of that year. If vendor is selling food or beverages, the licensee must also obtain a Food Establishment license. 
Sec. 5-208. - Fees for license; transferability; exhibition. 
    The fees for the license required by this article shall be as prescribed by Section 5-207. No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be used by any person, other than the one to whom it was issued. Any person engaged in activities as described in Section 5-201 shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. No fee shall be required of one selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the seller. 
Sec. 5-209. - Prohibited acts. 
A.  No vendor shall sell or offer to sell to the general public goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever without first obtaining a license to do so as required by this article. 
B.  Making any assertion, representation or statement or using any plan or scheme which misrepresents the purpose of the visit 
C.  Transient vendors may only conduct business from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Sales are prohibited during all other times. 
D.  The maximum speed at which the motorized vehicle may travel while selling or offering to sell goods to the general public shall not exceed 12 miles per hour. 
E.  No transient vendor shall make more than two stops in any one block. 
F.  Vendors may only solicit at the main entrance of a residence, and may not solicit to the same residence more than once in a 30 day period. 
G.  Sales are prohibited to persons standing in a City street. 
H.  Double parking is prohibited. 
I.  U-turns are prohibited. 
J.  Driving in a reverse direction is prohibited. 
K.  Loitering is prohibited. 
L.  Soliciting at residences or businesses that have a 'No Solicitors' or 'No Trespassers' sign is prohibited. 
M.  Vendors must leave a residence or business should the owner ask you to leave. Violators can be arrested and prosecuted for criminal trespassing. 
N.  Using the permit as an endorsement of the City or by any department or officer of the City. 
Sec. 5-210. - Revocation of license. 
A.  The Chief of Police, his/or her designee and/or any Code Enforcement Officer may revoke any license issued under this article, for any of the following causes: 
1.  Any violation of this article. 
2.  Conducting the business as defined in Section 5-209 in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the City. Notice of the revocation of a license shall be in writing to the applicant and the City Clerk and set forth the grounds of revocation. 
3.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
4.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business. 
5.  Unauthorized use of the public right-of-way for sale or display of merchandise, or for display of an advertising sign. 
6.  Violation of a site plan requirement for an existing land use or violation of the zoning ordinance. 
7.  Multiple complaints regarding aggressive behavior including persistence or rudeness. 
If a license is revoked for any reason, no refunds will be issued for application or permitting fees. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or City Clerk in the denial of an application or revocation of a license as provided in this article, shall have the right of appeal to the Government Body. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after notice of revocation or denial of the license has been mailed to such applicant's last known address setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Government Body shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided herein for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Government Body on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
Sec. 5-211. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of the terms of this article is declared to be a violation of this code and any person convicted of such violation is punishable by a minimum fine of $150.00 and a maximum fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the Leavenworth County Jail for not to exceed 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 5-212. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No peddler, canvasser or solicitor, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the City or upon any private premises in the City where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefore to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell; however, such regulations shall not apply to ice cream vendors selling from vehicles. 
Sec. 5-213. - Structures. 
    No person conducting activities pursuant to this article shall erect or cause to be erected out of doors any temporary structure, awning, tent, or stand for the purpose of storing, selling, or displaying goods or services without prior approval of the Community Development Division. 
Sec. 5-214. - Improved surfaces/parking. 
    No person shall conduct activities pursuant to this article on unimproved surfaces, or on a parking lot or aisleway area that constitutes a required parking area under the provisions of Chapter 7 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 5-215. - Setbacks. 
    Display of merchandise and parking of vehicles for the sale or display of merchandise shall be subject to the building setback requirements of the zoning district in which any activity subject to the provisions of this article is being conducted. 
Sec. 5-216. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be limited to one sign per location and shall comply with the rules and regulations promulgated by the City of Lansing Zoning Ordinance. No sign shall be placed in City-owned right of way. 
Sec. 5-217. - Vehicles. 
    No transient merchants shall sell products or services directly from any vehicle exceeding two (2) tons in rated load capaCity. 
Sec. 5-218. - Use of street. 
    No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets. No peddler shall be permitted to operate in any congested area where his or her operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
Sec. 5-219. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of any police officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer to require any person engaged in the activities as defined in this article, who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his or her license and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 5-301. - License required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal or agent or employee, to conduct, pursue, carry on, or operate any calling, trade, profession, or occupation from a business located within the corporate limits of the City without first making an application to the City Clerk for a license therefore, and paying a license fee prescribed and procuring a license from the City Clerk whenever the procuring of the license is required by the City. The requirement for a City license shall also apply to any in-house business. This requirement shall not apply to independent sales representatives for multi-level or network marketing companies. This requirement shall not apply to those businesses required to have an occupational license through the Public Works Department. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal or agent or employee, to conduct, pursue, carryon on, or operate any calling, trade, profession, or occupation in the City without first meeting proper zoning classification. Upon receipt of a general business license application, the City Clerk's office shall forward the application to the Public Works Department for review. If the business is deemed to be located in a proper zoning classification, the application shall be returned, within five (5) business days to the City Clerk's office for issuance of a business license. In the event the business does not meet the current zoning requirements, the Public Works Department shall notify the applicant to cease all work and apply for proper zoning through the rezoning process. 
C.  Payment of fees does not constitute issuance of a general business license. 
Sec. 5-302. - License fees. 
    All license fees shall be due and payable before the commencement of a trade, occupation, business, or profession for which license fees are required. No license shall be issued until the fee is paid. The amount of the fee for a General Non-Home Based Business License shall be $50.00 per year. The amount of the fee for a General Home Based Business License shall be $25.00 per year. These fees shall be prorated on a quarterly basis for new businesses. 
Sec. 5-303. - Renewal. 
A.  A license may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year, and renewal applications for such licenses shall be submitted on or before December 1 of each calendar year. 
B.  Upon timely application, a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be renewed by issuance of a new license in the manner provided herein. 
C.  If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time provided herein, the expiration of such license shall not be affected, and a new application shall be required. 
D.  A grace period of thirty days after the expiration of the license shall be allowed without incurring fines in order to submit a new application and fees for a general business license. If a new license is not applied for within thirty days after the expiration of the general business license, the penalty as prescribed in Section 5-305 shall apply. 
Sec. 5-304. - Application to existing businesses. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to: 
A.  All businesses required to be licensed as prescribed in Section 5-301 existing within the corporate limits of the City on the effective date of this code; and 
B.  All businesses required to be licensed as prescribed in Section 5-301 established within the corporate limits of the City after the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 5-305. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any provision of this article shall incur a penalty charge ten dollars ($10.00), and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation shall continue. 
Sec. 5-306. - Transient sales by holder of general business license. 
    Any business that currently holds a General Business License pursuant to Section 5-301 of this Code and wished to conduct door-to-door or transient sales on behalf of that business shall be permitted to do so under the following conditions: 
A.  Said business must be current on the payment of all General Business License fees due to the City. 
B.  The owner or authorized representative of said business shall apply to the City Clerk for a separate license authorizing such transient activity. The fee for this separate license will be thirty dollars ($30.00) per applicant, and said license shall be valid for not more than six (6) months from the date of issuance. 
C.  No license under the provisions of this section shall be used by any person or entity other than the one to whom it was issued. 
D.  Persons engaged in the activities permitted by a license issued pursuant to this section shall exhibit that license immediately upon request. 
E.  Persons engaged in the activities permitted by a license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to all of the terms and requirements regarding Transient Vendors as set for in Article II of this chapter. 
(Memo of 10-26-2017) 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 5-401. - Temporary special events: Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to provide for the temporary use of private property for special events in a manner consistent with its normal use and beneficial to the general welfare of the public. 
    Furthermore, it is the intent of this section to protect nearby property owners, residents and businesses from special events which may be disruptive, obnoxious, unsafe or inappropriate given site conditions, traffic patterns, land use characteristics and the nature of the proposed use. Finally, it is the intent of this section to preserve the public health, safety and convenience. 
Sec. 5-402. - Special event defined. 
    The term "special event" shall mean a temporary, short-term use of land or structures, not otherwise included as a permitted or accessory use by these zoning regulations, for one or more of the following types of activities: 
A.  Type 1: Fundraising or non-commercial events for nonprofit religious, educational or community service organizations; including any structures in conjunction with the event. 
B.  Type 2: Promotional activities or devices intended to attract attention to a specific place, business, organization, event or district, such as outdoor entertainment or display booths. 
C.  Type 3: Outdoor commercial activities intended to sell, lease, rent or promote specific merchandise or services [such as a tent sale, farmers market or product demonstration] or indoor seasonal events which will draw additional visitors to a property [such as haunted houses], and including licensed transient merchants requiring use of a tent or structure. 
D.  Type 4: Christmas tree sales. 
E.  Type 5: Public events intended primarily for entertainment or amusement, such as concerts or festivals. 
Sec. 5-403. - Special events not requiring a permit. 
    Special events meeting the Type 1 definition are allowed without a Temporary Special Event Permit provided all of the following standards are met: 
A.  The special event is conducted entirely on private property owned or leased by the sponsoring organization as a permanent facility, or the sponsoring organization has received written permission from the property owner for use of the property for the duration of the event. 
B.  Any structure used in conjunction with the special event shall meet all applicable yard setbacks, shall be subject to a valid building permit, shall meet uniform F Fire Code requirements, and shall be removed within 24 hours upon the cessation of the event. 
C.  Signs displayed in conjunction with use shall comply with City sign regulations and shall not be located on public right-of-way. 
D.  The duration and hours of operation of the special event shall be consistent with the intent of the event and the surrounding land uses, but in no case shall the duration exceed a limited period of time as specified in the application not to exceed thirty consecutive days and a maximum frequency for similar events of two (2) times per calendar year. 
Sec. 5-404. - Special events subject to an administrative permit. 
    Special events in compliance with the following standards may be issued a Temporary Special Event Permit administratively by the City Clerk upon review by the Director of Public Works and/or his or her designee. Any applicant denied a Temporary Special Event Permit shall be notified in writing of the reasons for denial and of the opportunity to appeal the denial to the Government Body. No more than four (4) Temporary Special Event Permits per calendar year shall be issued administratively at any location. Type 4 events do not count against the permit limit. 
A.  Special events meeting the Type 2 or Type 3 definition, and Type 1 events not meeting the standards outlined in Section 5-403, may be permitted administratively by the City Clerk subject to prior review and approval by the Public Works Department, Code Enforcement Division, Police Department and Fire Department. No administrative Temporary Special Event Permit shall be issued unless all of the following standards are met: 
1.  An application and site plan indicating the proposed use and any temporary structures or displays are submitted, and a fee paid in accordance with Section 5-406. 
2.  The special event shall not cause undue traffic congestion or accident potential given anticipated attendance and specific location of event. 
3.  The activity shall not cause the overcrowding of parking facilities given anticipated attendance-and the possible reduction in the number of available spaces caused by the event itself. Permits shall not be issued for properties which do not provide parking spaces in excess of the number required in the zoning ordinance to support the principal use(s) on the property. 
4.  The special event shall not endanger the public health, safety or welfare given the nature of the activity, its location on the site, and its relationship to parking and access points. 
5.  The special event shall not impair the usefulness, enjoyment or value of adjacent property due to the generation of excessive noise, smoke, odor, glare, litter or visual pollution. 
6.  Any structure used in conjunction with the special event shall meet all sight distance requirements in this Code, shall be the subject of a valid building permit, shall meet uniform fire code requirements, and shall be removed within 24 hours upon the cessation of the event. 
7.  Cars, trucks, vans and trailers may not be used for the sale of merchandise. Vehicles used for the storage of merchandise associated with an approved temporary use may only be located on site during the approved hours of operation of the special event. 
8.  The special event shall be conducted on private property [on which the Community Development Division has an approved site plan on file] where the property owner has granted the appropriate written permission. 
9.  The duration and hours of operation of the special event shall be consistent with the intent of the event and the surrounding land uses, but in no case shall the duration exceed a limited period of time as specified in the application not to exceed thirty days. 
10.  Signs displayed in conjunction with use shall comply with City sign regulations and shall not be located on public right-of-way. Signs for commercial activities shall only be displayed during hours of operation. 
B.  Special events meeting the Type 4 definition may be permitted administratively by the City Clerk subject to prior review and approval by the Public Works Department, Code Enforcement Division, Police Department and Fire Department. No more than one (1) Type 4 permit per calendar year shall be issued administratively at any location. No administrative permit shall be issued unless all of the following standards are met: 
1.  An application is submitted and a fee paid in accordance with Section 5-406. 
2.  A site plan is submitted indicating the location of the trees, aisles, parking and sales trailer or structure. 
3.  The location of the sales area shall not cause the overcrowding of parking facilities given anticipated attendance and the possible reduction in the number of available spaces caused by the event itself. Permits shall not be issued for properties which do not provide parking spaces in excess of the number required in the zoning ordinance to support the principal use on the property. 
4.  Any structure used in conjunction with the Christmas tree sales shall meet all sight distance requirements of this Code, shall be the subject of a valid building permit, shall meet uniform fire code requirements, and shall be removed within 24 hours upon the cessation of the sale. 
5.  The sale shall be conducted on private property [upon which the Community Development Division has an approved site plan on file] in a commercial or industrial zoning district where the property owner has granted the appropriate written permission. 
6.  Christmas tree sales shall be permitted for no more than sixty (60) consecutive days and the permit will expire on December 31st of each calendar year. 
7.  Signs displayed in conjunction with use shall comply with City sign regulations and shall not be located on public right-of-way. 
Sec. 5-405. - Special events subject to government body approval. 
    Type 5 events and any special event not meeting the criteria of Section 5-404 may be granted a Temporary Special Event Permit by the Government Body. No temporary special event permit shall be issued unless all of the following standards are met: 
1.  An application and site plan indicating the proposed use and any temporary structures or displays are submitted, and a fee paid in accordance with Section 5-406. 
2.  The special event shall not cause undue traffic congestion or accident potential given anticipated attendance and specific location of event. 
3.  The activity shall not cause the overcrowding of parking facilities given anticipated attendance-and the possible reduction in the number of available spaces caused by the event itself. Permits shall not be issued for properties which do not provide parking spaces in excess of the number required in the zoning ordinance to support the principal use(s) on the property. 
4.  The special event shall not endanger the public health, safety or welfare given the nature of the activity, its location on the site, and its relationship to parking and access points. 
5.  The special event shall not impair the usefulness, enjoyment or value of adjacent property due to the generation of excessive noise, smoke, odor, glare, litter or visual pollution. 
6.  Any structure used in conjunction with the special event shall meet all sight distance requirements in this Code, shall be the subject of a valid building permit, shall meet uniform fire code requirements, and shall be removed within 24 hours upon the cessation of the event. 
7.  Cars, trucks, vans and trailers may not be used for the sale of merchandise. Vehicles used for the storage of merchandise associated with an approved temporary use may only be located on site during the approved hours of operation of the special event. 
8.  The special event shall be conducted on private property [on which the Community Development Division has an approved site plan on file] where the property owner has granted the appropriate written permission. 
9.  Signs displayed in conjunction with use shall comply with City sign regulations and shall not be located on public right-of-way. Signs for commercial activities shall only be displayed during hours of operation. 
    Such permit may be subject to such conditions and safeguards as the Government Body may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These conditions may include but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Restrictions on the hours of operation, duration of the event, size of the activity or other operational characteristic. 
2.  The posting of a performance bond to help ensure that the operation of the event and subsequent restoration of the site are conducted according to Government Body expectations. 
3.  The provision of traffic control or security personnel to increase the public safety and convenience. 
4.  Obtaining liability and personal injury insurance in such form and amount as the Government Body may find necessary to protect the safety and general welfare of the community. 
Sec. 5-406. - Application and fee. 
A.  No Temporary Special Event Permit shall be issued until an application has been submitted to the City Clerk and the appropriate fee paid. The application shall be made on the appropriate form provided by the City Clerk a minimum of ten (10) working days prior to the proposed event. 
    Incomplete applications shall not be processed or accepted for processing. An application shall be accompanied by the following items as applicable: 
1.  A letter from the applicant describing the proposed event, the hours of operation, the duration of the event, anticipated attendance, and any structures used in conjunction with the event. 
2.  A sketch plan showing to scale the location of the proposed activities and structures in relation to existing buildings, parking areas, streets and property lines as shown on the approved site plan. In no event shall structures or display areas be located any closer than 25 feet to public right-of-ways adjacent to the property. 
3.  A letter from the property owner or manager, if different from the applicant, providing permission for the special event to occur on the property. 
4.  A separate application will need to be made to the Community Development Division for any signs to be displayed in conjunction with the special event. In no event shall signs be displayed on the public right-of-way. Signs for commercial activities shall only be displayed during hours of operation. 
B.  Each application for a Temporary Special Event Permit shall be accompanied by an application fee. The fee for all applications subject to administrative review, including Type 1 events not meeting the requirements of Section 5-403, and the review fee for Type 4 applications shall be $50.00. The review fee for Type 5 applications and all applications subject to Governing Body review shall be $100.00. 
C.  The approved Temporary Special Event Permit issued shall be available on site for inspection for the duration of the event. 
ARTICLE V. - VALUABLE PROPERTY DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
See Article XIII, Pawnbrokers and Precious Metal Dealers. 

ARTICLE VI. - AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE AND JUNK YARDS 

Sec. 5-601. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words shall mean: 
    Junk is any old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste or junked, dismantled, wrecked automobiles or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material. (K.S.A. 68-2203) 
    Junk yard is an establishment which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the term shall include garbage dump. 
    Salvage/automobile graveyard/yard is any lot or establishment, exposed to the weather, upon which more than five (5) motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling automobile parts, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled or inoperative motor vehicles. (K.S.A. 68-2203) 
Sec. 5-602. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm, corporation, or partnership shall maintain or operate an automobile salvage yard or junk yard without first having obtained a permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the Community Development Division, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, state sales tax identification number, and the location of the premises where the business is to be operated. An annual fee as set by a fee schedule shall be charged. In addition, prior to a permit being issued, the permittee shall have obtained a Conditional Use Permit which shall be subject to all City planning and zoning ordinances and regulations. 
Sec. 5-603. - Fence required. 
    A salvage or junk yard shall be entirely enclosed by a fence eight (8) feet in height, which shall be kept in good repair at all times, and shall be constructed of plank board so as to exclude such yard from public view. 
Sec. 5-604. - Advertisements. 
    The fence enclosing an automobile salvage or junk yard shall not be used for bill posting or other advertisement purposes, except that a space not larger than two (2) feet by eight (8) feet may be used for the advertisement of the business. Where such yard fronts on more than one street, the use of space for advertisements shall extend to each street on which the yard adjoins. 
Sec. 5-605. - Contents height. 
    The contents of an automobile salvage or junk yard shall not be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of the fence surrounding it. 
Sec. 5-606. - Demolishing or wrecking cars/junk. 
    All work in connection with the crushing of vehicles or junk shall meet the following requirements; 
A.  The crushing or demolishing of vehicles and junk shall be permitted only on weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
B.  Vehicles shall have all gasoline drained and tanks removed prior to the crushing process. 
C.  All components containing any fluids shall be thoroughly drained and or removed prior to the crushing process. 
D.  All refrigerants shall be removed and reclaimed in an approved manner prior to the crushing process. 
E.  All batteries shall be removed prior to the crushing process. 
F.  The crushing process shall take place only in an area designed and constructed to control and collect any fluids not previously drained from the material being crushed and any fluids leaking from the crushing equipment. 
Sec. 5-607. - Open fires. 
    No fires for the burning of rubbish, trash, automobiles, or any parts thereof, or other waste matters, shall be permitted. 
Sec. 5-608. - Rubbish and waste matter. 
    An automobile salvage yard shall, as far as practicable, be kept clear and clean of all rubbish or waste matter. 
Sec. 5-609. - Purchases by operator. 
    No purchaser operating or maintaining an automobile salvage or junk yard shall purchase any vehicles, parts or accessories, or junk, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
Sec. 5-610. - Access to City officers. 
    All automobile salvage and junk yard operations, together with the books required, shall at all times be open for inspection to all officers of the City having police power, and the Code Enforcement Officer. 
Sec. 5-611. - Serial numbers. 
    No purchaser shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have in his possession any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which the manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of the vehicle, part or accessory. Every person to whom is offered for sale any motor vehicle, part, or accessory from which has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or identification mark shall immediately notify the chief of police. 
Sec. 5-612. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation shall continue. 
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE TOW LOTS/STORAGE FACILITIES 

Sec. 5-701. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words shall mean: 
    Vehicle tow lots means any lot or establishment exposed to the weather, upon which there are more than five (5) motor vehicles of any kind incapable of being operated, which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping wrecked, ruined, or inoperative motor vehicles. 
Sec. 5-702. - Permit required. 
    No person shall maintain or operate a vehicle tow lot on any property within the City limits of Lansing, Kansas without first meeting all requirements for a conditional use permit as outlined in the zoning ordinance of the City. 
Sec. 5-703. - General requirements. 
    Every person, firm, corporation or partnership owning or operating any tow lot within the City limits of Lansing shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
A.  Lot surface shall consist of a minimum of 2 inches of crushed rock base treated with a state approved chemical to inhibit the growth of vegetation. 
B.  Every vehicle towed or stored in the lot shall have written on the windshield, in a medium capable of withstanding the elements, the date the vehicle was towed. 
    Every lot shall be entirely enclosed by a chain link fence six (6) feet in height. Barbed wire strands shall be allowed provided said strands are positioned vertically above the chain link fencing or sloped inward towards the interior of the tow lot at an angle of not more than 45 below the vertical. 
Sec. 5-704. - Advertisements. 
    The fence enclosing a vehicle tow lot shall not be used for bill posting or other advertisement purposes, except that a space not larger than two (2) feet by eight (8) feet may be used for the advertisement of the business. Where such yard fronts on more than one street, the use of space for advertisements shall extend to each street on which the yard adjoins. 
Sec. 5-705. - Storage limits. 
A.  For any vehicle storage where a fee is charged on a per day basis, the maximum period of storage shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days. 
    Under extreme circumstances where a vehicle cannot be removed before the 120-day time limit, a thirty (30) day extension may be approved by the Governing Body. Every request for extension of time must be received by the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to conclusion of the 120-day limit. 
B.  For any vehicle storage where a fee is charged on a monthly basis or where no fee is charged, the maximum period of storage shall not exceed thirty (30) days unless the vehicles are stored in a garage or other building. 
Sec. 5-706. - Crushing and removing stored vehicles. 
    All work in connection with the crushing of vehicles or junk shall meet the meet the following requirements; 
A.  The crushing of vehicles shall be permitted only on weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
B.  Vehicles shall have all gasoline drained and tanks removed prior to the crushing process. 
C.  All components containing any fluids shall be thoroughly drained and or removed prior to the crushing process. 
D.  All refrigerants shall be removed and reclaimed in an approved manner prior to the crushing process. KDHE is specific on having these items removed. 
E.  All batteries shall be removed prior to the crushing process. 
F.  The crushing process shall take place only in an area designed and constructed to control and collect any fluids not previously drained from the material being crushed and any fluids leaking from the crushing equipment. 
Sec. 5-707. - Open fire. 
    No fires for the burning of rubbish, trash, automobiles, or any parts thereof, or other waste matters, shall be permitted. 
Sec. 5-708. - Access to City officers. 
    All automobile tow lots shall be available for inspection during normal business hours by any officer of the City having police power and code enforcement officers. 
Sec. 5-709. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty ($150.00) nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation shall continue. 
    Any person, firm, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this article shall have the conditional use permit issued to said owner revoked by the Governing Body. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLE REPAIR FACILITIES 

Sec. 5-801. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following shall mean, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Inoperable means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned, or unable to perform the function or purpose for which it was originally constructed or without a valid, current state registration from the State of Kansas. 
    Vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor, ATV, recreational vehicle or motorcycle which as originally built contained an engine, regardless of whether it contains an engine at any other time; 
    Vehicle Repair Facility. Any business establishment intended for repair and maintenance, including both mechanical or body work, of any vehicle. The repair facility shall include any building housing the repair functions, and associated parking area and grounds of the premises; 
Sec. 5-802. - Presumptions. 
    Any one of the following conditions in existence for a period exceeding sixty (60) days shall raise the rebuttable presumption that a vehicle is inoperable: 
A.  Absence of a current registration plate upon the vehicle; 
B.  Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains, or other supports; 
C.  Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon any street or highway; 
D.  Placement of the vehicle on the premises of vehicle repair facility with one or more flat tires. 
Sec. 5-803. - General requirements. 
    Every person, firm, corporation or partnership owning or operating any auto repair facility within the City limits of Lansing shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
A.  Unlawful storage. Except as provided in subsection B., it shall be unlawful for any person or agent, either as owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of any vehicle repair facility to park, store, or deposit, or permit to be parked, stored, or deposited thereon, an inoperable vehicle unless the vehicle is enclosed in a garage or other building. 
B.  Storage limits. The maximum period of storage shall not exceed sixty (60) days for any vehicle not enclosed in a garage or other building. Under extreme circumstances where a vehicle cannot be repaired before the 60 day time limit, a thirty (30) day extension may be approved by the code enforcement officer. Every request for extension of time must be in writing, and clearly and concisely state the reasons for support of the request for an extension be received by the Code Enforcement Officer, at least ten (10) days prior to conclusion of the 60 day limit. An extension of time form can be obtained from City hall. 
C.  Open fires. No fires for the burning of rubbish, trash, automobiles, or any parts thereof, or other waste matters, shall be permitted. 
D.  Crushing and removing stored vehicles. No vehicles shall be permitted to be crushed on the premises of any vehicle repair facility. 
Sec. 5-804. - Compliance inspections. 
    Each vehicle repair facility within the City of Lansing, may be inspected randomly for code compliance of all vehicles on the property. The Code Enforcement Officer, or other City official, may record the date of the inspection along with the make and license number of each vehicle on the property. This inspection, and recording of information, may be used to monitor the time each vehicle remains on the vehicle repair facility. In addition, this inspection will assure each vehicle is within City codes regarding license and being operational. After the inspection, a copy of the collected information may be provided to that vehicle repair facility. 
Sec. 5-805. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty ($150.00) nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation shall continue. 
ARTICLE IX. - BATH HOUSES; MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS; TATTOO AND/OR BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 5-901. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bath house shall refer to the occupation of maintaining and operating for compensation any services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy. 
    Body painting studios shall refer to the occupation of maintaining, operating and offering any services for compensation of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially nude, by any means of application, technique, or process. 
    Body piercing shall refer to the means of puncturing the skin of a person by aid of needles or other instruments designed or used to puncture the skin for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other objects in or through the human body, except puncturing the external part of the human ear which shall not be included in this definition. 
    Employee shall refer to any person, other than masseurs or masseuses, who renders any service to a permittee under this article, who receives compensation from the permittee or patron. 
    Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
    Massage establishment means any establishment having a place of business where any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in subsection E. for compensation. 
    Masseur or masseuse means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as herein defined. 
    Modeling studios shall refer to the occupation of maintaining, operating and offering any services for compensation of modeling for the purpose of reproducing the human body, wholly or partially in the nude, by means of photograph, painting, sketching, drawing or otherwise. To be included within the definition of modeling studios is the occupation or practices for compensation of offering one's body, wholly or partially in the nude, for the purpose of having designs of whatever nature applied thereto by whatever process or technique with any kind of substance whether it be transparent or non-transparent. 
    Off-premises massage therapy means any activities mentioned in subsection E. performed outside of a licensed massage establishment as defined in subsection D. 
    Patron means any person over 18 years of age who utilizes or receives the services of any establishment subject to the provisions of this article and under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefore. 
    Recognized school means any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study not less than 70 hours to be given in not more than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such. 
    Tattoo means the indelible mar, figure, or decorative design introduced by insertion of nontoxic dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the skin upon the body of a live human being. 
    Tattooing refers to the process by which the skin is marked or colored by insertion of nontoxic dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the skin so as to form indelible marks for cosmetic or figurative purposes. 
Sec. 5-902. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall operate a bath house, massage establishment, body painting studio or modeling studio, as defined herein, without first having obtained a permit therefore issued by the City Clerk and approved by the Chief of Police and the Community Development Division of Public Works. A separate permit shall be required for each and every separate place of business conducted by any one permittee. Such permit shall be valid for a period of one year. 
Sec. 5-903. - Employee permit required. 
    No person shall be employed as an attendant, masseur, masseuse, model or as an employee of any kind in any establishment subject to the provisions of this article, unless he or she has a valid employee's permit issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of this article. No massage therapist may provide off-premise massage therapy unless he or she has a valid employee's permit issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 5-904. - Application for business permit; fees. 
A.  Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct any such establishment shall file an application with the City Clerk and pay an annual filing fee to the City Clerk based on the current fee schedule, which shall not be refundable or pro-rated. 
B.  The application for a permit to operate any such establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the services to be provided, the proposed place of business and facilities therefore, and the name, address, and telephone number of each applicant, including any stockholder holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, any partner, when a partnership is involved, and any manager. 
    In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit shall furnish the following information: 
1.  Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years old; 
2.  Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches, and fingerprints; 
3.  Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
4.  The massage, bath house, modeling studio, and body painting studio business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another City or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
5.  Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense for which convicted and the circumstances thereof; 
6.  Authorization for the City of Lansing, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
7.  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a current certificate of registration issued by the Kansas Secretary of State. 
Sec. 5-905. - Application for employee permits; fees. 
    Any person employed to perform any services in a massage establishment, bath house, modeling studio, or body painting studio, or providing off-premise massage therapy as defined herein, shall file a written application with and pay an annual filing fee to the City Clerk of $50.00, which shall not be refundable or pro-rated. 
    The application for an employee permit shall contain the following: 
A.  Name, address, and telephone number; 
B.  Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches; 
C.  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and fingerprints; 
D.  Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years old; 
E.  Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
F.  Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime except minor traffic violations. (If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction.) 
G.  The business name and position or function the applicant is being hired to perform within such establishment, if applicable; 
H.  Authorization for the City of Lansing, its agents, and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
Sec. 5-906. - Education requirements. 
    Any person, including an applicant for a massage establishment permit, who engages or intends to engage in the practice of massage as herein defined, shall upon making application for a permit, supply the name and address of the recognized school attended, the date attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing the applicant has successfully completed any statutory requirements of instruction in the theory, method, or practice of massage and has obtained and/or maintained any required licensure. 
Sec. 5-907. - Issuance of business permit. 
    After the filing of an application in the proper form, the City Clerk and/or their designee, the Chief of Police and/or their designee, and the Community Development Superintendent and/or their designee shall examine the application, and after such examination, shall issue a permit for a massage establishment, bath house, modeling studio or body painting studio, unless or more of the following applies: 
A.  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the City, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
B.  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the City's building, zoning, and health regulations; 
C.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any crime which would make any person ineligible to receive a permit hereunder, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application; 
D.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the City in conjunction therewith; 
E.  The applicant has had a massage establishment, bath house, body painting studio or modeling studio as defined herein, or other similar permit or license, denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above causes by the City or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application; 
F.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of 18 years; 
G.  The manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business would be ineligible to receive a permit under the provisions of this article. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article shall at all times be displayed by the permittee in an open and conspicuous place on the premises where the permitted business is conducted. 
Sec. 5-908. - Issuance of employee permit. 
    The City Clerk shall issue an employee permit within 21 days following application, unless he or she finds that: 
A.  The applicant for the employee permit has been convicted of a felony; an offense involving sexual misconduct with children; obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution, or pandering; 
B.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the City in conjunction therewith; 
C.  That the correct permit fee has not been tendered to the City, and in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; and 
D.  In the case of a masseur or masseuse that the applicant has not successfully completed a resident course of study or learning from a recognized school as required under the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 5-909. - Revocation or suspension of business permit. 
A.  Any permit issued for a massage establishment, bath house, modeling studio or body painting studio may be revoked or suspended by the Governing Body after a public hearing before the Governing Body where it is found that any of the provisions of this article are violated or where the permittee or any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, has been convicted of any offense found in Sections 5-908 and 5-909 herein and the permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of the violation or conviction, or in any case, where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer or health inspector of the City to inspect the premises or the operations therein. 
B.  The Governing Body, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least 10 days written notice of the charges against him or her and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Governing Body, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing. 
Sec. 5-910. - Revocation of employee permit. 
A.  An employee permit issued by the City Clerk shall be revoked or suspended after a public hearing before the chief of police, or his or her designated representative, where it appears that the employee has been convicted of any offense enumerated in Section 5-904. 
B.  The chief of police, before revoking or suspending any employee permit, shall give the employee at least 10 day's written notice of the examination into his or her conviction record and the opportunity for a public hearing before the chief of police or his or her designated representative, at which hearing the relevant facts regarding the occurrence of the conviction shall be determined. 
Sec. 5-911. - Facilities. 
    No permit to conduct a massage establishment, bath house, modeling studio or body painting studio shall be issued unless an inspection by the Community Development Division or authorized representative reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the business' operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for every patron. No service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within any permitted establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked; however, these requirements shall not apply to tanning booths. 
B.  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
C.  Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. The health inspector shall certify that the proposed business establishment complies with all of the requirements of this section and shall give or send such certification to the chief of police. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. 
Sec. 5-912. - Inspections; immediate right of entry. 
    The Police Department and/or Community Development Division of the City may from time to time make an inspection of each permitted establishment in this City for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer immediate access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. Any failure on the part of any permittee or employee to grant immediate access to such inspector shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any business or employee permit. 
Sec. 5-913. - Operation regulations. 
    The operation of any bath house, massage establishment, modeling studio, or body painting studio shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Such business shall be closed and operations shall cease between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day; 
B.  It shall be unlawful for customers of opposite sex to receive treatment in the same room or the same quarters at the same time; 
C.  No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages, nor the consumption thereof, shall be allowed, permitted or suffered to be done in or upon any premises permitted under the provisions of this article; 
D.  All operators permitted under the provisions of this article shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of business on their permitted premises and for any act or conduct of his or her or any of his or her employees which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this article. Any violation of the City, state or federal laws committed on the permitted premises by any such permittee or employee affecting the eligibility or suitability of such person to hold a license or permit may be grounds for suspension or revocation of same; 
E.  Every portion of a permitted establishment, including appliances and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition; 
F.  All employees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments which use is restricted to the permitted establishment. Provisions for a separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing; 
G.  All employees, masseurs and masseuses must be modestly attired. Diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, form-fitting or tight clothing is prohibited. Clothing must cover the employees', masseurs' or masseuses' chests at all times. Hemlines of skirts, dresses or other such attire may be no higher than the top of the knee; 
H.  The private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur or masseuse. Any contact with a patron's genital area is strictly prohibited; 
I.  All permitted establishments, when applicable, shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in approved, sanitary manner; and 
J.  Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
Sec. 5-914. - Limitations on off-premises massage at residential locations. 
    The operation of any Off-Premise Massage Therapy at residential locations shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Massage Therapy performed at a patron's residence is limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
B.  No service shall be given which is clearly dangerous or harmful in the opinion of the Director of the County Department of Health to the safety or health of any person, after such notice in writing to the licensee from such director; 
C.  All businesses licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of any Massage Therapist and any act which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter; any violation of the City, state, or federal laws committed by any such licensee or Massage Therapist affecting the eligibility or suitability of such person to hold a license may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the Massage Therapist License or Massage Business License; 
D.  All Massage Therapists shall be clean and wear clean outer garments which use is restricted to the licensed Massage Business. 
E.  All Massage Therapists must be modestly attired; diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, form fitting, or tight clothing is prohibited; clothing must cover the Massage Therapists' chests at all times; hemlines of skirts, dresses, or other such attire may be no higher than the top of the knee; 
F.  The private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of a Massage Therapist; any contact with a patron's genital area is strictly prohibited; 
Sec. 5-915. - Limitations on off-premises massage therapy at business locations. 
    The authority granted to a licensee for massage at a business location other than a massage establishment must be permitted by the owner or manager of such business. Massage Therapy at a business location other than a massage establishment is limited to the area above the patron's waist and patrons must remain fully clothed. 
A.  Massage Therapy performed at a business location is limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
B.  No service shall be given which is clearly dangerous or harmful in the opinion of the Director of the County Department of Health to the safety or health of any person, after such notice in writing to the licensee from such director; 
C.  All businesses licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of any Massage Therapist and any act which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter; any violation of the City, state, or federal laws committed by any such licensee or Massage Therapist affecting the eligibility or suitability of such person to hold a license may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the Massage Therapist License or Massage Business License; 
D.  All Massage Therapists shall be clean and wear clean outer garments which use is restricted to the licensed Massage Business; 
E.  All Massage Therapists must be modestly attired; diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, form fitting, or tight clothing is prohibited; clothing must cover the Massage Therapists' chests at all times; hemlines of skirts, dresses, or other such attire may be no higher than the top of the knee. 
Sec. 5-916. - Supervision. 
    A permittee shall have the premises supervised at all times while massages are being performed (Any business rendering on-site massage services shall have one person who qualifies as a masseur or masseuse on the premises at all times while such massage services are being performed). The permittee shall personally supervise the business and shall not violate or permit others to violate, any applicable provision of this article. The violation of any such provision by any agent or employee of the permittee shall constitute a violation by the permittee. 
Sec. 5-917. - Employee and patron registers. 
A.  All operators permitted under the provisions of this article shall keep and maintain on their premises a current register of all their employees showing such employee's name, address and permit number. Such register shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by any health inspector or members of the City's Police Department or Community Development Division. 
B.  Every person who engages in or conducts a permitted establishment shall keep a daily register, approved as to form by the police department, of all patrons, with names, addresses, and hours of arrival and, if applicable, the rooms or cubicles assigned. Said daily register shall at all times during business hours be subject to inspection by City health officials and by the Police Department and shall be kept on file for one year. 
Sec. 5-918. - Persons under age eighteen years old prohibited in bathhouse. 
    No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any permitted business establishment, as masseur, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business or accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
Sec. 5-919. - Advertising. 
    No establishment granted a permit under provisions of this article shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than those services as described in Section 5-901, or that employees, masseurs or masseuses are dressed in any manner other than described in Section 5-914, nor shall any establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any service is available other than those services described in Section 5-901. 
Sec. 5-920. - Transfer of permits; other licenses and fees. 
A.  No massage business, bath house, modeling studio, body painting studio or employee permits are transferable, separate or divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only on the permittee named therein. 
B.  Any applications made, fees paid and permits obtained under the provisions of this article shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other fees, permits or licenses required to be paid or obtained under any other ordinances of this City. 
Sec. 5-921. - Applicability to existing businesses. 
A.  The operators of any existing massage establishment, bath house, modeling studio or body painting studio are required to comply with all provisions of this article within 90 days of the effective date of Ordinance No. 212. 
B.  Applicants for a masseur or masseuse permit may substitute one years' continuous experience as a masseur or masseuse in lieu of the requirement of a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method and work of massage is taught. Such masseur or masseuse must obtain an affidavit attesting to such experience from the owner of the establishment where the continuous year of experience occurred. 
Sec. 5-922. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of State of Kansas, or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishment, nor shall this article apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by this state. 
Sec. 5-923. - Further regulations. 
    The Chief of Police or the health inspector, may, after a public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with but to carry out, the intent of this article. 
Sec. 5-924. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm corporation or partnership violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred ($100.00) [dollars] nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed during or each day on which a violation shall continue. 
Sec. 5-925. - Regulations for tattoo and/or body piercing establishments. 
A.  No person shall perform body piercing or tattooing on or to any person under 18 years of age without prior written and notarized consent of the parent or court appointed guardian of such person and the person giving such consent must be present during the body piercing or tattooing procedure. The written permission and a copy of the letters of guardianship when such permission is given or granted by a guardian, shall be retained by the person administering such body piercing or tattooing for a period of five years. 
B.  No person, including a permanent color technician and tattoo artist, shall perform tattooing, display a sign, or in any other way advertise or purport to be a permanent color technician and tattoo artist unless that person holds a valid license issued by the Kansas State Board of Cosmetology. No person shall perform body piercing, display a sign, or in any other way advertise or purport to be in the business of body piercing unless that person holds a valid license issued by the Kansas State Board of Cosmetology. 
    This does not prevent or affect the use of tattooing, permanent color technology or body piercing by a physician, a person under the control and supervision of a physician, a licensed dentist, a person under the control and supervision of a licensed dentist, an individual performing tattooing, permanent color technology or body piercing solely on such individual's body or any other person specifically permitted to use electrolysis or tattooing by law. 
ARTICLE X. - ADULT RETAIL BUSINESS 

Sec. 5-1001. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section and unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions are adopted: 
    Adult media outlet means a business engaging in the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures, films or other media, if such business is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
1.  For purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a "substantial or significant" portion of a business is devoted to the sale or rental of such items if any one or more of the following criteria are satisfied: 
a.  Fifty percent or more of the sales, measured in dollars over any consecutive ninety-day period, is derived from such items; 
b.  Fifty percent or more of the number of sales transactions, measured over any consecutive ninety-day period, is of such items; 
c.  Fifty percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to such items; 
d.  Fifty percent or more of all inventory consists of such items at any time; 
e.  Fifty percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of such items at any time; 
f.  Fifty percent or more of the stock in trade consists of such items at any time; 
g.  Fifty percent or more of the floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bath rooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to such items at any time. This presumption shall be rebuttable. 
    Adult news rack means any coin- or card-operated device that offers for sale by dispensing printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult retail business means a business which offers for sale or rent instruments, devices, gifts or paraphernalia which are assigned or marketed in connection with specified sexual activities, clothing that graphically depicts specified anatomical areas or any of the materials sold or rented in an "adult media outlet" as defined above, if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." For purposes of this subsection, the presumptions relative to what constitutes a substantial or significant portion of a business set forth in the definition of "adult media outlet" shall apply hereto. In determining whether an item is "designed or marketed for use" in connection with specified sexual activities, the following guidelines may be considered: 
1.  Expert testimony as to the principle use of the item; 
2.  Evidence concerning the total business of a person or business establishment and the type of merchandise involved in the business; 
3.  National and local advertising concerning the use of the item; 
4.  Evidence of advertising concerning the nature of the business establishment; 
5.  Instructions, graphics or other material contained on the item itself or on the packaging material for the item; 
6.  The physical or structural characteristics of the item; 
7.  The manner in which the item displayed, including its proximity to other regulated merchandise or signage relating to items in a display area. 
    Any person may request an interpretive ruling from the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, as to whether a particular item is considered by the City to be "designed or marketed for use" in connection with specified sexual activities. An application for an interpretive ruling shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Chief of Police, and shall be accompanied by such other information as may reasonably be requested under the circumstances pertaining to the specific item about which a ruling is requested. The Chief of Police shall issue a written interpretive ruling within ten business days following submission of a completed application. The decision of the Chief of Police may be appealed to the Governing Body within fifteen days following the interpretive ruling by submitted a written notice of appeal to the City Clerk. 
    The definition of "adult retail business" includes, but is not limited to, any and all of the following specific adult businesses, as defined herein: 
1.  Businesses that offer merchandise for sale or rent. 
    Employee means any and all persons, including managers, employees and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult retail business. 
    Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity at any adult retail business. 
    Minor means any person less than eighteen years of age. 
    Operate means to own, conduct or maintain the affairs of an adult business. 
    Operator means any person owning, operating, conducting or maintaining an adult business. 
    Patron means any person who enters an adult retail business without regard to whether a purchase is made from the adult business or compensation is paid to the adult business or any employee of the adult business for merchandise, or service, provided that the term patron shall not include persons who enter an adult business for the sole purpose of providing service or merchandise to the adult business and who do not remain in the adult business after the purpose has been accomplished including, but not limited to, persons performing construction, repair or maintenance on the premises or delivering goods or merchandise to the adult business and any such similar activity. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, joint venture, government entity, or other entity or group of persons, however organized. 
    Specified anatomical areas mean: 
1.  Uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttocks, female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the areola encircling the nipple, or any combination of the foregoing; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means sexual conduct, including actual or simulated acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts involving animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Sec. 5-1002. - Unlawful operations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an Adult Retail Business in the City unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has obtained a license from the City, or to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the City. 
    It shall be unlawful for any employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly perform any work or service directly related to the operation of an unlicensed Adult Retail Business. 
Sec. 5-1003. - License required for adult retail business. 
A.  The failure to post an adult business license in the manner required herein shall be prima facie evidence that an adult retail business has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any employee, manager or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in an adult business in which an adult business license is not posted in the manner required herein had knowledge that such business is not licensed. 
B.  Any business that engages in the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures, films or other media, if such business is not open to the public in general but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate City officials and inspection by those officials of only those business records necessary for the limited purpose of determining whether such business enterprise is an "Adult Retail Business" as defined herein. This entry and inspection shall take place during hours when such business is open to the public, unless otherwise requested by the business, and shall not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of such business. 
Sec. 5-1004. - License required for managers, employees and independent contractors. 
    It is unlawful for any person to work as an independent contractor, employee, or manager at an adult business without first obtaining a license to do so from the City, or to work as an independent contractor, employee or manager at an adult business after such person's license to do so has been revoked or suspended. 
Sec. 5-1005. - License, classification and fees. 
A.  The license year for all fees required herein shall be from each January 1, through December 31. The application for a license shall be accomplished by payment in full of the fee stated herein, and no application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid. 
B.  All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nontransferable, and license fees shall be nonrefundable. 
C.  The classification of licenses and fees for each shall be as follows: 
1.  Adult business license fee is $500.00 per year; 
2.  Managers license fee is $50.00 per year; 
3.  Employee license fee is $20.00 per year; 
4.  Independent contractor license fee is $20.00. 
Sec. 5-1006. - License limited to one identifiable type of adult use. 
    All adult retail business licenses shall be issued only for the one adult business use listed on the application. Any change in the type of adult use shall invalidate the adult retail business license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use. A separate license is required for each adult use. 
Sec. 5-1007. - Prohibitions. 
    No person shall operate or maintain a sexually oriented massage shop, modeling studio, motion picture theater, or motion picture arcade booth within the City. 
Sec. 5-1008. - Sexually oriented media store. 
    Within any Adult Retail Business, no sexually oriented media store shall be allowed to operate, sell, rent or conduct business unless it prohibits the admittance of persons under the age of 18 into the place of business or provides a clear physical separation within the store between sexually oriented media and media which is not sexually oriented. 
Sec. 5-1009. - License applications. 
A.  Adult Retail Business License. All persons desiring to secure a license to operate an adult business as required herein shall make a verified application with the City Clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person who owns the adult business. The application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by its President. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a partner. In all other instances where the owner is not an individual, where applicable, the application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the owner. The City Clerk may require proof of authorization before accepting an application. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall require all of the following information: 
1.  The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation, date, place of birth and social security number of the applicant. 
2.  The tax identification number and registered agent if the owner is required to have a tax identification number or registered agent. 
3.  The name of the adult retail business, a description of the type of adult business to be performed on the licensed premises, and the name of the owner of the premises where the adult business will be located. 
4.  The names, residence addresses, social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership or limited liability partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the same information for all corporate officers and directors and stockholders or members who own more than 25% interest in the corporation. 
5.  A statement from the applicant whether the applicant, or any corporate officer or director, or stockholder, partner or member who owns more than 25% interest in such entity in previously operating in this or another City, county or state, has had an adult business license of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity subjected to the suspension or revocation. 
6.  A statement from the applicant, all partners or each corporate officer and director that each such person has not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony, whichever event is later, within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography or related offenses, or controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Kansas Statutes or municipal ordinances. 
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant, each partner or each corporate officer and director has not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years immediately preceding the application where such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics. 
7.  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a current certificate of registration issued by the Kansas Secretary of State. 
8.  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this ordinance regulating adult businesses. Failure to provide the information and documentation required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within 10 working days of the date the application is received by the City Clerk. 
B.  Manager, Employee or Independent Contractor License. All persons desiring to secure a license to be a manager, employee or independent contractor shall make a verified application with the City Clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be a manager, employee or independent contractor. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall require all of the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used. 
2.  If applicable, the name and address of each adult retail business where the applicant intends to work as a manager, employee or independent contractor. 
3.  A statement from the applicant that the applicant has not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony, whichever event is later, within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography and related offenses, or controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Kansas Statutes or municipal ordinances. 
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant has not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years immediately preceding the application where such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics. 
4.  The applicant shall present to the City Clerk, who shall copy, documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America; 
e.  Any other form of picture identification issued by a governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the City Clerk; or 
f.  Any other form of identification deemed reliable by the City Clerk. 
Failure to provide the information required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within ten (10) working days of the date the application was received by the City Clerk. 
C.  Application Processing. Upon receipt of an application for an adult business, manager, employee or independent contractor, the City Clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of the application to the Chief of Police for investigation of the application. In addition, the City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the Public Works Director. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to investigate such application to determine whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the application meets the requirements herein for issuance of the license for which the application is made. The Chief of Police shall report the results of the investigation to the City Clerk not later than ten (10) working days from the date the application is received by the City Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to determine whether the structure where the adult business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building code, and fire and property maintenance ordinances of the City. The Public Works Director shall report the results of their investigation to the City Clerk not later than ten (10) working days from the date the application is received by the City Clerk. Upon receipt of the reports from the Chief of Police and the Public Works Director, the City Clerk shall schedule the application for consideration by the Governing Body at the earliest meeting consistent with the notification requirements established by law, provided the license application for an adult business, manager, employee or independent contractor license shall be approved or disapproved within thirty (30) days from the date the application is received by the City Clerk. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date when the Governing Body will consider the application and shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at that meeting. 
Sec. 5-1010. - Examination of application, issuance of license, disapproval. 
A.  The Governing Body shall examine an application for an adult retail business license or a manager, employee or independent contractor license within thirty (30) days of the date such application was received by the City Clerk. After such examination, the Governing Body shall approve the issuance of a license only if the appropriate license fee has been paid, applicant is qualified, and all the applicable requirements set forth herein are met. No license shall be approved for any person ineligible pursuant to the provisions herein. All incomplete applications shall be denied. 
B.  The record of the Governing Body shall show the action taken on the application, and if the license is granted, the Governing Body shall direct the City Clerk to issue the proper license. The adult retail business license and all manager, employee and independent contractor licenses shall state that it is not transferable to other persons or entities and the calendar year for which it is issued. 
C.  If an application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the applicant's last known address and the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. 
Sec. 5-1011. - License-ineligibility and disqualification. 
    No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to: 
A.  An applicant for an adult retail business license if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The premises for which an application for an adult business has been made is located within 1000 feet of any school, church, licensed child care center, public park, or hospital which uses are located within the City limits. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the premises from which the adult business would be operated to the nearest point on the property line of any school, church, licensed day care center, public park or hospital which uses are located within the City; 
a.  Provided further, the list of protected uses set forth herein shall exclude streets, alleys and highway rights-of-way; 
b.  Provided further, any school, church or licensed day care center located within commercially zoned property pursuant to a special use permit shall not be included as a protected use. 
2.  The premises for which an application for an adult business has been made is located within 1000 feet of any other adult business for which there is a license issued by the City. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to an intervening structures or objects from the premises from which an adult business would be operated to the nearest point on the property line of such other adult business located within the City; provided the list of protected uses set forth herein shall exclude streets, alleys and highway rights-of-way; 
3.  The applicant knowingly failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
4.  The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
5.  The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the City, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration by the Governing Body; 
6.  The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein during the time period set forth herein; 
7.  The applicant has had an adult business license or comparable license revoked or suspended in this or any other City during the past five (5) years; or 
B.  An applicant for a manager, employee or independent contractor license if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein during the time period set forth herein; 
2.  The applicant knowingly failed to provide all of the information required on the application; 
3.  The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
4.  The applicant has had a similar license revoked or suspended in this or any other City during the past five (5) years. 
Sec. 5-1012. - Standards of conduct. 
    The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all adult retail businesses, their employees and all managers, and patrons of adult retail businesses, while on or about the premises of the business: 
A.  Identification cards. All persons or any manager, employee or independent contractor issued a license by the City Clerk under the provisions contained herein shall, at all times when working in an adult business, have in their possession a valid identification card issued by the City, bearing the permit number, the employee's physical description and a photograph of such employee. Such identification cards shall be laminated to prevent alteration. 
B.  Age restriction. Only persons 18 years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of any adult entertainment business. 
C.  Exterior observation. The premises of all adult businesses will be so constructed as to insure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with an anteroom or foyer will be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building. 
D.  Exterior display. No adult retail business will be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material or persons depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
E.  Nudity prohibited. No manager, employee, independent contractor or patron in an adult business shall appear nude, unclothed, in less than opaque attire or in any fashion that exposes to view any specified anatomical area. 
F.  Closed booths or rooms prohibited. The premises of all adult retail businesses shall be physically arranged in such manner that the entire interior portion of any booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls is visible from a common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever. 
G.  Hours of operation. No adult retail business may be open or in use between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day other than a Sunday when the business may not be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. 
H.  Lighting required. The premises of all Adult Retail Businesses shall be equipped with overhead lighting of every place to which customers are permitted access, at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is present in or on the premises. 
I.  Ventilation and sanitation requirements. The premises of all adult retail businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition. Separate rest rooms for men and women shall at all times be maintained and kept in a sanitary condition. 
J.  Certain acts prohibited. 
1.  No manager, employee or patron shall perform any specified sexual activities as defined herein, wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict any of the specified sexual activities or participate in any act of prostitution as prohibited by state law or municipal ordinance while on the premises of an adult business. 
2.  All dancing or other live entertainment. 
3.  No owner, employee, or patron of an adult retail business while on the premises of said business shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of such owner, employee, or patron, whether such specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed. 
4.  No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of an adult retail business shall: 
a.  Permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages to be brought upon the premises unless authorized to do so by a properly issued and current drinking establishment or cereal malt beverage license; 
b.  Allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or narcotic on the premises; 
c.  Allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to be in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment business; 
d.  Allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution on the premises, as prohibited by state law or municipal ordinance; or 
e.  Allow or permit a violation of this ordinance or any other City ordinance provision or state law. 
    The Building Inspector shall certify that the proposed business establishment complies with all of the requirements of this section and shall give or send such certification to the City Clerk. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. The appropriate City official may recommend the issuance of a license contingent upon the compliance with any requirements in this section or other City ordinances. 
Sec. 5-1013. - License-Posting or display. 
A.  Every person licensed as an adult retail business shall post such license in a conspicuous place and manner on the adult business premises. 
B.  Every person holding a manager, employee or independent contractor license shall post his or her license in his or her work area on the adult business premises so it shall be readily available for inspection by City authorities responsible for enforcement of this ordinance. 
Sec. 5-1014. - Manager on premises. 
A.  A manager shall be on duty at all adult retail businesses at all times the premises are open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any person who works within the premises possesses a current and valid license and that such licenses are prominently posted. It shall also be the responsibility of the manager to insure minors do not enter upon the premises of an adult retail business. 
Sec. 5-1015. - Inspectors and inspections. 
    All adult businesses shall permit representatives of the police department or any other City official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all applicable regulations and laws. 
Sec. 5-1016. - Suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal-License. 
    Whenever the City Clerk has information that: 
A.  The owner or operator of an adult retail business or a holder of a license has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this ordinance; or 
B.  There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this ordinance that have occurred under such circumstances, that the owner or operator of an adult business knew or should have known that such violations were committed; or 
C.  The adult retail business license or a license for a manager, employee, independent contractor license was knowingly obtained through false statements in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or 
D.  The adult retail business license or the manager, employee or independent contractor licensee knowingly failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or 
E.  The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director holding an adult retail business license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided herein; or 
F.  If the holder of a manager, employee or independent contractor license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided herein, then the City Clerk shall make this information known to the Governing Body, which, upon five (5) days written notice to the person holding the license, shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the Governing Body may take any of the following actions: 
1.  Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days; 
2.  Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year; or 
3.  Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one year, on the condition that no further violations of the ordinance occur during the period of probation. If a violation does occur and after a hearing the violation is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year. 
Sec. 5-1017. - Renewal. 
A.  A license may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year, and renewal applications for such licenses shall be submitted on or before December 1 of each calendar year. 
B.  Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be renewed by issuance of a new license in the manner provided herein. 
C.  If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time provided herein, the expiration of such license shall not be affected, and a new application shall be required. 
Sec. 5-1018. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this ordinance. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, or be punished by incarceration for up to six (6) months, or by both such fine and incarceration. Each day's violation of, or failure, refusal or neglect to comply with, any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
Sec. 5-1019. - Regulations. 
    The City Clerk shall have the power to promulgate regulations as may be necessary and feasible for the carrying out of the duties of his/her office and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 5-1020. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this ordinance, or the application thereof to any circumstances, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 5-1021. - Application to existing businesses. 
A.  The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all adult businesses existing on the effective date of this code as well as to all adult businesses established after the effective date of this code. 
B.  Any adult business lawfully operating that does not comply with the provisions herein shall be deemed a nonconforming business. The nonconforming business will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six (6) months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming businesses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the business may be changed to a conforming business. If two (2) or more adult businesses are within 1000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming business and any later established business is nonconforming. 
C.  An adult retail business lawfully operating as a conforming business is not rendered nonconforming by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the adult business license, of a school, church, licensed day care center, public park or hospital and within 1000 feet of the adult business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
D.  Any nonconforming business may apply to the Governing Body for an extension of time beyond that date provided herein within which to terminate the nonconforming business or make the business conforming. No such extension of time shall be granted for a period longer than one (1) year after the termination date otherwise set forth herein and shall be granted only upon a showing of extreme hardship. 
ARTICLE XII. - REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBERS 

Sec. 5-1201. - Serial numbers; removing, altering. 
    No person shall destroy, remove, cover, conceal, alter, deface or cause to be destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced, the manufacturer's original number, or serial number or other distinguishing number or mark on any phonograph, radio or television receiver, combination thereof, radio device or accessory, outboard motor, piano or other article which bears a serial number attached by the manufacturer, with the intent to disguise such property when the person knows or has reason to know such property is stolen. Possession of any such articles shall be prima facie evidence of violation thereof. 
Sec. 5-1202. - Sale of article after removal of serial numbers. 
    No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any phonograph, radio or television receiver, combination thereof, radio device or accessory, outboard motor, piano or other article from which the manufacturer's original number, or serial number or other distinguishing number or mark has been removed or which has been destroyed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced, knowing or having reason to know such property to be stolen. The sale or offer for sale of any such articles shall be prima facie evidence of violation hereof. 
Sec. 5-1203. - Possession of article after removal of serial numbers. 
    No person shall buy or in any manner receive, or have in his or her possession any article mentioned in this article on which the manufacturer's original number, mark, serial number or other distinguishing number or mark has been destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced, with reason to believe the property to be stolen. Possession of any such articles shall be prima facie evidence of violation hereof. 
Sec. 5-1204. - Penalty, disposition of property. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. Property taken as evidence pending prosecution shall, after conviction, be retained by the police for such reasonable period of time as is necessary to locate the rightful owner, and if such owner is not located after reasonable efforts, then the property shall be remarked and sold at public auction. 
ARTICLE XIII. - PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS 

Sec. 5-1301. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Pawnbroker means any person who loans money on deposit or personal property or other valuable thing, other than intangible personal property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property on the condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. "Pawnbroker" does not include any person operating under the supervision of the state banking commissioner, credit union administrator or the consumer credit commissioner of this state. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association. 
    Precious metal means gold, silver, or platinum group metals or any used articles or other used personal property containing such metals, but shall not include coins purchased for their numismatic value rather than their metal content or ingots or other industrial residue or by-products composed of such metals purchased from manufacturing firms. 
    Precious metal dealer means any person who engages in the business of purchasing precious metal for the purpose of reselling such metal in any form. 
Sec. 5-1302. - Licensing and application. 
    No person shall engage or continue in business as a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer without first obtaining a license therefor. 
A.  Application for such license shall be in writing and shall state the full name and place of residence of the applicant; or if the applicant be a partnership, of each member thereof; or if a corporation or association, of each officer, shareholder or member thereof. The application shall include the address of the place(s) where the business is to be conducted, the hours of the day and days of the week during which the applicant proposes to engage in the business of pawnbroking or dealing in precious metals at each such place, and such other information as may be necessary to determine the applicant's qualifications for a license. Each applicant shall submit with his or her application: 
1.  A statement that he or she is the holder of a valid registration certificate issued by the Director of Revenue pursuant to K.S.A. 79-3608 for each place of business for which application for a license is made; and 
2.  A detailed inventory and description of all goods, wares, merchandise, precious metals or other property held in pledge or for sale at the time of the application at each place of business stated therein, indicating whether the same was received in pledge, purchased as secondhand merchandise, or precious metal purchased for resale. 
3.  The license application shall be in a form approved by the Attorney General. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 which shall be paid annually upon renewal of the license. 
Sec. 5-1303. - Qualifications. 
    No license or any renewal thereof shall be granted to: 
A.  Any person who is not a citizen of the United States; 
B.  Any person who has not been an actual resident of the State of Kansas for at least two (2) years immediately preceding the date of his or her application; 
C.  Any person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a felony under the laws of this state, or any other state, of the United States, or shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such offense within the ten (10) years immediately prior to such person's application for a license; 
D.  Any person who has had his or her license revoked for cause under the provisions of this article or any provision of state law relating to pawnbrokers; 
E.  Any person who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
F.  Any person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application; 
G.  Any person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, unless he or she has a written lease therefor for at least three-fourths (3/4) of the period for which the license is to be issued; 
H.  Any person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than age, citizenship, and residence requirements; 
I.  Any partnership, unless all of the partners shall be eligible to receive a license as an individual; and 
J.  A corporation, if any officer, manager, director or stockholder would be ineligible to receive a license as an individual. 
Sec. 5-1304. - Posting of license. 
    A license issued in accordance with Section 5-1302 shall be obtained for each place of business and such license shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business. 
Sec. 5-1305. - Change in location of place of business; duplicate license. 
    Whenever a licensee shall change his or her place of business to another location within the City, he or she shall immediately give written notice to the City Clerk, who shall then issue a duplicate license which shall show, in addition, the change in location and the date thereof. The old license shall be returned to the Clerk as soon as the change in location has taken place. 
Sec. 5-1306. - Record of transactions. 
A.  Every pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business a clean and legible register, and at the time of making a loan, shall enter in writing: 
1.  The date, duration, amount and charges of every loan made; 
2.  A full and accurate description of the property pledged; and 
3.  The name, age, residence, and driver's license or other personal identification number of the pledger. 
B.  Every precious metal dealer shall keep at his or her place of business a clean and legible register, and at the time of making a loan, shall enter in writing: 
1.  The date of the purchase; 
2.  A full and accurate description of each item purchased, including any identifying letters, numbers, or marks on the item; and 
3.  The name, age, residence and driver's license or other personal identification number of the seller. 
    The record required by this section shall be maintained by the pawnbroker or precious metal dealer at the place of business for not less than one year following the date of the transaction. 
Sec. 5-1307. - Report of property pledged or purchased; required holding period for precious metal. 
A.  On or before Tuesday of each week, or at more frequent intervals if required by City ordinance or county resolution, every pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall report the description of all property received in pledge or purchased as a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer during the preceding calendar week, in whatever quantity received. Such report shall include all property purchased as secondhand merchandise at wholesale, secondhand merchandise taken in for sale or possessed on consignment for sale and secondhand merchandise taken in trade. No such report need be made concerning property or merchandise acquired from another pawnbroker or precious metal dealer licensed in this state in a transaction involving the purchase or other acquisition from the other pawnbroker or precious metal dealer of the other pawnbroker's or dealer's stock in trade, or a substantial part thereof in bulk, where the other pawnbroker has made the reports required by this section with respect to such property or merchandise. 
B.  The report shall be submitted to the Chief of Police. 
C.  All reports made pursuant to this section shall comply with and be submitted in accordance with the terms of any applicable City ordinances or county resolutions requiring such reporting. 
D.  Every precious metal dealer shall retain in the dealer's possession for a period of 10 days all precious metal purchased as a precious metal dealer, and such metal shall remain in the condition in which it was purchased. The ten-day period shall commence on the date that the appropriate police chief or sheriff receives the report of its acquisition in compliance with this section. If the police chief or sheriff has probable cause to believe that any precious metal reported by a dealer has been stolen, the police chief or sheriff may give written notice to the dealer to retain such metal for an additional period of 15 days. Upon such notice, the dealer shall retain such metal in an unaltered condition for the additional fifteen-day period unless the police chief or sheriff notifies the dealer in writing that the waiting period is terminated at an earlier time. 
E.  Reports made pursuant to this section shall be available for inspection only by law enforcement officers and county and district attorneys and their employees, for law enforcement purposes. 
Sec. 5-1308. - Loans secured by pledged goods. 
    Every loan made by a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer for which goods are received in pledge as security shall be evidenced by a written contract, in ink, a copy of which shall be furnished to the borrower. The loan contract shall set forth the loan period, which shall be one (1) month, the date on which the loan is due and payable and the charges, and it shall clearly inform the borrower of his right to redeem the pledge during the redemption period of two (2) months after due date. Except as otherwise provided herein, the holder of any such contract shall be presumed to be the person entitled to redeem the pledge, and the pawnbroker shall deliver the pledge to the person presenting the contract, upon payment of the principal and charges. 
    Every pawnbroker shall retain in his possession, after the date on which the loan became due and payable, every article pledged to him for a redemption period of two (2) months. During such period, the borrower may redeem the pledged articles, upon payment of the principal and charges. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to sell or transfer title or possession of any pledged property until the expiration of such period of redemption. 
    If any pledged article is not redeemed within such redemption period, the pawnbroker shall become vested with all right, title and interest of the pledger, or his assigns, to such pledged article, to hold and dispose of as his own property. Any other provision of law relating to the foreclosure and sale of pledges shall not be applicable to any pledge, the title to which is transferred in accordance with this section. 
Sec. 5-1309. - Loans; interest charges, amounts, terms. 
A.  No pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall contract for, charge or receive directly or indirectly on or in connection with any transaction charges, whether for interest, storage, insurance, service fee, handling, compensation, consideration or expense which in the aggregate are greater than the charges provided and authorized by K.S.A. 16-719. Any other provisions of law relating to interest, storage and such charges shall not be applicable to any pawnbroker transaction made in accordance with K.S.A. 16-719. 
B.  Whenever any loan is made by a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer for which goods are received in pledge: 
1.  A charge may be added in an amount not to exceed 10% per month or 120% per annum of the amount advanced to the borrower; and 
2.  The amount of the loan shall not exceed $5,000.00. 
C.  The term of any loan made shall be one month. Loans may be extended or renewed by the payment of the charges herein provided monthly. The charges authorized herein shall be deemed to be earned at the time the loan is made and shall not be subject to a refund. No insurance charges or any other charges of any nature whatsoever shall be permitted. 
Sec. 5-1310. - Receipts. 
    Every pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall give to any person negotiating or leaving property with him a plainly written or printed ticket, having upon it a full and perfect copy of all the entries required by this article to be kept in the register. No charge shall be made for such copy. 
Sec. 5-1311. - Inspection of register and articles. 
    The licensee's register shall, at all times, be kept open to the inspection of the Chief of Police or officers designated by him. Upon request of the Chief of Police, or other officers designated by him, the licensee must show and exhibit to such officers for inspection any article or articles purchased, taken or reviewed by him, and books, accounts, records, files, safes, and vaults as provided by K.S.A. 16-712. Officers shall have access during regular business hours to the place of business of any licenses for the purpose of periodically inspecting property pledged or purchased in the transaction of business of the licensee and records relating to those transactions to determine if the licensee is complying with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 5-1312. - Absolute purchase: registry and inspection. 
    Every pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall, in the absolute purchase of any personal property, enter the same in the register in the same manner as property received on pledge, and shall, for five (5) days after such purchase, keep the same at his or her place of business subject to inspection by the Chief of Police or other Police Officers, as fully and to the same extent as goods received on pledge. 
Sec. 5-1313. - Transactions in precious metals. 
    A precious metal dealer shall require of every person from whom the dealer purchases precious metal for resale: 
A.  Proof of identification; and 
B.  A signed statement saying that the seller is the legal owner of the precious metal or is an agent of the legal owner who is authorized to sell such metal and stating when, where, and in what manner such metal was acquired by the seller. 
Sec. 5-1314. - Stolen property. 
    When converted or stolen property has been pawned or sold to a precious metal dealer and the pawnbroker or dealer refuses to redeliver such property to the rightful owner upon demand and presentation of a bill of sale or other proper evidence of ownership by the owner, and legal action by the rightful owner to recover the property becomes necessary, the court may assess the pawnbroker or dealer for reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the rightful owner if the court finds that the pawnbroker or dealer wrongfully withheld the converted or stolen property 
Sec. 5-1315. - Purchases prohibited. 
    No pawnbroker or precious metal dealer or any person employed by or acting for him shall purchase, take or receive any article of property, of or from any intoxicated person, or any stolen property, or property which, from any cause, he may have reason to believe or suspect cannot be lawfully sold by the person offering it. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or precious metal dealer or any person in any other kind of business which includes the purchasing of used personal property to purchase from any person, under the age of 18 years, any goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind or description. 
Sec. 5-1316. - Penalty. 
    The violation of any provision of this article shall be a class B misdemeanor. 
ARTICLE XIV. - FOOD SERVICES REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5-1401. - See Kansas Food Code: Appendix B. 
ARTICLE XV. - ARBORIST-TREE TRIMMING 

Sec. 5-1501. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying or otherwise treating trees, within the City without first procuring a license therefor from the City Clerk. The application for such license shall specify the types of service for which the applicant desires to be licensed. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the owner or occupant from performing work on his or her own property. 
Sec. 5-1502. - License. 
    Every such license shall show upon its face the types of service in which the licensee therein named is licensed and authorized to render and perform. 
Sec. 5-1503. - Insurance requirement. 
    No license shall be effective or be issued until the applicant or licensee shall present to the City Clerk a satisfactory public liability insurance policy covering all operations of such applicant or licensee in such business in the City in the sum of at least $50,000.00 per occurrence bodily injury liability insurance and at least $50,000.00 per occurrence, $100,000.00 aggregate limit property damage liability insurance. Should any policy be canceled, the City shall be notified of such cancellation within 10 days after such cancellation is effective. 
    A provision requiring such notice shall be incorporated in such policy. In the event any such policy at any time fails, in the opinion of the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee, to comply with the provisions hereof or to afford reasonably satisfactory protection to the persons intended to be protected, such failure shall be grounds for revocation of any such license, or in the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee, grounds for the suspension thereof until the insurance required hereby be so furnished. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business defined herein while his or her license is for any reason suspended or revoked. 
Sec. 5-1504. - License fee. 
    The initial fee for every licensee to engage in this business shall be $60.00 for twelve (12) months, or $30.00 if the licensee is certified by the Kansas Arborist Association. The issuance of such license shall entitle and authorize the licensee to engage in only such types of service as shown on the face of such license. It shall be unlawful and a ground for revocation of such license, for the licensee to engage in any or other different types of service constituting all or any part or parts of such business. Renewal of such license shall be based on the current fee schedule per twelve months. The initial fee for a license limited to dead tree removal from private property shall be $30.00 for twelve months, and $15.00 for renewal. Effective date of initial licenses shall be the first day of operation within the City. 
Sec. 5-1505. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee may recommend for adoption reasonable rules and regulations governing those aspects of the conduct of the business defined in [Section] 5-1501 hereof and of any and all parts thereof, directly affecting the public health and safety and requiring the use of such safety appliances, apparatus and equipment as are reasonably necessary for the protection of the workmen engaged therein, and the public and private property and it shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any such rules or regulations. Such rules and regulations shall be adopted, amended and repealed by majority vote of the Government Body and shall be effective when filed with the City Clerk. 
Sec. 5-1506. - Name and address displayed. 
    All automobiles, trucks, trailers or other vehicles operated by any licensee for the transportation of the equipment used by him or her in such business and all self-propelled, draw or tow equipment used by any licensee in such business shall have the name and address of such licensee displayed on both sides thereof in plain and legible figures and letters not less than three inches in height which shall be kept in such condition as to permit the same to be readily distinguished and read at a distance of at least sixty (60) feet. It shall be unlawful and a ground for revocation of his or her license for any licensee to operate any such vehicle or cause any such equipment to be operated or drawn or towed upon the streets, alleys or any public ways or places within the City unless or without the same being so displayed thereon. 
ARTICLE XVI. - HOME-BASED BUSINESS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See Zoning Ordinance. 

ARTICLE XVII. - CHILD CARE LICENSE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- See Zoning Ordinance. 

CHAPTER 6 - ELECTIONS 
ARTICLE I. - CITY ELECTIONS 

Sec. 6-101. - Conduct of election. 
    The election of City officials shall be conducted in all respects as provided by the laws of Kansas governing the holding of city elections and be governed by the provisions of Charter Ordinance No. 1-2016 set out in Appendix C of this Code. (K.S.A. 25-2101 et seq.) 
Sec. 6-102. - Hours of voting. 
    At all City elections the polls shall be open at 7:00 a.m. and close at 7:00 p.m., unless different hours are set and publicly announced by the County election officer. (K.S.A. 25-2111, 25-206) 
Sec. 6-103. - Qualifications of elective officers. 
    All officers elected shall be qualified electors of the City, and the removal from the City of any officer shall occasion a vacancy in such office. No person shall be eligible to any elective office unless he or she shall have been a resident of the City at least six months prior to the time of his or her election. 
Sec. 6-104. - City officers; general election. 
    City elections for Mayor and Council shall be non-partisan. The general election of City officers, when required, will be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November. In accordance with K.S.A. 25-205, and amendments thereto, any person may become a candidate for city office elected at large by having had filed on their behalf a nomination petition or a declaration of candidacy, accompanied by any fee required by law. For the position of Mayor, the nomination petition must be signed by not less than 50 qualified electors of the City of Lansing or not less than 1% of the ballots cast and counted at the last general city election, whichever is less. For the position of Councilmember, the nomination petition must be signed by not less than 50 qualified electors of the Ward or not less than 1% of the number of ballots cast in each specific Ward at the previous councilmember city election, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 976,  1, 3-16-2017) 
Sec. 6-105. - Councilmembers elections; terms. 
    A Mayor shall be elected from the city at large, who shall hold office for four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. In cases of a vacancy occurring by reason of resignation, death, removal from office or when the mayor no longer resides in the City, the President of the Council will fill the vacancy until the next election for that position. The Mayor of the City shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by ordinance. In case of a vacancy occurring by reason of resignation, death, removal from office or when a Council Member no longer resides in the ward in which the Council Member has been elected, the mayor, by and with the consent of the remaining council members may appoint some suitable elector residing in such ward to fill the vacancy until the next election for that Council position. The Mayor may appoint such other officers as are created by statute and/or ordinance, who shall hold their offices for a period of four years, unless sooner removed by the Mayor and Council. All officers of the City shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by ordinance. 
Sec. 6-106. - Commencement of terms of office; oath of office. 
A.  The term of office for newly elected City officials shall commence on the second Monday in January of the year following the date of the election. 
B.  Every person elected or appointed to City office, before entering upon the duties of such office shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation as specified in K.S.A. 54-106, and amendments thereto, and every such oath or affirmation shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
Sec. 6-107. - Election of Governing Body. 
A.  There shall be a primary election of City officers on the Tuesday preceding by five weeks the first Tuesday in August of every year that such City has a City election, except that a primary election shall only be held if needed to reduce the number of candidates for each office in the general election to no more than three candidates. No primary election of City officers shall be held unless by holding such primary two or more persons will be eliminated as candidates for office. In the event there are not more than three times the number of candidates as there are officers to be elected, the names of the candidates for such office shall not appear on the primary election ballots, and there shall be no primary election for such office, but the names of such candidates shall be placed on the general City election ballot. (K.S.A. 25-2108a) The Mayor and members of the Governing Body shall hold their offices for a term of four years. 
B.  Candidates for the office of Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age on the date of the election and shall be a resident and qualified elector of and within the City. An election for the office of Mayor shall be conducted on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November every four (4) years, and the person so elected shall take office on the second Monday in January of the year following the date of the election. Candidates for Council Member shall be at least 18 years of age on the date of the election and shall be a resident and qualified elector of the Ward from which they stand for election. Should any person be elected to the office of Mayor and thereafter move his or her place of domicile to outside the limits of the City, then such person shall cease to be Mayor and a vacancy shall be deemed to exist and said vacancy shall be filled as herein provided. In the event that any person elected to the Council should change their place of domicile to outside the Ward from which they were elected then a vacancy shall be deemed to exist for such position of Council Member and said vacancy shall be filled as herein provided. 
C.  In the event that a vacancy in the office of a Council Member should occur by reason of resignation, with or without acceptance by the Mayor, death, removal from office for cause, or change of residency to outside the Ward from which said Council Member was elected, the vacancy shall be filled in the following manner, if a clear successor cannot be produced by procedure set forth in Chapter 1 Section 1-201 of the City Code. 
1.  In the event that the vacancy occurs more than 60 days prior to the filing deadline for the next regular Governing Body election, the City Clerk shall, within 10 days of the occurrence of the vacancy, cause notice of such vacancy to be published twice in the City's official newspaper after the vacancy occurs. The notice of the vacancy shall be in substantially the following form: 
"A vacancy exists in the position of Council Member from Ward No. ___. A special election will be held to elect a successor to fill the vacancy. Candidates for the position of Council Member must be at least 18 years of age on the date of the election and a resident and qualified elector of the Ward from which they stand for election. Anyone wishing to be a candidate for the remaining term which expires _______, 20___ should contact the City Clerk and obtain a Statement of Candidacy. In order to be a candidate, the Statement of Candidacy together with a filing fee of $20.00, or in lieu of such filing fee a petition signed by 50 qualified electors of the Ward or by at least one percent of the number of ballots cast in the Ward in the last general City election, whichever is less, must be filed with the County Clerk by _______, 20___. The City Clerk shall, within five days of the occurrence of the vacancy, notify the Election Commissioner that a special election will need to be held within the City and shall obtain from the Election Commissioner a date for such election consistent with the time provided in Subparagraph 2 hereof. Any person desiring to be a candidate must file the Statement of Candidacy and pay the filing fee or submit the proper petition by 5:00 p.m. on the 20th day following the first publication notice in the official City newspaper. 
2.  The City shall hold a special election for the purpose of electing a Council Member from among those persons who has properly filed a Statement of Candidacy as hereinbefore set forth. Such special election shall be held not less than 60 days nor more than 70 days following the date upon which such vacancy occurred. Only qualified electors within the Ward in which the vacancy occurred shall be entitled to vote. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes upon certification of the results by the County Election Officer shall assume the position of Council Member at the first regular meeting of the Governing Body following certification of the election. 
3.  Failure to follow the precise procedure provided herein shall not invalidate the results of any election held hereunder. 
4.  In the event that the vacancy occurs less than 60 days prior to the filing deadline for the next regular Governing Body election, the vacancy shall not be filled prior to the next regular Governing Body election and the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes for the vacancy position at the next regular City Council election shall fill the vacancy for the remaining term. 
5.  If at any time there are more than two vacancies existing in the office of Council Member or in the event no person files a Statement of Candidacy as provided herein to fill the vacancy council position, the Mayor, upon the advice and consent of a majority of the remaining Council Members, shall appoint a suitable resident and qualified elector of the Ward in which said vacancy occurs to complete the unexpired term of office. 
D.  In the event of a vacancy occurring in any appointive office, the Mayor shall, by and with the consent of the Governing Body, appoint a person to fill the vacancy. Such appointment shall be made within 60 days of the occurrence of such vacancy and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any person so appointed shall meet the requirements of this ordinance applicable to such position. 
E.  No person shall hold or occupy more than one office of the City whether elective or appointive, at the same time. 
F.  In the event that a vacancy in the office of the Mayor should occur because of death, resignation, removal from office for cause, or change of residency to outside the limits of the City, then, if the President of the Council has not executed a non-candidacy statement as hereinafter set forth, he or she shall become the Mayor until his or her successor is elected as hereinafter provided. If the President of the Council has executed a non-candidacy statement, then the most senior Council Member (determined by most recent continuous time in office) who has not executed a non-candidacy statement shall serve as Mayor until his or her successor is elected. In the event there is not one Council Member who is the most senior then the Council shall choose the Mayor from among the most senior Council Members who have not executed non-candidacy statements. A successor to the Mayor shall be selected in the following manner, if the above guidelines do not produce a clear successor: 
1.  In the event that the vacancy occurs more than 60 days prior to the filing deadline for the next regular City Council election, the City Clerk shall, within 10 days of the occurrence of the vacancy, cause notice of such vacancy to be published twice in the City's official newspaper after the vacancy occurs. The notice of the vacancy shall be in substantially the following form: 
"A vacancy exists in the position of Mayor. A special election will be held to elect a successor to fill the vacancy. Candidates for the position of Mayor must be at least 21 years of age on the date of the election and a resident and qualified elector of the city of Lansing. Anyone wishing to be a candidate for the remaining term expiring _______, 20 _____ should contact the City Clerk and obtain a Statement of Candidacy. In order to be a candidate, the Statement of Candidacy together with a filing fee of $20.00 or in lieu of such filing fee, a petition signed by 50 qualified electors of the City or by at least one percent of the number of ballots cast in the City in the last general City election, whichever is less, must be filed with the County Clerk by _______, 20 _____. The City Clerk shall, within five days of the occurrence of the vacancy, notify the Election Commissioner that a special election will need to be held within the city and shall obtain from the Election Commissioner a date for such election consistent with the time provided in (iii) hereof." 
2.  Any person desiring to be a candidate must file the Statement of Candidacy and pay the filing fee or submit the proper petition by 5:00 p.m. on the 20th day following the first publication notice in the official City newspaper. 
3.  The City shall hold a special election for the purpose of electing a Mayor from among those persons who have properly filed a Statement of Candidacy as hereinbefore set forth. Such special election shall be held not less than 60 days nor more than 70 days following the date upon which such vacancy occurred. Only qualified electors of the City shall be entitled to vote. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes upon certification of the results by the County Election Officer shall assume the position of Mayor at the first regular meeting of the Governing Body following certification of the election. 
4.  Failure to follow the precise procedure provided herein shall not invalidate the results of any election held hereunder. 
5.  In the event that the vacancy occurs less than 60 days prior to the filing deadline for the next regular City election at which a Mayor would be elected, the procedure provided herein shall not apply and the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes for the position of Mayor at such regular City election shall succeed to the office of Mayor. The non-candidacy statement shall be in substantially the following form: "The undersigned Council Member of the City of Lansing hereby states that I will not be a candidate for the position of Mayor to fill the unexpired term caused by the vacancy in office of the Mayor occurring more than 60 days prior to the filing deadline for the next regular City election at which the Mayor would be elected." or if such vacancy has occurred within 60 days of such filing deadline, "I will not be a candidate for the position of Mayor in the next regular city election at which a mayor would be chosen." "I agree not to file a Statement of Candidacy for such position and further agree that any such statement filed by me or on my behalf shall be void and of no force or effect and that the Election Commissioner shall not include my name on any list of candidates for the position of Mayor at any election conducted under the provisions of the Lansing City Code, Chapter 6, Article 1, Section 6-107, Subsection (F)." 
Sec. 6-108. - Recall. 
    The recall of elected City officers shall be handled as provided by K.S.A. 25-4318 et seq. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD, COMMISSION, OR ADVISORY GROUP APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 6-201. - Mayoral appointments; City Council approval; time limits; other requirements. 
    Any appointment to any board, commission, advisory group or other body made by the Mayor which is subject to the approval of the City Council must be acted upon by the City Council within 45 days of the appointment by the Mayor or the appointment shall be deemed approved. The City Council shall approve such appointment unless the City Council makes a specific finding by the passage of a resolution that the person is either unqualified to hold the office or is not fit to hold the office or position. 
Sec. 6-202. - Removal of committee, commission, or board member. 
    The Governing Body is the only authority that can remove a committee, commission, or board member from a board with the recommendation of the majority of the committee, commission, or board. 
ARTICLE III. - WARDS 

Sec. 6-301. - Division of City into Wards and precincts. 
    The City of Lansing, Kansas, a City of the second class, shall be divided into four Wards, and precincts when necessary for election purposes, (see attached Ward Boundary Map), pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 14-103 and K.S.A. 14-207. 
CHAPTER 7 - FIRE 
ARTICLE I. - FIRE 

Sec. 7-101. - Establishment of Fire District No. 1. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the State of Kansas and the laws of the City of Lansing, Kansas, and pursuant to the provisions of the Fire District Interlocal Agreement of November 6, 2003 between the City of Lansing, Leavenworth County, Delaware Township and High Prairie Township, there is hereby established within the City of Lansing, Kansas "Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1" with such responsibilities and duties as are established by law and contract. 
Sec. 7-102. - Chief; powers; penalty for obstruction. 
    The Fire Chief shall have power and is hereby authorized to call assistance from any and all citizens who shall be present at the time of any fire or other emergency, in the operation of any portion or part of the fire apparatus of the City. All persons who shall refuse to follow the directions so given or shall disobey the orders of the Chief, or shall obstruct or hinder any person in his or her efforts while working under the instructions of the Chief, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable with a fine up to $500.00 and/or jail not to exceed one month. 
Sec. 7-103. - Powers of other employees. 
    The Fire Chief and members of the fire department and Public Works Department Community Development Division employees shall have the powers of a police officer in performing their duties under this chapter. When requested to do so the Fire Chief and the Chief of Police are authorized to assign such available police officers as necessary to assist the fire department or public works in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 7-104. - Priority traffic signal control systems; penalty. 
    The activation of any priority traffic signal controllers for emergency vehicles within the City Limits of Lansing is prohibited unless authorized in writing by the Chief of Police. A violation of this ordinance is a Class C violation and may result in up to one month in jail and/or a fine of up to $500.00. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 7-201. - Adoption of the International Fire Code. 
    There is hereby adopted by the City of Lansing, Kansas, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain Code and Standards known as the International Fire Code, and all appendices thereto, being particularly the 2003 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. Not less than one copy of such Code and Standards shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Lansing, Kansas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Lansing, Kansas 
Sec. 7-202. - Authority to issue notice to appear. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Charter Ordinance No. 1-2016 (allows City employees to issue NTA), employees of the City of Lansing Public Works Department Community Development Division, and City of Lansing Law Enforcement Officers, shall have the authority to issue a Notice to Appear for alleged violations of the International Fire Code, and amendments thereto, as adopted and amended by law. 
Sec. 7-203. - Duties regarding fire prevention. 
A.  The International Fire Code shall be enforced by Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1 personnel duly appointed and designated by the Chief of the Fire Department, City of Lansing Public Works Department, Community Development Division employees, and City of Lansing Law Enforcement Officers. Additionally, any fire related deficiency or violation noted that relates to the currently adopted building codes shall be forwarded to the Lansing Public Works Department Community Development Division. 
B.  The Chief of the department may detail or designate such members of the department as fire inspectors as from time to time may be necessary. When such designation is made, the Chief shall select such fire inspectors through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members of the fire department. 
C.  The Chief is authorized to order an operation or use stopped or the evacuation of any premises, building, vehicle or property or portion thereof which has or is a fire hazard or a danger to life, welfare and safety of a person or the public. 
D.  Orders and notices issued or served as provided by this Code shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the order or notice pertains. In cases of extreme danger to persons or property, immediate compliance is required. If immediate compliance cannot be accomplished, then vacancy of the premises, building, vehicle or property or portion thereof may be required by the Fire Chief, Public Works Director, Community Development Superintendent or Police Chief. 
Sec. 7-204. - Definitions. 
    Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the International Fire Code, it is City of Lansing, Kansas. 
Sec. 7-205. - Minimum standards. 
    This article, including the International Fire Code, as amended, shall constitute the minimum standards for the governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion. 
Sec. 7-206. - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
    The International Fire Code, Edition 2003, is amended and changed to read as follows: 
Section 101.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of City of Lansing, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 105.1.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.1.1 Permits required. Permits required by this code, shall be obtained from the City of Lansing, Community Development Office. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the City code official. However, Seasonal Fireworks Display permits shall be obtained from the Fire Chief or his designee at the Fire District No. 1 office. 
Section 105.6 shall be amended by deleting the following subsections: 
Section 105.6.12 Cutting and welding 
Section 105.6.13 Dry cleaning plants 
Section 105.6.23 High-piled storage 
Section 105.6.26 Lumber-yards and woodworking plants 
Section 105.6.31 Open Burning 
Section 105.6.33 Open flames and candles 
Section 105.6.35 Places of assembly 
Section 105.6.39 Refrigeration equipment 
Section 105.6.40 Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities 
Section 105.6.46 Waste handling 
Section 105.6.47 Wood products 
Section 105.6 shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
Section 105.6.48 Cut natural or resin bearing tree. An operational permit is required to store, use or display any cut natural or resin bearings tree in a public building. 
Subsection 107.6 shall be amended to add the following: 
107.6 Overcrowding. Additionally, the chief, or his or her designee, may request the City of Lansing Department of Public Works Community Development employees, or the City of Lansing Law Enforcement Officers to issue a Notice to Appear, pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 1-2016 (NTA), in the City of Lansing Municipal Court for alleged violations of the 2003 International Fire Code 
Section 109.3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice (see 104.5 and 109.2.1) has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 111.2 shall be amended to add the following: 
A copy of any violation or notice shall be provided to the office of the Community Development Superintendent. 
Section 111.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 111.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100 dollars or more than $500 dollars. 
Section 304.3.3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 304.3.3 Capacity exceeding 1.5 cubic yards. Dumpsters and containers with a capacity of 1.5 cubic yards (40.5 cubic feet) (1.15 m3) or more shall not be stored in buildings or placed within 10 feet (3m) of combustible walls, openings or combustible roof eave lines. 
Section 307.2.1 shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
Section 307.2.1.1 Any recreational fire after sundown except for those in approved fire rings as provided in Section 305-B will require an approved permit from the Fire Chief or his designated employee. 
Section 308.3.1 Open-flame cooking devices. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Single Family Residence 
2.  Duplexes, one story in height 
3.  Multi-family dwelling units, one story in height 
4.  Buildings, balconies, and/or decks adequately protected by automatic sprinkler systems 
Those fires conducted by City of Lansing or school district functions. 
Section 308.1.1 Liquefied-petroleum-gas-fueled cooking devices. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Single Family Residence 
2.  Duplexes, one story in height 
3.  Multi-family dwelling units, one story in height 
Section 506.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 506.2 Key box maintenance. The operator of the building shall immediately notify the fire code official and provide the new key when a lock is changed or re-keyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the key box. The key box shall also be maintained in working order by the operator/owner/occupant of the building. 
Section 508.2.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 508.2.1 Private Fire Service Mains. Private fire service mains and appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with Nation Fire Protection Association current edition 24, and shall comply with American Water Works Association standards adopted by Lan-Del Water, Consolidated Water District #1, or Consolidated Water District #8, whichever has jurisdiction. 
Section 508.5.5 Clear space around hydrants shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 508.5.5 Clear space around hydrants. A 3-foot (914mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved. The hydrant will also be readily visible for fire department access from public roadway. 
Section 804.1 shall be amended to add the following: 
Section 804.1.4 Permit. All natural cut trees in all occupancies other than R-4 apartment house individual units and R-3 occupancies shall be required to obtain a permit as required by Section 105.6.48. 
Section 903.3 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems shall be amended by adding the following subsections: 
Section 903.3.8 Dry system air supply: The compressed air supply shall be from a source available at all times. The compressor will be hard wired into the electrical system and there will be no on-off switch for the compressor. 
Section 905 shall be amended to read as follows: 
905.3.4.1.1 Hose Requirements. Hose may be eliminated from the hose cabinet upon written permission of the Fire Chief. 
905.5.3.1 Hose Requirements. Hose may be eliminated from the hose cabinet upon written permission of the Fire Chief. 
Section 907.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
907.2.1 shall be amended by deleting the following, "having an occupant load of 300 or more." 
907.2.1 shall be amended by deleting the Exception. 
907.2.2 shall be amended by deleting the following, "having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge." 
907.2.2 shall be amended by deleting the Exception. 
907.2.3 shall be amended by deleting Exception 1 and 2. 
907.2.4 shall be amended by deleting the following, "that are two or more stories in height and have an occupant load of 500 or more above or below the lowest level of discharge." 
907.2.4 shall be amended by deleting the Exception. 
907.2.7 shall be amended by deleting the following, "other than covered mall buildings complying with Section 402 of the International Building Code, having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge." 
907.2.7 shall be amended by deleting the Exception. 
907.2.8.1 shall be amended by deleting Exception 1 and 2. 
907.4.1 shall be amended by deleting the Exception. 
Section 1004.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
1004.2.1 Overcrowding. A person shall not permit overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved occupant load. The Code Official, upon finding overcrowded conditions or obstruction in aisles, passageways or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition which constitutes a hazard to life and safety, shall cause the occupancy, performance, presentation, spectacle or entertainment to be stopped until such a condition or obstruction is corrected and the addition of any further occupants prohibited until the approved occupant load is reestablished. 
Section 1409 Fire Alarm Reporting shall be amended by adding the following subsection; 
Section 1409.2 Temporary address: The address shall be placed on the building during construction, re-model or demolition. The numbers shall be at least 4" in height and of a contrasting color to the background. The address shall be clearly visible from the public roadway. 
Section 3204.3.1.1 Geographical limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited within the entire City limits of the City of Lansing. 
Section 3404.1 General shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
Section 3404.1.1 The storage of LP-gas in quantities 300 gallon, or greater, water capacity shall be prohibited in any residentially zoned area within the limits of the City of Lansing, where the transmission system of a franchised natural gas supplier is accessible. 
Section 3404.2.13.1.3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 3404.2.13.1.3 Out of service for 1 year. Underground tanks that have been out of service for a period of 1 year shall be removed from the ground in accordance with Section 3404.2.14. 
Section 3404.2.13.1.4 Tanks abandoned in place shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
Section 3404.2.13.1.5. Tanks abandoned in place. Monitoring, maintenance, and abandonment of underground storage tanks shall comply in all respects to pertinent regulations of KDHE and EPA. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 7-301. - Burning within fire limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, lumber, leaves, straw or any other combustible material in any street, alley or lot within the fire limits of the City without a permit issued by Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1. Only clean waste, as described below, will be allowed to burn. The burning of tires, oil, plywood, treated lumber, painted wood, grass clippings, piled leaves, and other similar combustibles is specifically prohibited. 
Sec. 7-302. - Burning on paved streets, gutters or boulevards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to start fire to any papers, weeds, brush, grass, leaves or other combustible material on any paved street, alley, parking area, gutter or boulevard in the City. 
Sec. 7-303. - Regulation, burning clean waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to start fire to any paper, weeds, brush, grass, leaves or other combustible material or to make any fire of any description in the open air within the City before sunrise or after sunset or 7:00 p.m., whichever occurs first. Every fire shall be carefully supervised at all times and the person in charge of supervising the fire shall see that proper equipment is readily available to control the fire. No burning material or embers shall be permitted to be scattered or blown about by the wind. Every fire shall be wholly extinguished and made safe no later than sunset or 7:00 p.m., whichever occurs first, and before the person starting or maintaining the fire shall leave the place where such fire was started and maintained. 
A.  Clean waste shall mean brush, trees, dimensional lumber, and standing grass. 
B.  Only material generated from the site may be burned on site. No materials may be brought in from off site. 
Sec. 7-304. - Trash burning: Fire Chief may prohibit. 
    The Chief of the Fire Department may prohibit any and all bonfires and rubbish fires when, in the opinion of the Chief or his representative, conditions exist that make burning said materials detrimental to public safety and property, or atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
Sec. 7-305. - Approved trash burners. 
A.  Nothing in this article shall allow the burning of trash and rubbish. Trash burners are prohibited within the City limits. 
B.  An approved burn ring as used herein shall be one built of brick, cement, stone or metal, constructed in a manner to securely confine burning material and not be greater than 48 inches in diameter. These will be used for recreational purpose only and will not require a permit. They will also be allowed to burn after dark as long as it is attended by a resident of the property over 18 years of age, except when the Fire Chief or his designee, or Leavenworth County has issued a county-wide ban on open burning. 
Sec. 7-306. - Not prohibited. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the Chief of the fire department from burning or causing to be burned dry grass or weeds from vacant lots anywhere within the limits of the City when, in his or her opinion, the same is a hazard to other property. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the burning of standing grass, standing weeds, brush, trees, or crop residue in agricultural fields within the City Limits providing that a valid burn permit has been issued. 
Sec. 7-307. - Accumulation combustible trash. 
    No person or persons shall allow remaining longer than 36 hours or overnight, in any alley, or on any sidewalk or premises, within 30 feet of any building, empty boxes, barrels, rubbish, trash, waste paper, excelsior or other like combustible materials. 
Sec. 7-308. - Handling of ashes. 
    No person shall be allowed to place ashes within any building in any box, barrel or other wooden vessel or upon any wooden vessel or floor. 
Sec. 7-309. - Handling oily waste, rags. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept on the premises any oily waste or oily rags, unless at all times when not actually in use such oily waste and oily rags be kept in a metal can with self-closing cover and riveted joints, standing on metal legs which raise the bottom of the container at least five inches above the floor. 
Sec. 7-310. - Owner, occupant permit inspection. 
    All owners or occupants of buildings and real property within the City Limits are required to permit the Chief of the fire department, or his or her designee, to inspect their buildings and/or property to see if the provisions of this article are complied with, and it is hereby made the duty of the Chief of the fire department or his/her designee to make such inspection before a permit to burn is issued or whenever and wherever the Chief may suspect a violation of this article. 
Sec. 7-311. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof be fined of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues is deemed a separate offense. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS FUND 

Sec. 7-411. - Scope and application. 
    The City is hereby authorized to utilize the procedures established by K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., whereby no insurance company shall pay a claim of a named insured for loss or damage to any building or other structure located within the City, arising out of any fire, explosion or windstorm, where the amount recoverable for the loss or damage to the building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the policy covering such building or other insured structure, unless there is compliance with the procedures set out in this article. (K.S.A. 40-3901) 
Sec. 7-412. - Lien created. 
    The governing body of the City hereby creates a lien in favor of the City on the proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure located within the City, caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion or windstorm, where the amount recoverable for all the loss or damage to the building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the policy(ies) covering such building or other insured structure. The lien arises upon any unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, or any other charge imposed upon real property by or on behalf of the City which is an encumbrance on real property, whether or not evidenced by written instrument, or such tax, levy, assessment, expense or other charge that has remained undischarged for at least one year prior to the filing of a proof of loss. 
Sec. 7-413. - Same; encumbrances. 
    Prior to final settlement on any claim covered by Section 7-402, the insurer or insurers shall contact the county treasurer, Leavenworth County, Kansas, to determine whether any such encumbrances are presently in existence. If the same are found to exist, the insurer or insurers shall execute and transmit in an amount equal to that owing under the encumbrances a draft payable to the County Treasurer, Leavenworth County, Kansas. 
Sec. 7-414. - Same; pro rata basis. 
    Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurance companies insuring the building or other structure. 
Sec. 7-415. - Procedure. 
A.  When final settlement on a covered claim has been agreed to or arrived at between the named insured or insurers and the company or companies, and the final settlement exceeds 75 percent of the face value of the policy covering any building or other insured structure, and when all amounts due the holder of a first real estate mortgage against the building or other structure, pursuant to the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto, shall have been paid, the insurance company or companies shall execute a draft payable to the City Treasurer in an amount equal to the sum of fifteen (15) percent of the covered claim payment, whichever is less, unless the chief building inspector of the City has issued a certificate to the insurance company or companies that the insured has removed the damaged building or other structure, as well as all associated debris, or repaired, rebuilt, or otherwise made the premises safe and secure. 
B.  Such transfer of funds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the City shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms. 
C.  Upon the transfer of the funds as required by subsection A. of this section, the insurance company shall provide the City with the name and address of the named insured or insurers, the total insurance coverage applicable to said building or other structure, and the amount of the final settlement agreed to or arrived at between the insurance company or companies and the insured or insurers, whereupon the chief building inspector shall contact the named insured or insurers by registered mail, notifying them that said insurance proceeds have been received by the City and apprise them of the procedures to be followed under this article. 
Sec. 7-416. - Fund created; deposit of moneys. 
    The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and shall create a fund to be known as the "Fire Insurance Proceeds Fund." All moneys received by the City Treasurer as provided for by this article shall be placed in said fund and deposited in an interest-bearing account. 
Sec. 7-417. - Building inspector; investigation, removal of structure. 
A.  Upon receipt of moneys as provided for by this article, the City Treasurer shall immediately notify the chief building inspector of said receipt, and transmit all documentation received from the insurance company or companies to the chief building inspector. 
B.  Within 20 days of the receipt of said moneys, the chief building inspector shall determine, after prior investigation, whether the City shall instigate proceedings under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended. 
C.  Prior to the expiration of the 20 days established by subsection B. of this section, the chief building inspector shall notify the City Treasurer whether he or she intends to initiate proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended. 
D.  If the chief building inspector has determined that proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended shall be initiated, he or she will do so immediately but no later than 30 days after receipt of the moneys by the City Treasurer. 
E.  Upon notification to the City Treasurer by the chief building inspector that no proceedings shall be initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, the City Treasurer shall return all such moneys received, plus accrued interest, to the insured or insurers as identified in the communication from the insurance company or companies. Such return shall be accomplished within 30 days of the receipt of the moneys from the insurance company or companies. 
Sec. 7-418. - Removal of structure; excess moneys. 
    If the chief building inspector has proceeded under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, all moneys in excess of that which is ultimately necessary to comply with the provisions for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, if any, shall be paid to the insured. 
Sec. 7-419. - Same; disposition of funds. 
    If the chief building inspector, with regard to a building or other structure damaged by fire, explosion or windstorm, determines that it is necessary to act under K.S.A. 12-1756, any proceeds received by the City Treasurer under the authority of Section 7-405.A. relating to that building or other structure shall be used to reimburse the City for any expenses incurred by the City in proceeding under K.S.A. 12-1756. 
    Upon reimbursement from the insurance proceeds, the chief building inspector shall immediately affect the release of the lien resulting there from. Should the expenses incurred by the City exceed the insurance proceeds paid over to the City Treasurer under Section 7-405.A., the chief building inspector shall publish a new lien as authorized by K.S.A. 12-1756, in an amount equal to such excess expenses incurred. 
Sec. 7-420. - Effect upon insurance policies. 
    This article shall not make the City a party to any insurance contract, nor is the insurer liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy. 
Sec. 7-421. - Insurers; liability. 
    Insurers complying with this article or attempting in good faith to comply with this article shall be immune from civil and criminal liability and such action shall not be deemed in violation of K.S.A. 40-2404 and any amendments thereto, including withholding payment of any insurance proceeds pursuant to this article, or releasing or disclosing any information pursuant to this article. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 7-501. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire hazard shall mean any arrangement of materials and/or heat sources that presents potential for harm, such as personal injury or ignition of combustibles. 
    Fireworks shall have the same meaning as defined in the International Fire Code Section 3302 of the most recent edition adopted by the City of Lansing. 
    Sky lanterns shall mean miniature, unmanned air balloon that relies on an open flame as a heat source to heat the air inside the lantern with the intention of causing it to lift into the atmosphere. Typically made of rice paper or flame resistant paper, it has a fuel cell in the opening. 
    Sky rocket shall mean a rocket designed to explode high in the air as a signal or firework. 
Sec. 7-502. - Storage, sale, handling. 
    Fireworks to be sold shall be stored in a room set aside for the storage of fireworks only. Over the entrance to this room shall be posted a sign reading, "Fireworks-No Smoking-Keep Open Flames Away." The storage room shall not be within 100 feet of any type of flammable materials and/or goods. 
Sec. 7-503. - Additional regulations; storage, sale. 
    Rules and regulations regulating storage and sale shall be as follows: 
A.  Fireworks shall not be sold or kept for sale in a place of business where paint, oils, varnishes, turpentine or gasoline or other flammable substances are kept in unbroken containers, unless in a separate and distinct section or department of the store. 
B.  No fireworks shall be sold from any other structure other than a three sided building with a roof, which building shall be constructed so as not to grant immediate and unrestricted access to the interior thereof by customers. Said building may be a permanent or temporary structure. If permanent the building must meet all building code requirements, and must pass a safety inspection by the City Inspector prior to the retail sale of fireworks. If temporary, the building must pass a safety inspection by the City Inspector prior to the retail sale of fireworks. 
C.  Fireworks shall not be stored, kept, sold or discharged within 150 feet of any gasoline pump, or where volatile liquids are sold in quantities in excess of one gallon, except in stores where cleaners, paints, and oils are handled in sealed containers only. 
Sec. 7-504. - Fire extinguishers required. 
    Two ABC certified fire extinguishers with a minimum rating of 2A, and one certified water extinguisher with at least a 20 pound rating must be provided and kept in close proximity to the stock of fireworks in all buildings where fireworks are sold. 
Sec. 7-505. - Retail sales. 
    Rules and regulations relating to Retail sale of fireworks in the City shall be as follows: 
A.  Where and when permitted. 
1.  No person shall sell or store fireworks in within the City without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk's Office as provided for in Section 7-505B. 
2.  Fireworks shall not be offered for sale to individuals at retail before the 1st day of July and after the 4th day of July, and no sales shall occur at retail other than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
3.  Fireworks for retail sale will not be allowed to be stored within the City limits of Lansing before June 30th or after July 5th of any given year. Any fireworks stored or located within the city of Lansing before June 30th or after July 5th will be subject to the penalties prescribed in Section 7-513. 
4.  Fireworks stands or empty temporary storage units shall not be erected prior to June 25th and shall be removed in their entirety by 5:00 p.m. on July 5th. 
B.  Licenses. Every person before selling or offering for sale fireworks in the City shall make application to the City Clerk for a license to sell same. The application shall be approved by the Public Works Director or his/her designated representative and the Fire Chief before the license shall be issued. The license fee shall be in the amount of $500.00 per year. The licensee shall post a sign provided by the City designating the days and hours for discharging fireworks, prohibited fireworks, fine for non-compliance, and a statement that debris must be cleaned up no later than Noon the day after discharge. In addition to the application, the applicant must provide: 
1.  A copy of their Tax Clearance Letter from the Kansas Department of Revenue showing they are current on taxes; 
2.  A complete list of firework items on the premises for sale; and 
3.  A copy of the Distributors license with number issued by Kansas State Fire Marshall. 
C.  [Adult presence.] No retail stand shall be open for the sale of any fireworks unless there is at least one adult over the age of 18 years present on the premises at all times during the hours of operation. 
Sec. 7-506. - Retailers, regulations. 
    All retailers are forbidden to expose fireworks where the sun shines through glass on the merchandise displayed, except where such fireworks are in the original package, and all fireworks kept for sale on front counters, must remain in original packages, except where an attendant is on constant duty at all times at counters where such fireworks are on display. Fireworks in open stock may be kept in show cases or counters, out of the reach of the public without an attendant being on duty. Signs reading, "Fireworks For Sale-No Smoking Allowed," shall be displayed in the section of the store set aside for the sale of fireworks. 
Sec. 7-507. - Approved fireworks. 
    The sale, distribution, use, manufacture and possession of only those articles of fireworks labeled and classified as U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) or Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) Class C Fireworks, except bottle rockets and sky rockets are hereby approved within the City. The sale, distribution, use, manufacture, possession, lighting and/or release of sky lanterns, bottle rockets, sky rockets or like materials shall be prohibited within the City at all times. 
Sec. 7-508. - Permit required; exhibitions; special events. 
    Fireworks to be used for exhibition purposes at fairs and celebrations or special events may be fired which otherwise are prohibited provided the individual, organization or business has been issued a Fireworks Permit by Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1. An applicant for a permit must meet all permitting requirements of Chapter 5, Article IV for Temporary Special Events Permits of the Lansing City Code. In addition, to the permitting requirements stated in Chapter 5, Article IV of the Lansing City Code an individual, organization or business must have someone supervising the handling of fireworks who is experienced, and must comply with the current State of Kansas Fire Marshall requirements and the International Fire Code requirements as specifically stated, but not limited to, Chapter 33 of said code. In addition, the public attending such exhibition or special event must be kept at a safe distance. Fireworks held in storage for such exhibition or special event must be kept in a closed box until they are removed for firing. 
Sec. 7-509. - Discharge of fireworks. 
    The discharge of fireworks within the City is hereby prohibited except as provided by the following: Fireworks may be discharged within the City from the 1st day of July through the 4th day of July between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., except that on the 4th day of July fireworks may be discharged within the City from the hours of 12:00 p.m. until 11:00 p.m. only. 
    Unless the Fire Chief of the Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1 shall make a report with the City Clerk stating that due to weather and/or other conditions that a fire hazard exists in the City and upon presentation to the governing body, and the approval thereof, and notice is given no later than the 26th day of June by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Leavenworth County, Kansas that an emergency exists with respect to the discharge of fireworks. Such notice shall have the effect of prohibiting the discharge of fireworks within the City from the 1st day of July through the 4th day of July. 
    No discharge of fireworks shall be allowed within 150 feet of a storage area for fireworks as well as 150 feet of the fireworks stands. 
    It is the responsibility of the person(s) discharging fireworks to remove all fireworks debris from private and public property no later than 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the day following the discharge of fireworks. 
    Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00 for each offense. 
Sec. 7-510. - Insurance. 
    All retailers are required to provide the City Clerk a copy of a liability insurance policy in an amount not less than $100,000.00 per person, $500,000.00 for injury or death for more than one person, and $100,000.00 coverage for damage to property and shall name the City as an additional insured party. The copy of the insurance policy shall be provided to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of a permit for the purposes of retail sales of fireworks. 
Sec. 7-511. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the City or by the Chief of the Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1 and or his/her designee. 
Sec. 7-512. - Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof (other than those in Section 7-511) be fined an amount of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation of the ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  In addition, any violations of the provisions of this article which result in a conviction in the municipal court of the City or any state court within Kansas shall bar the person so convicted from obtaining City permits and licenses relating to fireworks for a period of two years from the date of the conviction. 
ARTICLE VI. - BLASTING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 7-601. - Scope. 
    Possession and use of explosive materials as defined by this chapter for subsurface blasting shall be in accordance with this article. 
Sec. 7-602. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant shall mean the person applying for the blasting permit and the party responsible for compliance with this article. 
    Blast site shall mean the area in which explosive materials are being or have been loaded and which includes all holes loaded or to be loaded for the same blast and a distance of 50 feet (15 240 mm) in all directions. 
    Blasting agent shall mean a material or mixture consisting of fuel and oxidizer, intended for blasting provided that the finished product as mixed for use or shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test detonator when unconfined. Blasting agents are labeled and placarded as Class 1.5 material by U.S. Department of Transportation. 
    Blasting expert shall mean a professional engineer licensed in the State of Kansas with blasting experience, or a consultant whose primary business involves blasting operations and blasting analysis. 
    Chief shall mean the Fire Chief of Fire District 1. 
    Division of fire prevention shall mean the fire prevention division of the Leavenworth County Fire District 1. 
    Explosive shall mean a chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord, igniters and display fireworks, (1.3G (Class B, Special.)). 
    The term "explosive" includes any material determined to be within the scope of USC Title 18: Chapter 40 and also includes any material classified as an explosive other than consumer fireworks, 1.4G (Class C, Common) by the hazardous materials regulations of Department of Transportation 49 CFR. 
    Explosive materials shall mean explosives, blasting agents, and detonators. 
    NFPA shall mean the National Fire Protection Association current edition. 
    Owner shall mean persons having vested or contingent interest in the property in question and their duly authorized agents or attorneys. 
    Person shall mean a natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or agent of any of the aforesaid. 
    Property for the purposes of this article shall mean real property; land. 
    Public Works Director shall mean the Director of the City of Lansing Public Works Department. 
    Structure shall mean a combination of materials or piece of work built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner for occupancy, use or ornamentation. The term "structure" shall include everything that is built or constructed and affixed to the real property. The term "structure" shall not include utility lines, and accessory apparatus. 
    Utility lines shall mean an electric, cable, fiber optic line, water line, sanitary sewer line, pipeline or other type of conduit used to transport or transmit electricity, gases, liquids, and telecommunications lines. 
Sec. 7-603. - Permits required. 
    A permit application to use or possess explosive materials subject to regulation under this article shall be made to the Lansing Public Works Department. The Director of Public Works or his or her designated representative may approve the issuance of the permit only after inspection and review by Fire District No. 1 (Fire Department) and/or Public Works and the Fire Department has made recommendations pertinent to the issuance of the permit. The Director of Public Works or his or her designated representative shall have seven days after receipt of a completed application to review the application, including all supporting documentation, and recommendations from the Fire Department and to issue or deny a permit. The process to apply for a permit shall be as follows: 
A.  For blasting operations occurring at a distance greater than 1,500 feet of any structure or utility line: 
1.  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a Blasting Plan for the blasting operation. The Blasting Plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name of the contractor conducting the blasting operation, and 
b.  The names of all responsible on-site personnel with copies of their permits to blast explosives issued by the State of Kansas Fire Marshal. 
2.  The applicant shall maintain and provide proof of liability insurance coverage for the purpose of payment of damages to persons or property which arise from, or are caused by, the blasting operations. The policy or policies shall provide for the following minimum coverage: 
a.  Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which might result from blasting operations: 
(i)  General Aggregate (or a combination of general liability insurance and an umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations): $5,000,000.00. 
(ii)  Each Occurrence: $2,000,000.00 
b.  Automobile Liability Insurance Combined Single Limit: $1,000,000.00 
c.  Workers Compensation: Statutory Coverage 
3.  The applicant shall pay an application fee of $500.00. 
B.  For blasting operations occurring at a distance equal to or less than 1,500 feet and greater than 500 feet of any structure or utility line: 
1.  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a Blasting Plan for the blasting operation. The Blasting Plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of the contractor conducting the blasting operation, 
b.  Names of all responsible on-site personnel with copies of their permits to blast explosives from the Kansas State Fire Marshal. 
c.  Scale drawing which accurately allows dimensions and all distances relative to the application to be calculated for the following: 
(i)  Distances to all structures, to the extent such data is available, within 1,500 feet of the blast site; 
(ii)  Distances from structures to the explosive storage magazines; 
(iii)  Drill patterns, delay periods, and decking; 
(iv)  Type and amount of explosive to be used at each location. 
d.  Evidence of the notice required by this article, sent by United States mail, to owners of property and/or utility lines located within 1,500 feet of the blast site. The required evidence shall include a copy of the written notification and a list of names and addresses of those notified. Said written notification shall contain the following information: 
(i)  Notice of intent to blast; 
(ii)  Name of the blasting contractor; 
(iii)  Estimated duration of blasting operations and the general location of the blast site, with a copy of the map included with the notice; 
(iv)  Name of the insurance agency providing the blasting contractor's liability insurance coverage and the agency's contact information; and 
(v)  The date, time, and location of the informational meeting with property owners and/or utility company representatives. 
e.  Proof that the seismology equipment to be used at the blasting site has been calibrated and certified within one year of the proposed blasting. 
2.  The applicant shall maintain and provide proof of liability insurance coverage for the purpose of payment of damages to persons or property which arise from, or are caused by, the blasting operations. The policy or policies shall provide for the following minimum coverage: 
a.  Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which might result from blasting operations: 
(i)  General Aggregate (or a combination of general liability insurance and an umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations): $5,000,000.00 
(ii)  Each Occurrence: $2,000,000.00 
b.  Automobile Liability Insurance Combined Single Limit: $1,000,000.00 
c.  Workers Compensation: Statutory Coverage 
3.  The applicant shall pay an application fee of $500.00. 
C.  For blasting operations occurring at a distance equal to or less than 500 feet of any structure or utility line: 
No blasting shall occur within 100 feet of any structure or utility line unless the owner(s) of the structure(s) and/or utility line(s) consent in writing, and the blasting conforms to the limits recommended by the U.S. Bureau of Mines Table of Scaled Distances. 
1.  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a Blasting Plan for the blasting operation. The Blasting Plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name of the contractor conducting the blasting operation, 
b.  The names of all responsible on-site personnel with copies of the blasters certificates, 
c.  Scale drawing that accurately allows dimensions and all distances relative to the application to be calculated for the following: 
(i)  Distances to all structures, to the extent such data is available, within 1,500 feet of the blast site. 
(ii)  Distances from structures to the explosive storage magazines. 
(iii)  Designation of proposed pre-blast surveyed structures within 500 feet of the blast site. 
(iv)  Drill patterns, delay periods, and decking. 
(v)  Type and amount of explosive to be used at each location. 
d.  Name of the independent firm, approved by the Lansing Public Works Department Community Development Division and reporting directly to the Public Works Director, which shall conduct the seismographic monitoring of blasts occurring within 500 feet of any structure or utility line. 
e.  Proof that the seismology equipment to be used at the blasting site has been calibrated and certified within one year of the proposed blasting. 
f.  Evidence of the notification required by this article, sent by U.S. mail, to owners of property and utility lines located within 1,500 feet of the blast site. The required evidence shall include a copy of the written notification and a list of names and addresses of those notified. Said written notification shall contain the following information: 
(i)  Notice of intent to blast; 
(ii)  Name of the blasting contractor; 
(iii)  Estimated duration of blasting operations and the general location of the blast site, with a copy of the map included with the notice; 
(iv)  Name of the insurance agency providing the blasting contractor's liability insurance coverage and the agency's contact information; and 
(v)  The date, time, and location of the informational meeting with property owners and/or utility company representatives. 
g.  Evidence of the notification required by this article, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than 15 days before blasting commences to owners of property and utility lines located within 500 feet of the blast site. The required evidence shall include a copy of the written notification and a list of names and addresses of those notified. Said written notification shall contain the following information and/or statements: 
(i)  Notice of intent to blast; 
(ii)  Name of blasting contractor; 
(iii)  Estimated duration of blasting operations and the general location of the blast site, with a copy of the map included with the notice; 
(iv)  Name of the insurance agency providing the blasting contractor's liability insurance coverage and the agency's contact information; 
(v)  The date, time, and location of the informational meeting with owners of property located within 500 feet of the blast site and/or with representatives of utility companies with utility lines located within 500 feet of the blast site; 
(vi)  Name of the company performing the pre-blast surveys; 
(vii)  Contact information for the company performing the pre-blast surveys; 
(viii)  An offer to permit representatives of notified utility companies to be present during blasting operations; 
(ix)  A statement advising the utility company or companies that if it fails within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice to object to the intent to blast, or to request additional time to review the plans, any objections are deemed waived; and 
(x)  A statement advising the utility company or companies that the utility company is responsible for identifying the need for, and requesting, a pre-blast survey of utility company structures. 
h.  A copy of a pre-blast survey log which contains a list of properties with structures and/or utility lines eligible for pre-blast surveys, and a list of properties with structures and/or utility lines which received pre-blast surveys. 
i.  The name, address, and telephone number of the qualified blasting expert who shall review and analyze the blasting plan, including the items listed below, anytime blasting occurs within 500 feet of any structure or utility line. The qualified blasting expert shall be experienced in blasting operations. The blasting expert shall be approved by, and report to, the Director of Public Works, and the Fire Chief. Said blasting expert shall be independent of the blasting contractor and shall be compensated by the applicant. The blasting expert shall provide the Director of Public Works, and the Fire Chief with proof of general liability insurance in an amount consistent with industry standards. The blasting expert shall review and analyze the following: 
(i)  Pre-blast survey records to confirm the pre-blast surveys were performed in accordance with this article; 
(ii)  The notice of the informational meeting for property and utility line owners, to verify it was sent in accordance with this article; 
(iii)  Proposed location and time of the blast(s); 
(iv)  Credentials of the certified blaster designated to be in charge of the blasting operation; 
(v)  Type of material to be blasted; 
(vi)  Number of proposed holes to be bored and the spacing thereof; 
(vii)  Proposed diameter of, and proposed depth of, holes; 
(viii)  Type and amount of explosives to be used; 
(ix)  Amount of explosives per delay of 8 milliseconds or greater; 
(x)  Proposed method of firing and proposed type of circuit to be used; 
(xi)  Verification that no blasting shall occur within one hundred (100) feet of any structure or utility line, unless a written consent from the owner(s) of the structure or utility line is on file with the Director of Public Works, and the Fire Chief, and the planned blasting conforms with the limits recommended by the U.S. Bureau of Mines Table of Scaled Distances (NFPA 495); 
(xii)  Whether or not mats or other precautions will be used; 
(xiii)  Type of proposed detonators and delay periods; 
(xiv)  Type and height of proposed stemming; 
(xv)  Proposed locations of seismology equipment during blasting operations and verification of the equipment's calibration/certification within one year of the proposed blasts; 
(xvi)  Verification of notice to utility companies; and 
(xvii)  Subsurface analysis of the site. 
j.  Upon completion of the review and analysis required by Section 8-603.C.1(i), the blasting expert shall provide a written statement to the Director of Public Works, and the Fire Chief certifying that the proposed blasting operation does or does not meet the City Code. 
k.  The applicant shall offer pre-blast surveys to residents or owners of structures and utility lines located within 500 feet of the blasting site. The pre-blast surveys shall conform to the requirements of this article. The pre-blast surveys shall be completed before the initiation of blasting may occur, unless permission to conduct a pre-blast survey has been denied or contact with the owner or occupant of the structure or utility line could not be made after due diligence on the part of the pre-blast survey company representative to make such contact. 
2.  The applicant shall maintain and provide proof of liability insurance coverage for the purpose of payment of damages to persons or property which arise from, or are caused by, the blasting operations. The policy or policies shall provide for the following minimum coverage: 
a.  Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which might result from blasting operations: 
(i)  General Aggregate (or a combination of general liability insurance and an umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations): $5,000,000.00 
(ii)  Each Occurrence: $2,000,000.00 
b.  Automobile Liability Insurance Combined Single Limit: $1,000,000.00 
c.  Workers Compensation: Statutory Coverage 
(i)  The applicant shall pay an application fee of $500.00. 
Sec. 7-604. - Pre-blast surveys of structures within 500 feet of the blast site. 
A.  Pre-blast surveys offered. Pre-blast surveys shall be offered to the owners and/or occupants of structures and utility lines located within 500 feet of the blast site. The pre-blast surveys shall be conducted by a firm regularly engaged in performing pre-blast surveys and which is independent of the blasting contractor. The pre-blast surveyor shall promptly conduct a pre-blast survey of the identified structures unless permission for a survey has been denied by the owner or occupant of the structure, or after due diligence on the part of the surveyor, contact with the owner or occupant of the structure could not be made. The surveyor shall promptly conduct a pre-blast survey of utility company structures if a utility company representative requests one from the surveyor. 
B.  Written reports. The surveyor shall examine the interior and/or exterior of the structure, documenting through the use of photography or videotaping equipment, any existing damage and other physical factors that could reasonably be affected by the blasting operation. In the event a claim of damage is made, a written report of the surveyor's pre-blast survey or examination of the structure shall be prepared. All photographs shall be identified by number. The written report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the company or firm that performed the pre-blast surveys. 
C.  Copies of pre-blast surveys. Copies of the pre-blast survey shall be made available to the Public Works Department Community Development Division and the Fire Chief and may be provided to the blasting contractor. Upon request, the applicant shall provide to the owner of the structure making the request, a copy of the pre-blast survey of the requesting party's surveyed structure. No person other than the owner or occupant of the surveyed structure shall receive a copy of the pre-blast survey of the structure, unless otherwise provided by law. The applicant may charge the owner or occupant requesting the copy the actual cost of reproducing the pre-blast survey. 
D.  Initiation of blasting operations. Before the initiation of blasting operations, the pre-blast surveys shall be completed, unless permission to conduct a pre-blast survey has been denied or contact with the owner or occupant of the structure could not be made after due diligence on the part of the surveyor to make such contact. The applicant shall submit to the Public Works Department and the Fire Chief a copy of a pre-blast survey log which contains a list of properties and/or utility lines eligible for pre-blast surveys, and which shows a list of properties and/or utility lines which received pre-blast surveys. Blasting may commence if the pre-blast surveys are completed, or permission to conduct a pre-blast survey has been denied, and the ten-day period in which a utility company that has utility lines within 500 feet of the proposed blasting site has to object to the intent to blast or to request additional time to review the plans, has expired. 
Sec. 7-605. - Permit-Expiration and reissuing. 
A.  Expiration. Permits shall expire thirty (30) days after the date of issuance. 
B.  Reissuing permits. Permits may be reissued if they have expired or have been terminated, subject to such provisions of inspection, reporting, and amendments contained in this ordinance as the Public Works Department and the Fire Chief deems necessary. 
    If a permit is reissued, the applicant shall notify in writing the owners of property within 1,500 feet of the blast site of the new permit period if the time period contained in the original written notification expires. The notice to owners of property within 1,500 feet of the blast site shall be by regular U.S. mail. If a permit is reissued, the applicant shall notify in writing the owners of property within 500 feet of the blast site of the new permit period if the time period contained in the original written notification expires. The notice to owners of property within 500 feet of the blast site shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notification to owners of properties within 500 feet of the blast site that the permit is reissued shall also state that the owner of the structure may request a second pre-blast survey if the structure underwent an improvement, construction or remodeling project requiring a building permit after the initial pre-blast survey was completed. 
Sec. 7-606. - Revocation of permits. 
    The public works director, Fire Chief, or their designated representative is authorized to revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this article when it is found by inspection or otherwise that: 
A.  There has been a false statement or representation as to a material fact in the application or construction documents on which the permit or approval was based. 
B.  The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued. 
C.  The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit. 
D.  Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated. 
E.  There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit. 
F.  The permit is used by a different person or firm than the name for which it was issued. 
G.  The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within the time provided therein. 
H.  The permit was issued in error or in violation of any ordinance, regulation, or the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, as amended. 
The Chief and or Director, or his or her designee, may delay reissuing a permit that has been revoked pursuant to this article until such time as the Chief, Director or the designee deems appropriate taking into account the nature and severity of the conduct which caused the permit to be revoked. 
Sec. 7-607. - Blasting operations. 
A.  Use and handling. 
1.  Distance from structures. There shall be no blasting within one hundred feet of any structure or utility line unless the owner of the structure(s) and/or utility line(s) consent in writing, and the blasting conforms to the limits recommended by the U.S. Bureau of Mines Table of Scaled Distances. 
2.  General. Blasting operations shall be conducted only by approved, competent operators familiar with the required safety precautions and the hazards involved. Blasting operations shall be performed in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer of the explosive materials being used. 
3.  Blasting in close proximity. When blasting is done in close proximity to a structure, railway or highway, or any other installation, precautions shall be taken to minimize earth vibrations and air blast effects. Blasting mats or other protective means shall be used to prevent fragments from being thrown. 
4.  Restricted hours. Blasting operations shall only be conducted during daylight hours. 
5.  Personnel. Persons in charge of blasting shall possess a valid permit to blast explosives issued by the Kansas State Fire Marshal, shall not be under the influence of alcohol or drugs which impair sensory or motor skills, shall be at least 21 years of age, and shall demonstrate knowledge of all safety precautions related to the storage, handling or use of explosives or explosive materials. Persons 18 years of age or older are allowed to use and handle explosive materials under the direct supervision of a person who possesses a valid permit to blast explosives issued by the Kansas State Fire Marshal. 
6.  Open flames and lights. Smoking, matches, flame-producing devices, open flames, fire arms and firearms cartridges shall not be permitted inside of or within the blast site. 
7.  Blasting safeguards. Before a blast is fired, the person in charge shall make certain that surplus explosive materials are in a safe place, that persons and equipment are at a safe distance or under sufficient cover, and that a loud warning signal reasonably calculated to be heard by individuals not less than 100 feet of the blast site has been sounded. 
8.  Electric detonator precautions. Precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental discharge of electric detonators from currents induced by radar and radio transmitters, lightning, adjacent power lines, dust and snow storms, or other sources of extraneous electricity. 
9.  Non-electric detonator precautions: Precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental initiation of non-electric detonators from stray currents induced by lightning or static electricity. 
10.  Non-sparking tools. Tools used for the opening and closing of packages of explosive materials, other than metal slitters for opening paper, plastic or fiberboard containers, shall be made of non-sparking materials. 
11.  Disposal of packaging. Empty containers and paper and fiber packaging materials that previously contained explosive materials shall be disposed of or reused in an appropriate manner. 
12.  Abandonment. Explosive materials shall not be abandoned. 
13.  Transportation. Explosive materials shall be transported in accordance with Chapter 7 of the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, and amendments thereto. 
14.  Blast records. A record of each blast shall be kept and retained by the applicant for at least five (5) years and shall be available for inspection upon request by the Public Works Department Community Development Division or the Fire Chief or owners of property within 500 feet of the blast site or as provided by law. These records shall contain the following minimum data: 
a.  Name of blasting contractor; 
b.  Pre-blast survey records; 
c.  Location and time of blast; 
d.  Name of certified blaster in charge; 
e.  Type of material blasted; 
f.  Number of holes bored and spacing; 
g.  Diameter and depth of holes; 
h.  Type and amount of explosives; 
i.  Amount of explosives per delay of 8 milliseconds or greater; 
j.  Method of firing and type of circuit; 
k.  Identification, direction, and distance, in feet, from the nearest blast hole to the nearest building or structure outside the permit area; 
l.  Whether or not mats or other precautions were used; 
m.  Type of detonators and delay periods; 
n.  Type and height of stemming; 
o.  Seismograph and air blast records of each shot. 
15.  Post-blast survey of structure. If during the course of the blasting operation, a complaint is made, or a claim of damage is stated, the applicant shall, with the owner's consent, have the surveyor conduct a post-blast inspection of the structure in question. The surveyor, blasting contractor, and/or insurance agency representative shall investigate each complaint or claim thoroughly using where appropriate the surveyor's written report to compare pre-existing damages with those being claimed. 
16.  Other regulations. Blasting operations shall be conducted in accordance with federal, state and local regulations. 
B.  Ground vibration and air blasts. 
1.  Maximum peak particle velocity. The maximum peak particle velocity at the nearest structure or utility line shall not exceed one inch per second in any one of three mutually perpendicular directions, unless the property or utility line owner(s) consents in writing. 
2.  Ground vibration. Regardless of the distance to nearby structures and utility lines, the blasting operations shall be carried out in such a manner that they will not cause fly rock damage or damage from exceeding air blast or ground vibration limits. 
3.  Seismographic monitoring. Seismographic monitoring of blasts occurring within 500 feet of any structure or utility line shall be provided by a firm independent of the blasting contractor, approved by the Fire Prevention Division, reporting directly to the Fire Marshal and compensated by the applicant. The seismograph monitoring site shall be located between the nearest structure or utility line and the blast site. Seismographic monitoring of blasts occurring at a distance greater than 500 feet of any structure or utility line shall be provided by the blasting contractor or by a firm engaged by the blasting contractor. 
4.  Calibration/certification of seismology equipment. All seismology equipment used on the job site, by either the applicant or a third party independent firm shall have been calibrated and certified within the year preceding the blasting operations. 
5.  Air blasts. Air blasts at the location of any structure shall not exceed the maximum limits specified in Table 11.2 of N.F.P.A. 495. 
C.  Notice of new storage site. When a new explosive material storage location, including a temporary jobsite, is established, the applicant shall notify 48 hours in advance, not including Saturdays, Sundays the City of Lansing Public Works Department, the Lansing Police Department, and Leavenworth county Fire District 1 of the type, quantity and location of explosive materials at the site. 
1.  The Fire Chief is authorized to limit the quantity of explosive materials allowed at any location. 
2.  The Fire Chief is authorized to remove, or cause to be removed or disposed of in an approved manner, at the expense of the applicant, explosives and explosive materials stored, possessed, or used in violation of this article. 
3.  Storage of explosive materials shall comply with Chapter 7 of the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, and amendments thereto. 
4.  The applicant shall possess a valid permit to store explosives from the Kansas State Fire Marshal's Office for the storage site. 
D.  Posting notification. The applicant shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous location, accessible to the public, a weather protected copy of the site map, a copy of the permit to use or possess explosive materials issued by the Division of Fire Prevention, and copies of the permits to blast explosives issued by the Kansas State Fire Marshal's office for all on-site personnel responsible for blasting operations. 
Sec. 7-608. - Inspection and enforcement. 
    The Leavenworth County Fire District 1 and the Public Works Department shall enforce this article under the supervision of the Fire Chief and Public Works Director. The Public Works Department and Fire District No. 1 shall adhere to the provisions concerning inspections, enforcement, and appeals procedures adopted in Chapter 7 and Chapter 1 of the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas and amendments thereto. 
Sec. 7-609. - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 7-610. - Effective dates. 
    This article shall take effect on and after the adoption of this Code by the City. 
  
Appendix to Article VI
Application Checklist for Permit to Conduct Blasting Operations 
  
PROJECT NAME/LOCATION: 
_____
_____ 
DESCRIPTION OF DOCUMENT/INFORMATIONProof of Liability Insurance: 
  
Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which might result from blasting operations: 
  
$5,000,000.00 : General aggregate or a combination of general liability insurance and an umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations 
  
$2,000,000.00 : Each Occurrence 
  
$1,000,000.00 : Automobile combined, single limit 
  
Statutory Amount : Workers Compensation Insurance Insurance Agency Name: Insurance Agency Address: Insurance Agency Telephone No.: Insurance Expiration Dates: Certificates of Insurance on file with Public Works? (Y/N) Copies of Permits to Blast Explosives for all persons responsible for blasting operations on site Blasting Plan: Name of blasting contractor: Names of responsible on-site personnel with copies of permits to blast explosives: Permit to Store Explosives from Kansas State Fire Marshal's office Scale drawing with: 
  
 *Distances to structures within 1,500 feet of blast site 
  
 *Distances to structures/explosive storage magazines 
  
 *Designation of proposed pre-blast survey structures within 500 feet of blast site Name of Seismographic Monitoring Firm: Proof of certification/calibration of seismology equipment Evidence of Notification (including copy of notice) to property and utility line owners located within 1,500 [feet] of blast site Evidence of notification sent certified mail return receipt requested (including copy of notice) to owners of property and utility lines within 500 feet of blast site Copy of pre-blast survey log: Name, Address, Telephone number of blasting expert Proof of insurance for blasting expert: Blasting Expert's certification concerning applicant's blasting operation: Applicant's Information: Name of Person Applying for Permit: Address of Person Applying for Permit: Telephone Nos. of Person Applying for Permit: Applicant's Signature: Application Fee of $500.00  
CHAPTER 8 - HEALTH AND WELFARE 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 8-101. - Health department designated. 
    The Governing Body hereby designates as its official health department the Leavenworth County Health Department. 
Sec. 8-102. - Scope of authority. 
    The Leavenworth County Health Department shall exercise within the corporate limits of the City all powers, functions and duties invested in it by the statutes of the State of Kansas. 
Sec. 8-103. - Pollution of streams. 
    No person shall throw, place or deposit in any stream, creek, lake or pond within the City limits any matter or thing liable to impede, impair or pollute the water therein, or to build, place, throw or deposit on or along the banks thereof, any structure or any matter or thing of any description liable to smother or diminish existing vegetation, or to decay and produce any noxious gases or effluvia likely to pollute or obstruct any of such waters. 
Sec. 8-104. - Stagnant water. 
    No owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land within the City limits shall remove any earth or soil from such lot, tract or parcel of land so as to cause water to collect therein and become stagnant, unclean, offensive and injurious to the individual or public health. 
Sec. 8-105. - Slaughterhouses and packing houses. 
    No person shall keep or maintain a slaughterhouse or packing house within the City limits in such manner as to be injurious to the health of the inhabitants of the City or in an unclean and filthy condition 
Sec. 8-106. - Commercial poultry houses. 
    No person owning or occupying any rooms, buildings or any place where fowl, birds or game are dressed, cleaned or kept alive or dead shall allow such rooms or buildings to become nauseous, filthy or unhealthful nor shall they neglect to thoroughly cleanse and purify the same at least every twenty-four (24) hours. All live poultry shall be kept within the building. 
Sec. 8-107. - Dumping manure. 
    No person shall dump any manure, except for fertilizing purposes, or other refuse matter on any public or private grounds within the limits of this City without first securing permission from the Public Works Department to do so. 
Sec. 8-108. - Spitting. 
    No person shall expectorate on or in any public building or upon the floor or any part of any public conveyance or upon any sidewalk abutting on any public street. 
Sec. 8-109. - Dumping sewage prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit any sewage to be deposited, dumped, discharged or drained on the surface of the ground or about any public right-of-way or ditch within the City. For the purpose of this section, sewage is defined as any substance that contains any of the waste products or other discharges from the bodies of human beings or animals, or chemical or other wastes from domestic, manufacturing or other forms of industry. Such definition shall include but not be limited to the discharge from laundry operations, both domestic and institutional. 
Sec. 8-110. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall be convicted in the municipal court of violating any provisions of this chapter, unless a penalty is otherwise stated, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment of not more than six months or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that any violation to this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable hereinafter as a separate violation. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note- See also Chapter 5, Business Regulations. 

Sec. 8-201. - Adoption of the Kansas Food Code. 
    The City of Lansing adopts by reference the regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Kansas Department of Health and Environment and known as the "Kansas Food Code", K.A.R. 28-36-101 et. Seq. One copy of said Kansas Food Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Adopted by the Code of the City of Lansing", to be opened to inspections and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (See Appendix A, K.A.R. 28-36-101 et seq. and Appendix B, Kansas Food Code.) 
Sec. 8-202. - Same-Licenses and regulation of food service establishments. 
    The inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension, and revocation of licenses to operate food service establishments, the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink, and the enforcement shall be regulated in accordance with the "Kansas Food Code." 
Sec. 8-203. - Enforcement of Kansas Food Code. 
    Section 1-201.10(B) of the Kansas Food Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"Regulatory Authority" means the state enforcement body or authorized representative having jurisdiction over the food establishment, to include the City of Lansing, specifically the Community and Economic Development Department and its designated representatives and shall have the authority as stated under Charter Ordinance 1-2016. 
Sec. 8-204. - Same-Amendment, penalties. 
    The "Kansas Food Code" is amended to add: Any person, firm, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any provisions of this article for which another penalty is not specifically provided is guilty of a public offense and punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person, firm, partnership, or corporation is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person, firm, partnership, or corporation and shall be punished accordingly. 
Sec. 8-205. - Same-Food service license required. 
    No food service establishment shall be operated within the City, or its police jurisdiction, except those issued a license to operate. An application for a City of Lansing Food Establishment License shall be made to the City Clerk and shall include a copy of the Kansas Department of Health and Environment Food Services Establishment Inspection Report. No license shall be issued until the above documentation has been provided and final approval has been received from the Public Works Department. When any food service establishment fails to qualify as provided in the "Kansas Food Code" the Regulatory Authority as stated in 8-203 is authorized to suspend, revoke or deny the license of the food service establishment, or take any other action as stated in the Kansas Food Code. This article shall also apply to temporary food service establishments. Any City of Lansing Food Establishment License issued under this article shall be non-transferable. 
Sec. 8-206. - Same-License fee. 
    Each owner or operator of a food or drink establishment operating within the City shall pay an annual food service license fee of $50.00 payable to the City of Lansing. This fee shall be in addition to any other State or County licensing fees or costs. 
Sec. 8-207. - Same-License renewal. 
    The food service license required in Section 8-205 must be renewed by the licensee, and the food service license fee paid, prior to the beginning of each calendar year. 
Sec. 8-208. - Same-Training required. 
    Every employee of a food or drink establishment operating in the City shall be certified as having successfully attended a food service training school. The employee's completion must be evidenced by official documents. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 8-301. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Lansing, Kansas and to protect neighborhoods against physical, visual and economic deterioration. To that end, the City intends this act to prohibit nuisances that: 
A.  Contribute to or cause injury or endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of others; 
B.  Are contrary to community standards of decency; 
C.  Are offensive to the senses; 
D.  Obstruct the free use of property so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable and quiet enjoyment of life and property by the public; or 
E.  Damage or contribute to the deterioration of property or improvements in the community. 
Sec. 8-302. - Enforcement provisions. 
    The Code Enforcement Officers of the City of Lansing Public Works Department, the Lansing Police Department, and the Leavenworth Department of Health and the authorized representatives of such departments shall be responsible for the enforcement of all provisions of this article and shall have the authority granted them under Charter Ordinance 1-2016. 
Sec. 8-303. - Inspection of property; right of entry; violation. 
A.  All officers and/or authorized agents or representatives charged with the enforcement of this article are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of residential property located within the City and shall be allowed access and entry upon any such private property for said purpose, in order that he or she may perform his/her duty of safeguarding the welfare and safety of the general public and in order that he/she may ascertain that property as set forth in this article is properly maintained. 
B.  Any officer or employee of the City charged with the enforcement of this article shall not, in the discharge of his/her duties; thereby render him/her liable personally. 
C.  It shall be a violation of this article to deny an officer or authorized agent of the City the right of access and entry upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inquiry and inspection to determine if a nuisance exists or while abating the nuisance. 
Sec. 8-304. - Violations not exclusive. 
    Violations of this article are in addition to any other violation enumerated within the ordinances of the Code of the City of Lansing. This article in no way limits the penalties, actions or abatement procedures which may be taken by the City for a violation of this article which is also a violation of any other ordinance of the City or statute of the State of Kansas. 
Sec. 8-305. - Definitions. 
    As used in this title, the terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Absence of an effective registration plate means where a registration plate is completely missing from the vehicle or otherwise invalid or where a vehicle is (1) parked or stored in the City so that it is visible from a public or private street, or adjacent property and (2) the license plate of such vehicle is screened from view by an adjacent structure or vegetation, or by a cover, tarp or similar object, the vehicle shall be deemed to be an inoperable vehicle subject to the provisions of the chapter. 
    City means Lansing, Leavenworth County, Kansas. 
    Control measures means any chemical, structural, physical procedures or processes designed to eradicate, minimize, prevent or otherwise limit the reproduction and/or infestation of insects and rodents detrimental to public health. 
    Director of Public Works means the director of the department of public works of the City of Lansing, or his/her authorized representative. 
    Dwelling means any building, manufactured home or mobile home which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Health officer means a code enforcement officer of the City of Lansing Community and Economic Development Department, Law enforcement officer for the City of Lansing, or an officer of the Leavenworth County Health Department. 
    Human excreta means the body discharge (both feces and urine) of humans. 
    Inoperable means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the functions or purposes for which it was originally constructed, or 
1.  The absence of a current valid registration plate upon such vehicle permitting that vehicle to be operated on the public streets and highways of the State of Kansas, unless the vehicle has a non-highway vehicle title issued solely because the vehicle was not manufactured for street use, or 
2.  The absence of one or more of the parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle on the public streets and highways, unless the vehicle has a non-highway title issued solely because the vehicle was manufactured for street use, or 
3.  The placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains or other supports. 
    Insects means the classes Insects and Arachnida of the phylum Arthropoda including flies, mosquitoes, fleas, lice, cockroaches, bedbugs, plant bugs, mites, ticks, spiders, and scorpions. 
    Junk means the storage of all old appliances, equipment, or parts thereof, all old iron or other scrap metal, automobile tires, cardboard, old lumber, old wood and mattresses, which items are not being used for their intended purposes, and does not include orderly stacked firewood. 
    Junk vehicle means any vehicle which is wrecked, scrapped, ruined, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned and/or without a valid automobile license tag. 
    Litter means and includes all waste material, including but not limited to disposable packages or containers. 
    Manure means the body discharge of all animals except humans. 
    Nuisance means any condition which is injurious to health, or is a potential health hazard, or is indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by a majority of persons subjected to the condition, such condition being no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted is unequal. To include, but not limited to the following: all dead animals not removed within 24 hours after death; any place or structure that emits or causes any offensive disagreeable or nauseous odors; all stagnant ponds or pools of water; any fence structure, thing or substance placed upon or being upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public ground so as to obstruct the same, except as permitted by the City; any alarm response calls over five in any calendar year. 
    Owner means any person who is a holder of any legal or equitable interest in the premises, property or lot, and alone or jointly or severally with others: 
1.  Has record legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
2.  Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit and if the case permits, may include all persons who have an interest in a structure and any who are in possession or control thereof as owner or agent of the owner, contract purchaser, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner; or 
3.  Collects rent for a dwelling unit on behalf of or in place of the owner. 
    Any such person representing the owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as if he/she were the owner, and upon failure to comply therewith shall be subject to the same penalties hereinafter set out. 
    Parking means the temporary location for not more than 72 consecutive hours of motor vehicles (except for inoperable vehicles), boats, trailers and unoccupied recreational vehicles. 
    Person means a natural person or a legal entity such as, but not limited to, an individual, firm, association, joint stock company, syndicate, partnership, or corporation. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including structures located thereon. 
    Property means any real property within the City which is not a street or highway. 
    Refuse means all waste materials such as trash, debris, garbage, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead animals and solid industrial wastes but shall not include human or animal excrements. 
    Residential bulky waste means items of solid waste normally produced by persons in their dwellings or on their dwelling premises that are too large or too heavy to be placed in a thirty- to thirty-five-gallon container and includes household appliances, furniture, plumbing fixtures, playground equipment, yard appliances and equipment and similar materials but does not include vehicle major component parts, hazardous waste, demolition and construction waste or tree waste. 
    Residential district means that land area, including public and private streets, that is contained within one of the zoning districts defined by the Lansing Zoning Ordinance as a residential zoning district. This definition shall include those sections of public and private streets that abut residentially zoned land on both sides. 
    Rodents mean the so-called domestic rats, Rattus norvegicus, and Rattus rattus, and domestic mice, Mus musculus and wild native rodents associated with the transmission of disease or causing nuisance to man or other animals. 
    Salvage material means materials of some value that are obtained from the disassembly of various kinds of machinery, mechanical appliance, and/or the demolition of buildings or structures. 
    Solid waste collector means any governmental agency or any person collecting, transporting and disposing of a solid waste, subject to the conditions of this chapter. 
    Storage means the keeping outside of an enclosed building for more than 72 consecutive hours. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between property lines of every way publicly maintained and/or when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. Where the word highway or the word street is used in this title, it means street, avenue, boulevard, thoroughfare, trafficway, alley and any other public way for vehicular travel by whatever name unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Tree waste means all tree or shrub waste including tree stumps, but does not include leaves, tree trimmings or branches tied in bundles not more than four feet in length and not more than eighteen inches in diameter placed beside the solid waste storage containers, vegetation prunings or wood chips placed in such container, fireplace wood or other wood fuel. 
    Vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor, farm machinery, motorcycle, motorized bicycle or other device designed of used for transportation of persons or property which, as originally built, contained an engine, regardless of whether it contains an engine at any other time. 
    Visible means that the shape of a vehicle is recognizable as a vehicle even if it is covered. 
    Weeds are those plants defined as noxious weeds in K.S.A. 2-1314 and amendments thereto and as otherwise defined in this article. 
Sec. 8-306. - Notice of violations; abatement; immediate hazard. 
A.  Whenever an officer, authorized to enforce violations of the provisions of this article, determines that there has been a violation of any provisions of this article, unless other notice requirements are set forth by the Code of the City of Lansing, he/she shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefore, as herein provided. Such notice shall: 
1.  Be in writing; 
2.  Particularize the violations alleged to exist or have been committed; 
3.  Provide a reasonable time for correction of the violation particularized; 
4.  Be addressed to and served upon the owner and/or occupant of the premises. Notice shall be deemed properly served upon such owner, operator, or occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him/her personally, or if such notice cannot be personally served, a copy is sent by return receipt delivery, as defined in K.S.A. 60-303(c), to his/her last known address. If the notice is returned with an endorsement showing refusal to accept delivery then the notice may be sent by first-class mail addressed to the party to be served. If mailed, service shall be considered obtained three days after the mailing by first-class mail, postage prepaid, which shall be evidenced by a certificate of service. Mere failure to claim return receipt delivery is not refusal of service within the meaning of this subsection. If notice of violation cannot be served, service may be obtained by notice of publication by at least one publication in the official newspaper of the City of Lansing. Such publication shall contain the conditions and reason of said notice. 
B.  As used in this section, a reasonable time for correction shall be a period of not more than ten days from the individual's receipt of the notice or publication of such notice in the official newspaper of the City of Lansing. In the discretion of the officer authorized to enforce this article, the time allowed for correction of the violation may be extended for a period of not more than thirty days upon receipt of a request for such extension of time by the individual receiving the notice of violation. 
C.  In the event the responsible person fails to abate within the time frame prescribed, the City may abate the problem. In that event, the cost of abatement shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located and a $25.00 administrative fee shall be charged. The City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying other taxes to the County Clerk, certify the costs as provided in this section. The County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the City as other City taxes are collected and paid. 
D.  The officer authorized to enforce this article, shall give notice to the owner of the premises by return receipt delivery of the costs of abatement of the nuisance. The notice shall state that payment of the cost is due and payable within 30 (thirty) days following mailing of the notice. 
E.  Immediate hazard. When, in the opinion of the officer authorized to enforce violations of the provisions of this article, there is a nuisance that constitutes an immediate hazard requiring immediate action to protect the public health and safety, such officer may take those actions or abatement as are needed without delay, and such action may, under the preceding circumstance be taken without prior notice to the owners or possessors of said premises, property or lot that is or harbors the nuisance. Costs and fees for abatement will still be assessed and collected as stated in Section 8-306C. 
Sec. 8-307. - Insects, rodents, and other vermin. 
A.  Every occupant of a structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects or rodents, other vermin therein or on the premises. Wherever two or more occupants are in the same building, the owner or operator of the building shall be responsible for such extermination. If the infestation is caused primarily by improper housekeeping, it shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and occupants to effect such extermination. 
B.  All real property shall be maintained free of conditions that encourage or permit any unnecessary breeding of insects that are annoying or dangerous to residents of the City. Exterior windows and doors of all structures shall be screened in a manner adequate to exclude insects. 
Sec. 8-308. - Nuisance lighting prohibited. 
A.  No person shall install, maintain and/or use an outdoor visible light or other source of illumination, which is on private property and produces glare or direct illumination across a property line in a residential area of such intensity that it creates a nuisance or unreasonably interferes with the use or enjoyment of adjacent property. 
B.  Outside lights must be made up of a light source and reflector so that, acting together, the light beam is controlled and not directed across a property line. 
C.  This section shall not apply to street lights or lights installed, maintained and used in connection with the use and operation of any outdoor stadium; amphitheater, or athletic field which is open to the public. 
Sec. 8-309. - Unauthorized parking in residential districts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Park a motor vehicle on any street or alley for the primary purpose of washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except when repairs are necessitated by an emergency. 
2.  For any person or operator to park a motor vehicle on any portion of the required front yard of any lot within the City. 
3.  For any person or operator to park a motor vehicle on any portion of the unpaved side yard of any lot within the City. 
4.  For any person or operator to park a motor vehicle on an unpaved surface. 
5.  Citations may be issued for violations of subsections (1) through (4) of this section, without the necessity of allowing the person or operator time to correct these violations. 
6.  Citations may be served for violations of subsections (1) through (4) of this section, by conspicuously affixing the citation to such vehicle. 
7.  In any proceedings for a violation of this section, the registration plate displayed upon the motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facia presumption that the owner of such motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at the place where the violation occurred. 
B.  Every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount of not more than five hundred dollars. 
Sec. 8-310. - Outdoor storage prohibited. 
A.  No owner or occupant of any structure or real property shall store, use or maintain on the exterior of said structure or real property, interior furniture which is so dilapidated or deteriorated as to be a potential accident hazard, a harborage for insects, rodents or vermin, or which emits offensive odors. 
B.  No owner or occupant of any structure or real property shall store salvage or junk in the City or on vacant lots, including abandoned or not in actual use iceboxes, or refrigerators. 
    The owner and/or occupant shall keep premises free of litter, refuse, salvage material and junk; provided, that building materials to be used within ninety days for construction on the premises, if properly authorized by a current building permit, may be kept if stored at least eighteen inches off the ground and not closer than forty-eight inches to a wall or fence, provided the health officer may approve a lesser distance. 
Sec. 8-311. - Weeds and noxious weeds. 
    It is declared a public nuisance and unlawful for any person or owner of real property or premises to allow the following to occur on his/her/its property. 
A.  Rank grass, weeds, noxious weeds as defined by K.S.A. 2-1314, and shall include, but shall not be limited by, any noxious weeds as defined by Leavenworth County, and to also include brush and woody vines, indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as to become a fire menace to adjacent improved property, weeds which bear or may bear seed of a downy or wingy nature, weeds located in an area which harbors rats, insects, animals, reptiles, or any other creature which either may or does constitute a menace to public health, safety or welfare, or other vegetation over twelve inches in height upon any platted lot or piece of land or upon the streets and alleys in and/or adjoining upon any such platted lot or piece of land within the City. It is unlawful for the owner of any such lot or piece of land to permit rank grass, weeds or other vegetation in excess of twelve inches in height to exist and remain on said owner's land or upon the streets and alleys in front of and abutting upon any such platted lot or piece of land owned by said owner. 
B.  Upon a determination by any officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this article, that a nuisance such as is described in subsection A. of this section exists and such nuisance has not been abated following a notice of violation pursuant to Section 8-306, such officer shall notify public works to abate such nuisance. 
Sec. 8-312. - Inoperable or abandoned vehicles. 
    No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle, which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperable, junked, or partially dismantled condition upon any private property within the City. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperable, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property is declared a public nuisance, which may be abated as such, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Any one (1) of the following conditions in existence for a period exceeding twenty (20) days shall be deemed prima facie evidence that a vehicle is inoperable: 
1.  The absence of current registration plate upon the vehicle and current motor vehicle insurance; 
2.  The placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains or other supports; 
3.  The absence or condition of disrepair of one (1) or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon the streets and highways; 
4.  Placement of the vehicle on any public or private property with one or more flat tires; 
5.  The placement of materials or property within the vehicle which would preclude the lawful operation of the vehicle upon the streets or highways. 
B.  This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the City and properly operated in an appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the City. 
Sec. 8-313. - Abandoned vehicles; authority to remove. 
    A person shall not use the public highway to abandon vehicles or use the highway to leave vehicles unattended in such a manner as to interfere with public highway operations. When a person leaves a motor vehicle on a public highway or other property open to use by the public, the City of Lansing having jurisdiction of such highway or other property open to use by the public may, after 48 hours or when the motor vehicle interferes with public highway operations, remove and impound the motor vehicle. (K.S.A. 8-1102) 
Sec. 8-314. - Abandoned vehicle; notice. 
    Any motor vehicle which has been impounded as provided in this section for 30 days or more shall be disposed of in the following manner: 
A.  If such motor vehicle has displayed thereon a registration plate issued by the division of vehicles and has been registered with the division, the City shall request verification from the division of vehicles of the last registered owner and any lien holders, if any. Such verification request shall be submitted to the division of vehicles not more than 30 days after the City took possession of the vehicle. The City shall mail a notice by certified mail to the registered owner thereof, addressed to the address as shown on the certificate of registration, and to the lien holder, if any, of record in the county in which the title shows the owner resides, if registered in this state. The notice shall state that if the owner or lien holder does not claim such motor vehicle and pay the removal and storage charges incurred by the City on it within 15 days from the date of the mailing of the notice that it will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. The notice shall be mailed within 10 days after receipt of verification of the last owner and any lien holders, if any, as provided in this subsection. 
B.  After 15 days from date of mailing notice, the City shall publish a notice once a week for two consecutive weeks in the City's official newspaper, which notice shall describe the motor vehicle by name of maker, model, serial number, and owner, if known, and stating that it has been impounded by the City and that it will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash if the owner thereof does not claim it within 10 days of the date of the second publication of the notice and pay the removal and storage charges, and publication costs incurred by the City. If the motor vehicle does not display a registration plate issued by the division of vehicles and is not registered with the division, the City after 30 days from the date of impoundment, shall request verification from the division of vehicles of the last registered owner and any lien holders, if any. Such verification request shall be submitted to the division of vehicles no more than 30 days after the City took possession of the vehicle. The City shall mail a notice by certified mail to the registered owner thereof, addressed to the address as shown on the certificate of registration, and to the lien holder, if any, of record in the county in which the title shows the owner resides, if registered in this state. The notice shall state that if the owner or lien holder does not claim such motor vehicle and pay the removal and storage charges incurred by the City on it within 15 days from the date of the mailing of the notice, it will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. The notice shall be mailed within 10 days after receipt of verification of the last owner and any lien holders, if any, as provided in this subsection. After 15 days from the date of mailing notice, the City shall publish a notice in the City's official newspaper, which notice shall describe the motor vehicle by name of maker, model, color and serial number and shall state that it has been impounded by the City and will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash, if the owner thereof does not claim it within 10 days of the date of the second publication of the notice and pay the removal and storage charges incurred by the City. (K.S.A. 8-1102) 
Sec. 8-315. - Same-Sold at auction. 
A.  When the City has complied with the provisions of this section with respect to an abandoned motor vehicle and the owner thereof does not claim it within the time stated in the notice and pay the removal and storage charges and publication costs incurred by the City on such motor vehicle, the City may sell the motor vehicle at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. 
B.  After any sale pursuant to this section, the City or its designated agent may file proof thereof with the Division of Vehicles. Thereupon, said division shall issue a certificate of title to the purchaser of such motor vehicle. All moneys derived from the sale of the motor vehicles pursuant to this article, after payment of the expenses of the sale, shall be paid into the fund of the City, which is used by it for the construction or maintenance of highways. (K.S.A. 8-1102) 
Sec. 8-316. - Same-On private property. 
A.  Any person who shall abandon and leave any vehicle on any real property, other than public property or property open to use by the public, within the City of Lansing, which is not owned or leased by such person or by the owner or lessee of such vehicle, shall be guilty of a criminal trespass. Upon request of the owner or occupant of such real property, the City or its designated agent may remove and dispose of such vehicle in the manner provided in this article, except that the provisions that a motor vehicle be abandoned for a period of time in excess of forty-eight (48) hours prior to its removal shall not be applicable to abandoned vehicles which are subject to the provisions of this section. 
B.  Any person removing such vehicle from the real property at the request of the City shall have a promissory lien on such vehicle for the costs incurred in removing towing and storing such vehicle. 
(K.S.A. 8-1102) 
Sec. 8-317. - Return of impounded motor vehicle; requirements. 
    Any person attempting to recover a motor vehicle impounded under this article shall show proof of valid registration and ownership of the motor vehicle to the City before obtaining the motor vehicle. In addition, the City may require payment of all reasonable costs associated with the impoundment of the motor vehicle, including transportation and storage fees, prior to release of the motor vehicle. (K.S.A. 8-1102) 
Sec. 8-318. - Salvage dealers; screening. 
    The provisions of Section 8-312 shall not apply to any person conducting a business enterprise in compliance with existing zoning regulations or who places such vehicles behind screening of sufficient size, strength, and density to screen such vehicles from the view of the public and to prohibit ready access to stored vehicles by children. However, nothing in this section shall be construed as to authorize the maintenance of a public nuisance. 
Sec. 8-319. - Other nuisances unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any nuisance within the City. Said nuisance shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
A.  All dead animals not removed within 24 hours of death; 
B.  Any place or structure or substance which emits or causes any offensive disagreeable or nauseous odors; 
C.  All stagnant ponds or pools of water; 
D.  Any fence, structure, thing or substance placed upon or being upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public ground so as to obstruct the same, except as permitted by the City. 
Sec. 8-320. - Penalties. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall be convicted in the municipal court of violating any provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine or not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment of not more than six months or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that any violation to this article occurs, it shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable hereinafter as a separate violation. Provided, however, that if upon trial of any person found guilty of a misdemeanor hereinunder it shall appear to the court that the nuisance complained of as proscribed in this chapter is continuing, the court shall enter such order as it shall deem appropriate to cause the nuisance to be abated. Costs of abatement are separate and apart from any fine ordered by the court. 
Sec. 8-321. - Habitual violator. 
A.  A property is classified as a "Chronic Nuisance" property when a second citation for any property maintenance code/nuisance violation is issued, or a second abatement of same is made on the same property in a calendar year. The property will then be placed on a "Chronic Nuisance" list with the Department of Public Works, Community Development Division. 
B.  The fee for the first remediation will be the cost, plus a $100.00 administrative charge. 
C.  For any further remediation(s) and/or citations at a "Chronic Nuisance" property within a two-year period, in addition to the cost for remediation, the administrative charge will be $150.00 for the second offense, with the administrative charge increasing by an additional $100.00 for each subsequent offense. 
D.  Once on the "Chronic Nuisance" list, an annual $300.00 monitoring fee will be charged to the property owner on January 1 of each subsequent year until the property is maintained for one calendar year (January 1-December 31) without further enforcement action by the City. 
E.  Additional fines may be charged by the court. 
    Any person found guilty of violation of this article shall be fined a minimum of $200.00 and a maximum of $500.00 for each habitual violator citation. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend the minimum fine or any portion thereof. A person cited for violation of this section shall be required to appear in municipal court. In addition thereto, the Municipal Judge shall have the authority to sentence the individual to up to six (6) months in jail. It shall be a defense to an alleged violation of this section for the defendant to have been adjudged not guilty, or the charge dismissed. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION 

Sec. 8-401. - General provisions. 
A.  Purposes. The purpose and objectives of this article are as follows: 
1.  To maintain and improve the quality of water impacted by the storm drainage system within the City of Lansing. 
2.  To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff and illicit discharges from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites into the storm drainage system within the City of Lansing. 
3.  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the storm drainage system. 
4.  To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products. 
5.  To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners of construction sites within the City. 
6.  To enable the City to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting requirements for stormwater discharges. 
B.  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
C.  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings: 
BMP - Best Management Practices CFR - Code of Federal Regulations EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency HHW - Household Hazardous Waste KDHE - Kansas Department of Health and Environment MS4 - Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System SWP3 - Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan  
D.  Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    Best Management Practices (BMP's) here refers to management practices and methods to control pollutants in stormwater. BMP's are of two types: "source controls" (nonstructural) and "treatment controls" (structural). Source controls are practices that prevent pollution by reducing potential pollutants at their source, before they come into contact with stormwater. Treatment controls remove pollutants from stormwater. The selection, application and maintenance of BMP's must be sufficient to prevent or reduce the likelihood of pollutants entering the storm drainage system. Specific BMP's may be imposed by the City and are discussed further in Section 8-402E. 
    City means the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
    Clearing means any activity that removes all or a substantial part of the vegetative surface cover. 
    Commercial means pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1 acre or more, as well as those of less than one acre when the Director of Public Works determines that resulting potential or actual erosion and sedimentation may adversely impact streets, storm sewers, drainage ways or adjacent property. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Construction site means any location where construction activity occurs. 
    Contaminated means containing harmful quantities of pollutants. 
    Contractor means any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a construction site, including any construction manager, general contractor or subcontractor. Also includes, but is not limited to, earthwork, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or landscaping contractors, and material suppliers delivering materials to the site. 
    Director means the person appointed to the position of Public Works Director by the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
    Discharge means any addition or release of any pollutant, stormwater or any other substance whatsoever into storm drainage system. 
    Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any owner of a construction site or industrial facility. 
    Domestic sewage means sewage originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom and laundry sources, including waste from food preparation, dishwashing, garbage grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks. 
    Drainage way means any surface channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
    Earthwork means the disturbance of soils on a site associated with clearing, grading, or excavation activities. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized official of the EPA or such successor agency. 
    Erosion control means a measure that prevents erosion. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a Kansas licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction. 
    Facility means any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
    Fertilizer means a substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. 
    Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire, or to inspect or test fire equipment. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Grading means excavation or fill of soil, rock or other material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Groundwater means any water residing below the surface of the ground or percolating into or out of the ground 
    Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that the Director determines will cause an adverse impact to storm drainage system or will contribute to the failure of the City to meet the water quality based requirements of the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261. 
    Household hazardous waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household (including single and multiple residences) that would be classified as hazardous pursuant to K.A.R. 28-29-1100 (b) (1). 
    Illegal discharge. See "illicit discharge" below. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the storm drainage system that is prohibited under this article. 
    Illicit connections means an illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    Industrial waste (or commercial waste) means any wastes produced as a by-product of any industrial, institutional or commercial process or operation, other than domestic sewage. 
    Mechanical fluid means any fluid used in the operation and maintenance of machinery, vehicles and any other equipment, including lubricants, antifreeze, petroleum products, oil and fuel. 
    Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning (or mobile washing) means power washing, steam cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning, of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a commercial activity. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances, including roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins and ponds owned and operated by the City and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and not used for collecting or conveying sanitary sewage. 
    NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued by EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to Waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Notice of violation means a written notice detailing any violations of this article and any action expected of the violators. 
    Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to: petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
    Owner means the person who owns a facility, part of a facility, or land. 
    Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, Joint Stock Company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns, including all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest. 
    Pet waste or animal waste means excrement and other waste from domestic animals. 
    Petroleum product means a product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. 
    Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, inks, toners, and solvents; oil, antifreeze, fuel, and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, that same cause or contribute to pollution; floatables, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life, property, or public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    Potable water means water that has been treated to drinking water standards and is safe for human consumption. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Private drainage system means all privately or publicly owned ground, surfaces, structures or systems, excluding the MS4, that contribute to or convey stormwater, including but not limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns, driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds, draws, swales, streams and any ground surface. 
    Public improvement plans means engineering drawings subject to approval by the City Engineer for the construction of public improvements. 
    Qualified person means a person who possesses the required certification, license; or who possesses appropriate competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated by sufficient education, training, and/or experience to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity, and demonstrates such, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, in the performance of duties of a Qualified Person as set forth in this article. 
    Release means to dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of: (A) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and (B) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Sanitary sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the City sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the City sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
    Sanitary sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the City sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Sediment means soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported naturally by water, wind or gravity, or mechanically by any person. 
    Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and aerated tanks. 
    Shall means mandatory; may means discretionary. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. Also, a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
    Site development permit means a permit issued by the municipality for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff, and grading. 
    Small quantity generator waste means any hazardous waste generated within the limits prescribed for small quantity generators in K.A.R. 28-31-260. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining or agricultural operations, and residential, community and institutional activities. 
    Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Start of construction means the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including but not limited to preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
    State means The State of Kansas. 
    Storm drainage system means all surfaces, structures and systems that contribute to or convey stormwater, including private drainage systems, the MS4, surface water, groundwater, Waters of the State and Waters of the United States. 
    Stormwater means runoff resulting from precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) means a document that describes the Best Management Practices to be implemented at a site, to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. 
    Subdivision development includes activities associated with the platting of any parcel of land into one or more lots and includes all construction activity taking place thereon. 
    Surface water means water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the surface of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams, puddles, channelized flow and runoff. 
    Uncontaminated means not containing harmful quantities of pollutants. 
    Used oil or used motor oil means any oil that as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties. 
    Utility agency means private utility companies, City departments or contractors working for private utility companies or City departments, engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility distribution lines and services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television and communication services. 
    Watercourse means any natural or improved lake, pond, stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, gutter, culvert, drain, gully, swale or wash in which waters flow continuously or intermittently 
    Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Waters of the State (or water) means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the State, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the State or inside the jurisdiction of the State. 
    Water quality standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface water in the State for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by State or Federal regulatory standards to be necessary to protect those uses. 
    Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and the flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40 CFR Section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetland means any area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks or debris that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land clearing operations. 
Sec. 8-402. - Prohibitions and requirements. 
A.  Prohibitions. 
1.  No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm drainage system any discharge that is not composed entirely of uncontaminated stormwater, except as allowed in Section 8-402B. Common stormwater contaminants include trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste and sediment. 
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8-402B., any discharge shall be prohibited by this section if the discharge in question has been determined by the Director to be a source of pollutants to the storm drainage system. 
3.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
4.  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic sewage or industrial waste, to the storm drainage system, or allow such a connection to continue. 
5.  No person shall connect a line, or maintain a previously established line conveying stormwater, groundwater, or any other substance directly to public lines or structures, or directly onto streets or curbs. 
6.  No person shall maliciously destroy or interfere with BMP's implemented pursuant to this article. 
B.  Exemptions. The following non-stormwater discharges are deemed acceptable and not a violation of this section. 
1.  A discharge authorized by an NPDES permit other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4; 
2.  Uncontaminated waterline flushing and other infrequent discharges from potable water sources; 
3.  Infrequent uncontaminated discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering; 
4.  Discharge from the occasional non-commercial washing of vehicles on properties zoned A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5. 
5.  A discharge of swimming pool water in compliance with Chapter 8 Article 5. 
6.  Uncontaminated discharge from foundation, footing or crawl space drains and their associated sump pumps and air conditioning condensation drains; 
7.  Uncontaminated groundwater, including rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration into storm drains, pumped groundwater and springs; 
8.  Diverted stream flows and natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
9.  A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or materials. 
C.  Requirements applicable to certain dischargers. Allowed releases in terms of this section refer to surface releases on private property. Physical connections to storm sewer pipes and structures are still strictly prohibited. 
1.  Private drainage system maintenance. The owner of any private drainage system shall maintain the system to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. This maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, sediment removal, bank erosion repairs, maintenance of vegetative cover, and removal of debris from pipes and structures. 
2.  Minimization of irrigation runoff. A discharge of irrigation water that is of sufficient quantity to cause a concentrated flow in the storm drainage system is prohibited. Irrigation systems shall be managed to reduce the discharge of water from a site. 
3.  Cleaning of paved surfaces required. The owner of any paved parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as required to prevent the buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup of mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment or debris is a violation of this ordinance. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with this article. This section does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction activities, which are regulated by Section 8-403. 
4.  Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning operations shall not discharge to the storm drainage system in violation of this article. 
5.  Maintenance of equipment. Any leak or spill related to equipment maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to prevent the potential release of pollutants. Vehicles, machinery and equipment must be maintained to reduce leaking fluids. 
6.  Materials storage. In addition to other requirements of this Code, materials shall be stored to prevent the potential release of pollutants. The uncovered, outdoor storage of unsealed containers of hazardous substances is prohibited. 
7.  Pet waste. Pet waste shall be disposed of as solid waste or sanitary sewage in a timely manner, to prevent discharge to the storm drainage system. 
8.  Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations and applicable laws. Excessive application shall be considered a violation of this article. 
9.  Prohibition on use of pesticides and fungicides banned from manufacture. Use of any pesticide, herbicide or fungicide, the manufacture of which has been either voluntarily discontinued or prohibited by the Environmental Protection Agency, or any Federal, State or City regulation is prohibited. 
10.  Open drainage channel maintenance. Every person owning or occupying property through which an open drainage channel passes shall keep and maintain that part of the drainage channel within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, divert. or retard the flow of water through the drainage channel as determined by the Director of Public Works. In addition, the owner or occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures adjacent to a drainage channel, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the drainage channel. 
D.  Release and hazardous release reporting and cleanup. Any person responsible for a known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in or may result in illegal discharges to the storm drainage system shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, abatement and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material, said person shall comply with all state, federal, and local laws requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the release. In the event of such a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Director no later than 4:30 p.m. of the next business day. In the event of a discharge of a hazardous material, said person shall immediately notify the Director and Police Department 
E.  Adoption and imposition of best management practices. The City hereby adopts the most recent edition, as may be amended from time to time, of the Mid-America Regional Council and American Public Works Association Manual of Best Management Practices for Stormwater Quality. Where specific BMP's are required, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall implement and maintain these BMP's at their own expense. 
Sec. 8-403. - Stormwater discharges from construction activities. 
A.  General requirements for construction sites. 
1.  The owner of a site of construction activity shall be responsible for compliance with all the requirements of Section 8-403A. 
2.  Waste Disposal. Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of Best Management Practices. Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of waste. Uncontained waste that may blow, wash or otherwise be released from the site is prohibited. 
3.  Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying ready-mixed concrete, shall be contained on construction sites for proper disposal. Release of these materials is prohibited. 
4.  Erosion and Sediment Control. Best Management Practices shall be implemented to prevent the release of sediment from construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. 
Excessive sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed immediately if the sediment presents a traffic hazard or public safety concern as determined by the Director of Public Works or the Police Chief. 
5.  Upon completion of permitted construction activity on any site, the property owner and subsequent property owners will be responsible for continued compliance with the requirements of Section 8-403A., in the course of maintenance, reconstruction or any other construction activity on the site. 
6.  Permits. 
a.  No person shall be granted a site development permit for land-disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of 43,560 or more square feet (1 acre or more) without the approval of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan by the Lansing Department of Public Works. 
b.  No site development permit is required for the following activities: 
(i)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
(ii)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
c.  Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of any licensed technical professional or consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. 
d.  Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and that personnel knowledgeable about erosion and sediment control best management practices shall be on site on all days when construction or grading activity takes place. 
e.  The applicant will be required to file with the City of Lansing a faithful performance and maintenance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security acceptable to the Director of Public Works in an amount deemed sufficient by the Director of Public Works to cover all costs of construction, inspection, and maintenance of temporary and permanent sediment control improvements during construction, and the cost to correct failure of permanent sediment control measures installed on the site for a period of two years following final completion of site work as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
f.  A permit and sediment control measures may be required for sites of less than one acre when the Director of Public Works determines that potential or actual erosion and sedimentation may adversely impact streets, storm sewers, drainage ways, or adjacent property. 
7.  Review and Approval. 
a.  The Lansing Public Works Department will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. The review will be undertaken as Promptly as reasonably practical, and no later than 30 days after receiving an application the Lansing Public Works Department shall, in writing: 
(i)  Approve the permit application; 
(ii)  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
(iii)  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
b.  Failure of the Lansing Public Works Department to act on an original or revised application within 30 days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed and in accordance with an approved general NPDES permit unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the Lansing Public Works Department. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities may be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the Lansing Public Works Department. 
c.  Denial of a permit maybe appealed to the Governing Body within 5 days of the notice of denial. 
B.  Construction sites requiring an approved SWP3. This section applies to all construction sites excluding subdivision developments. Where construction on a site will disturb soil or remove vegetation on one (1) or more acres of land during the life of the construction project, and/or sites less than one (1) acre when the Director of Public Works determines that potential or actual erosion and sedimentation may adversely impact streets, storm sewers, drainage ways, or adjacent property, an approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) for the project must be provided and implemented by the construction site owner as follows 
1.  The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire property area unless all applicable plans specifically exclude certain areas from disturbance. 
2.  The SWP3 must be provided by the owner and submitted to the City for approval. Two copies of the SWP3 shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works. For sites subject to plan review by the Planning Office, the plan will not be released for construction until an approved SWP3 has been obtained. 
3.  The preparation and implementation of the SWP3 must comply with Section 8-403D. 
4.  The Director will review the SWP3 submitted for the site and will return either a letter of SWP3 approval or a request for revisions within 14 days of submission of the SWP3. Construction activity, including any soil disturbance or removal of vegetation, shall not commence on the site until the Director has issued a letter of SWP3 approval. 
5.  The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the SWP3 and notification of all contractors and utility agencies on the site. 
C.  Subdivision developments requiring an approved SWP3. Where construction of a subdivision development will disturb soil or remove vegetation on one (1) or more acres of land during the life of the development project, approved Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans (SWP3's) for the project must be provided and implemented by the subdivision owner as follows: 
1.  The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire platted area. 
2.  SWP3's must be provided by the subdivision owner and included in Public Improvement Plans submitted to the City Engineer for the development. 
3.  The preparation and implementation of all SWP3's must comply with Section 8-403D. 
4.  SWP3's must be provided for all phases of development, including sanitary sewer construction, storm drainage system construction, waterline, street and sidewalk construction, general grading and the construction of individual homes. The subdivision owner will not be required to provide an SWP3 for the activities of utility agencies within the subdivision. Utility construction is addressed in Section 8-403E. 
5.  Approval of Public Improvement Plans by the City Engineer will constitute approval by the Director of the included SWP3. Construction activity, including any soil disturbance or removal of vegetation, shall not commence until the Public Improvement Plans are approved for the development. 
6.  The subdivision owner shall provide a copy of the approved SWP3's to all utility agencies prior to their working within the subdivision. 
7.  The subdivision owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the approved SWP3's for all construction activity within the development, excluding construction under the control of subsequent owners of individual lots and construction managed by utility agencies. 
a.  Individual Lot or Lots. The permittee who transfers ownership of a lot or a portion of the overall permitted area and the new owner or operator of the lot or parcel shall complete an Individual Lot Certificate (ILC) form for each lot, lots or parcels sold or incorporate into the contract for sale requirements equal to those indicated on the ILC form. The ILC or statements in the contract for sale do not constitute a transfer of the Authorization to discharge. The agreement is between the new owner or operator of the lot or parcel and the permittee to implement the SWP3 plan and the conditions of the general NPDES permit cooperatively. 
8.  The subsequent owner of an individual lot bears the responsibility for continued implementation of the approved SWP3's for all construction activity within or related to the individual lot, excluding construction managed by utility agencies. 
D.  Stormwater pollution prevention plans. Preparation and implementation of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans for construction activity shall comply with the following: 
1.  Preparation. 
a.  The SWP3 shall be prepared under the direction of a Kansas Licensed Professional Engineer. 
b.  The SWP3 shall provide the name, address and phone number of the project owner for purposes of correspondence and enforcement. 
c.  The SWP3 shall identify existing natural resources such as streams, forest cover and other established vegetative cover. 
d.  The SWP3 shall specify and provide detail for all BMP's necessary to meet the requirements of this article, including any applicable BMP's that have been adopted and imposed by the City. 
e.  The SWP3 shall specify when each BMP will be installed, and for how long it will be maintained within the construction sequence. Multiple plans may be required for major phases of construction such as rough grading, building construction and final grading. 
f.  The SWP3 shall delineate all anticipated disturbed areas and specify the vegetative cover that must be established in those areas to achieve final stabilization. 
2.  Implementation. 
a.  BMP's shall be installed and maintained by qualified persons. The owner or their representative shall be able to provide upon the Director's request a copy of the SWP3 on site within one hour during construction activity, or within the next business day for periods of inactivity, and shall be prepared to respond to unforeseen maintenance of specific BMP's. 
b.  The owner shall provide for a qualified person pursuant to [Section] 8-401D. to inspect all BMP's at least once per week and within the next business day after a rainfall of one half inch or more as measured at the site or generally reported in the Lansing area and shall prepare an inspection report specifying all deficiencies and recommending corrections Copies of all inspection reports must be provided to the Lansing Public Works Office within two days of a rainfall event and within two days of date of weekly inspection. 
c.  Based on inspections performed by the owner's designated qualified person or by authorized City personnel, modifications to the SWP3 will be necessary if at any time the specified BMP's do not meet the objectives of this article. In this case, the owner shall meet with authorized City personnel to determine the appropriate modifications. All modifications shall be completed within seven (7) days of the referenced inspection, and shall be recorded on the owner's copy of the SWP3, unless the Director of Public Works determines immediate modification is necessary, in which case the modification shall be undertaken and completed immediately. 
E.  Requirements for utility construction. 
1.  Utility agencies shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of Section 8-403E. 
2.  Utility agencies shall develop and implement Best Management Practices (BMP's) to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site of utility construction within the City. In addition, the City may adopt and impose BMP's on utility construction activity. 
3.  Utility agencies shall implement BMP's to prevent the release of sediment from utility construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Excessive sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed immediately if the sediment presents a traffic hazard or public safety concern as determined by the Director of Public Works or the Chief of Police. 
4.  Prior to entering a construction site or subdivision development, utility agencies shall have obtained from the owner a copy of any SWP3's for the project. Any disturbance to BMP's resulting from utility construction shall be repaired immediately by the utility company in compliance with the SWP3. 
F.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
1.  The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be prepared by a Kansas licensed professional engineer and shall include the following: 
a.  A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, and resources protected under other chapters of this Code. This map should be at a scale no smaller than 1"=100'. 
b.  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent erosion control measures including vegetation. 
c.  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
d.  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
2.  Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as Section 8-403A. of this regulation, may be authorized by the Public Works Director or his designee by written authorization to the permittee, and shall include: 
a.  Major amendments of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan submitted to the Lansing Public Works Department. 
b.  Field modifications of a minor nature. 
Sec. 8-404. - Enforcement. 
A.  Submissions from the general public. Members of the General Public may submit information pertaining to this article to the City of Lansing, Department of Public Works. The Director will consider such submissions as they pertain to the implementation and enforcement of this article and will provide written or verbal response to the person submitting the information. 
B.  Enforcement personnel authorized. The following personnel employed by the City shall have the power to issue Notices of Violations and implement other enforcement actions under this article as provided by Charter Ordinance No. 1-2016 of the City of Lansing: 
1.  All authorized personnel under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. 
2.  All Law enforcement officers of the Lansing Police Department 
3.  All health officers that are authorized representatives of the Director Leavenworth County Health Department. 
C.  Right of entry and sampling. 
1.  Whenever the Director has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the Director or his/her designee shall have the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
2.  The Director or his/her designee shall have the right to set up on the property of any discharger to the storm drainage system such devices that are necessary to conduct sampling of discharges. 
3.  Lansing Public Works Department or the Department's designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
4.  Lansing Public Works Department or the Department's designee has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
5.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Lansing Public Works Department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the facility operator. 
6.  Unreasonable delays in allowing Lansing Public Works Department access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance. 
D.  Notice of violation. 
1.  Whenever an authorized enforcement person determines that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the enforcement person will order compliance by written Notice of Violation to the responsible person. 
2.  The Notice of Violation shall identify: 
a.  The name of the responsible person. 
b.  The date and location of the violation. 
c.  A description of the violation. 
d.  Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to remedy the violation. 
e.  The deadline within which the required actions must be completed. 
f.  Enforcement actions that may be taken by the City. 
3.  Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the Notice to the Governing Body of Lansing. The written appeal must be received by the City Clerk within 5 days of the Notice date. A hearing on the appeal will be scheduled before the Governing Body. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final. 
E.  Action without prior notice; imminent danger. Any person who violates a prohibition or fails to meet a requirement of this article will be subject, without prior notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions identified in [Section] 8-404F., when attempts to contact the person have failed, of if action has not been taken with expedience commensurate with the danger by the person, and the enforcement actions are necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system. 
F.  Enforcement actions. Any person who fails to comply with or appeal a Notice of Violation, or fails to comply with an appeal decision of the Governing Body, will be subject to one or more of the following enforcement actions: 
1.  Stop Work Order. The Director may issue a Stop Work Order to the owner and contractors on a construction site, by posting the order at the construction site and distributing the order to all City departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made, the Stop Work Order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. A Notice of Violation shall accompany the Stop Work Order, and shall define the compliance requirements. 
2.  Abatement of an illicit connection. The Director may order City representatives to terminate an illicit connection to the MS4. Any expense related to such abatement by City representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner. 
3.  Abatement of a violation on private property. When a property owner is not available, not able or not willing to correct a violation, the Director of Public Works may order City representatives to enter private property to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow City representatives to enter upon the premises for these purposes. Any expense related to such abatement by City representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner. 
4.  Recovery of costs. Within 30 days after abatement by City representatives, the Director shall notify the property owner of the costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the deadline for payment. The property owner may protest the assessment before the Governing Body. The written protest must be received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of the notification. A hearing on the matter will be scheduled before the Governing Body. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final. If the amount due is not paid within the protest period or within 10 days of the decision of the Governing Body, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Clerk so that the Clerk may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the Treasurer shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of land. 
5.  Termination of utility services. After lawful notice to the customer and property owner concerning the proposed disconnection, the Director shall have the authority to order the disconnection of City sanitary sewer and/or sanitation services, upon a finding by the Director that the disconnection of utility services will remove a violation of this article that poses a public health hazard or environmental hazard. 
6.  Performance bonds. Where necessary for the reasonable implementation of this article, the Director may, by written notice, order any owner of a construction site or subdivision development to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this article. The City may deny approval of any building permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other City permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy, until such a performance bond has been filed. The owner may protest the amount of the performance bond before the Governing Body. The written protest must be received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of the notification. A hearing on the matter will be scheduled before the Governing Body. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final. 
7.  Criminal prosecution. Any person who violates or continues to violate a prohibition or requirement of this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to criminal penalties. 
G.  Criminal penalties. The violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a municipal offense. Any person violating this article shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or a plea of no contest, be fined a minimum of $250.00 to a maximum of $1,500.00. Each separate day on which a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense. The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend all or a portion of the minimum fine. 
H.  Other legal action. Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the City, if any person discharges into the storm drainage system in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this article, the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable relief including damages and costs in the District Court of Leavenworth County. The City Attorney may seek a preliminary or permanent injunction or both which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the discharger. 
Sec. 8-405. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOL DISCHARGE REGULATION 

Sec. 8-501. - Applicability and enforcement. 
    This article provides for the regulation of swimming pool discharge from any indoor pool, outdoor pool, residential pool, or non-residential pool with a full volume equal to or greater than 5,000 gallons. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge in noncompliance with the provisions of this article, and the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas, and amendments thereto. 
Sec. 8-502. - Definitions. 
    The following words used in this article shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise: 
    City shall mean the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
    Discharge for the purposes of this article, shall refer to the transfer of any substance from the swimming pool system to the sanitary sewer system or storm drainage system. Typical substances discharged for swimming pools include but are not limited to water, chemicals, detergents, filtering agents and debris. 
    Sanitary sewer system shall mean a sewer that carries wastewater and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater or stormwater. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Storm drainage system shall mean swales, gutters, inlets, pipes, sewers, ditches, channels and streams that carry storm and surface water, but exclude wastewater and industrial wastes. The surface of the ground in any location shall be considered part of the storm drainage system. 
    All other definitions shall reference the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 8-503. - Discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
    Filter backwash lines and any other pipelines that discharge through the filtering system shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. Connections to the sanitary sewer system for discharge of filter backwash purposes shall comply with the following: 
A.  Discharge to the sanitary sewer system shall not exceed a rate of 50 gallons per minute. If the capacity of the pumping system exceeds this rate, secondary pumps, wet wells, reduced pipe size or other alternatives shall be installed to comply with the 50 gallon per minute maximum discharge rate. 
Hydraulic calculations for chosen alternatives shall be submitted with permit applications. 
B.  Connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be installed with a Hub Drain for Swimming Pool Discharge. 
Sec. 8-504. - Discharge to the storm drainage system. 
    Pipelines that discharge indirectly to the storm drainage system may be installed, provided that they bypass the filtering system and are released to the storm drainage system. Release to the storm drainage system shall comply with the following: 
A.  Swimming Pools. Swimming pool water excluding filter backwash, may be discharged to the storm drainage system provided that it does not contain harmful quantities of chlorine, acid or other chemicals and has less than 1 PPM chlorine, and is released on a lawn outside of street right-of-way and drainage easements in order for the water to be filtered prior to release into the stormwater drainage system, and is released at a rate no greater than 100 GPM. If these provisions are met, discharge to the stormwater drainage system is allowed. 
B.  For swimming pools with a full volume equal to or greater than 30,000 gallons, discharge to the ground surface is not allowed unless the discharge enters a drainage channel in a platted drainage easement prior to leaving the property. 
C.  For swimming pools with a full volume less than 30,000 gallons, discharge to the ground surface is not allowed unless prior to leaving the property the discharge enters either: 
1.  A drainage channel in a platted drainage easement, or 
2.  The public street right-of-way. 
D.  Swimming pool discharge by means of a physical connection to storm sewer system pipes or structures is not allowed. 
E.  In no case shall swimming pool discharge be allowed to flow across adjacent property unless confined to a storm drainage easement. 
Sec. 8-505. - Required inspections and enforcement. 
A.  No work or discharge shall proceed prior to a City inspection. All installations shall be permitted and inspected pursuant to City Code. The owner shall notify the appropriate City inspector at least 24 hours prior to the start of any work. Construction sequencing shall yield to inspection schedules. Any subsurface work that has been buried prior to inspection shall be excavated as directed by the inspector. 
B.  Swimming pool system components and connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be permitted and inspected by the Department of Public Works. 
C.  Release to the storm drainage system shall be permitted and inspected by the Department of Public Works. 
D.  Notice of Violation. 
1.  Whenever an authorized enforcement person determines that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the enforcement person will order compliance by written Notice of Violation to the responsible person. 
2.  The Notice of Violation shall identify: 
a.  The name of the responsible person. 
b.  The date and location of the violation. 
c.  A description of the violation. 
d.  Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to remedy the violation. 
e.  The deadline within which the required actions must be completed. 
f.  Enforcement actions that may be taken by the City. 
3.  Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the Notice to the Governing Body of Lansing. The written appeal must be received by the City Clerk within 5 days of the Notice date. A hearing on the appeal will be scheduled before the Governing Body. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final. 
E.  Action without prior notice; imminent danger. Any person who violates a prohibition or fails to meet a requirement of this article will be subject, without prior notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions identified in [Section] 8-505F., when attempts to contact the person have failed, or if action has not been taken with expedience commensurate with the danger by the person, and the enforcement actions are necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system. 
F.  Enforcement actions. Any person who fails to comply with or appeal a Notice of Violation, or fails to comply with an appeal decision of the Governing Body, will be subject to one or more of the following enforcement actions: 
1.  Stop Work Order. The Director may issue a Stop Work Order to the owner and contractors on a construction site, by posting the order at the construction site and distributing the order to all City departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made, the Stop Work Order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. A Notice of Violation shall accompany the Stop Work Order, and shall define the compliance requirements. 
2.  Abatement of an Illicit Connection. The Director may order City representatives to terminate an illicit connection to the MS4. Any expense related to such abatement by City representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner. 
3.  Abatement of a Violation on Private Property. When a property owner is not available, not able or not willing to correct a violation, the Director of Public Works may order City representatives to enter private property to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow City representatives to enter upon the premises for these purposes. Any expense related to such abatement by City representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner. 
4.  Recovery of Costs. Within 30 days after abatement by City representatives, the Director shall notify the property owner of the costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the deadline for payment. The property owner may protest the assessment before the Governing Body. The written protest must be received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of the notification. A hearing on the matter will be scheduled before the Governing Body. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final. If the amount due is not paid within the protest period or within 10 days of the decision of the Governing Body, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Clerk so that the Clerk may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the Treasurer shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of land. 
5.  Performance Bonds. Where necessary for the reasonable implementation of this article, the Director may, by written notice, order any owner of a construction site or subdivision development to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this article. The City may deny approval of any building permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other City permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy, until such a performance bond has been filed. The owner may protest the amount of the performance bond before the Governing Body. The written protest must be received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of the notification. A hearing on the matter will be scheduled before the Governing Body. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final. 
6.  Criminal Prosecution. Any person who violates or continues to violate a prohibition or requirement of this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to criminal penalties. 
G.  Criminal penalties. The violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a municipal offense. Any person violating this article shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or a plea of no contest, be fined a minimum of $250.00 to a maximum of $1,500.00. Each separate day on which a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense. The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend all or a portion of the minimum fine. 
H.  Other legal action. Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the City, if any person discharges into the storm drainage system in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this article, the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable relief including damages and costs in the District Court of Leavenworth County. The City Attorney may seek a preliminary or permanent injunction or both which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the discharger. 
Sec. 8-506. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
CHAPTER 9 - MINIMUM HOUSING/PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 9-101. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code 2003, and the Minimum Housing Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
Sec. 9-102. - Scope. 
    This code shall apply to residential structures and premises currently existing, both owner occupied and those structures used as rental property for human habitation, to nonresidential structures, and to residential and non-residential lands, and to vacant lots. 
A.  Residential structures shall mean any building or structure or part thereof used or occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
B.  Residential land shall mean real property upon which residential structures are situated. 
C.  Nonresidential structures shall mean any structure which is used for other than residential purposes, or a part of such structure. 
D.  Nonresidential land shall mean real property upon which nonresidential structures are situated. 
E.  A vacant lot shall mean any real property upon which there is situated no residential or nonresidential structures. 
Sec. 9-103. - Intent. 
    This Code shall be enforced to insure public health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the maintenance of structures and premises. 
Sec. 9-104. - Other regulations. 
    The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations, which prescribe standards other than, are provided herein. However, due to the general age of the majority of dwellings for which this ordinance was developed, the minimum housing standards, not the International Residential Code, is the primary focus of the Property Maintenance Code and should be the primary focus for its enforcement. This shall not prevent referring to the most recently adopted edition of the International Residential Code or the International Existing Building Code when circumstances arise dealing with safety issues for the occupants or the general public. 
Sec. 9-105. - Application of building code. 
    Any repairs or alterations to a structure, or change of use herein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the building code. 
Sec. 9-106. - Existing remedies. 
    The provisions in this Code shall not be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe, and/or unsanitary. 
Sec. 9-107. - Validity. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phase of this Code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this Code are hereby declared to be severable. 
Sec. 9-108. - Saving clause. 
    This code shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code, or regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed. 
Sec. 9-109. - Existing structures. 
    As provided in Section 9-102, this Code establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all structures and premises and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established by ordinance which may be additional or more stringent for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of structures, equipment, or facilities. 
Sec. 9-110. - Public officer. 
    The City Building Official shall be delegated the duty and responsibility as code official to exercise the powers prescribed by this Code and for the enforcement thereof. The code official may appoint other City representatives under his or her authority, as authorized, and fix their duties as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this Code, and may delegate any of his or her functions or powers to such representatives. 
Sec. 9-111. - Relief from personal liability. 
    Any code official, officer, or employee who acts in good faith and without malice in the discharge of duties of enforcement of this Code is relieved of all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act. 
    Further, the code official shall not be held liable for any costs in any action, suit, or proceeding that may be instituted by the code official in the enforcement of this Code. In any of these actions, the official or employee shall be defended or represented by the jurisdiction's attorney-at-law until the final termination of the proceedings. 
Sec. 9-112. - Official records. 
    An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this Code, and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times and under reasonable regulations established by the code official to maintain the integrity and security of such records. 
Sec. 9-113. - Duties and powers of code official. 
A.  The code official shall enforce all the provisions of this Code relative to the maintenance of structures and premises, except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by other regulations. 
B.  The code official shall issue all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to insure compliance with the code requirements for the safety, health, and general welfare of the public. 
C.  In order to safeguard the safety, health, and welfare of the public, the code official is authorized to enter upon any premises at a reasonable time as defined in this Code. The code official is also authorized entry into any structure pursuant to permission of the occupant or issuance of a warrant for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this Code. 
D.  If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this Code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this Code is sought, the administrative authority may seek, in a court of law, an order that such owner, occupant, or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference. 
E.  The code official or the code official's authorized representative shall disclose proper credentials of their respective office for the purpose of inspecting any and all buildings and premises in the performance of duties under this Code. 
F.  Inspection of premises, the issuance of notices and orders and enforcement thereof, shall be the responsibility of the code official so charged by the jurisdiction. The code official shall make a reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of inspection so as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors, and to confer with the other departments for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. A department shall not, however, delay the issuance of any emergency orders which it determines must be issued. 
G.  The code official shall have the authority as may be necessary in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare, to adopt procedures for interpreting and implementing the provisions of this Code to secure the intent thereof; but such rules shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this Code or violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety. 
Sec. 9-114. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use, or occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this Code, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 9-115. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $150.00 or more than $1,500.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days, or both, and shall be ordered to correct the violation or make restitution for the correction of the violation thereof, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 9-116. - Prosecution. 
    In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the code official may request the jurisdiction's legal representative to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty provided in Section 9-115. Also, the code official may ask the legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person: 
A.  To restrain, correct, or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work; 
B.  To restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such structure; 
C.  To require the removal of work in violation, or; 
D.  To prevent the occupation or use of the structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed, or altered in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit, or certificate was issued. 
Sec. 9-117. - Enforcement procedures. 
    Enforcement procedures may be initiated in the following ways: 
A.  When a petition is filed with the code official by any resident of the City charging that any premises or structure is in violation of the property maintenance code; or 
B.  The code official may initiate a preliminary investigation; or 
C.  A majority of the members present for a City Council meeting may direct the code official to investigate a premises and/or structure which is alleged to be in violation of the property maintenance code. 
D.  If a preliminary investigation of a potential code violation, discloses a basis for further action, the code official shall issue the owner of record, or current occupant, a courtesy notice for first time offenders, a written complaint and notice to appear for repeat offenders, of the items in violation. A minimum of 48 hours from date of notice shall be given for initial response to the City with a minimum of 10 days given for corrections, or additional time as may be determined by the code official. The code official shall make an inspection at the end of the prescribed time period. If the corrections are satisfactory, the case shall be closed. If the work is not completed, the code official shall issue a written complaint and notice to appear before the municipal court. 
E.  If the owner fails to comply with the court's directive, the penalty under Section 9-115 shall be imposed. The costs of such repairs, alterations, improvements, or the vacating, closing, removing, or demolition ordered by the code official or court shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of land on which the structure was located. If such assessment is not paid by the time certified, a lien shall be placed against the property in the manner prescribed by law and shall include all necessary attorney fees. The City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying other City taxes, certify the unpaid portion of the aforesaid cost and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against the lot or parcel of land. 
F.  The enforcement officer shall have the authority to immediately issue a written citation and notice to appear in court for repeat offender without further notification. 
Sec. 9-118. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings indicated in this article. 
    Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
    Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the building, residential, electrical, plumbing, and/or mechanical codes, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
    Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this Code or under the provisions of the building, residential, electrical, plumbing, and/or mechanical codes, they shall have the meaning as the context herein may imply or shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meaning. 
Sec. 9-119. - Applied meaning of words and terms. 
    Accessory structure. A subordinate building which serves as a function clearly incidental to or customarily found in connection with and located on the same lot as that of the main building. Customary accessory buildings include garages, carports, and small storage sheds. 
    Approved. Approved, as applied to a material, device, or method of construction, shall mean approved by the code official under the provisions of this Code, or approved by other authority designated by law to give approval in the matter in question. 
    Basement. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in the building having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as first story. 
    Building Code. Any law, ordinance, or governmental regulation concerning fitness for habitation, or the construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use, or appearance of any premises or dwelling unit. 
    Building Official. Person or those persons designated under the International Building Code and the International Residential Code as adopted and amended from time to time who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Central heating. The heating system permanently installed and adjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments from a source outside of these rooms. 
    Code official. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative. 
    Condemn. To adjudge unfit for use or occupancy. 
    Condemnation. The act of judicially condemning. 
    Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which contains one or more dwelling units, including mobile homes and manufactured homes, but not including motels, hotels, rooming or boarding houses, institutions, or convalescent or nursing homes. Whenever the words "multi-family dwelling," "residence building," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit," or "premises" are used in this Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words, "or any part thereof." 
    Dwelling, single-family. A building designed exclusively to contain 1 dwelling unit. This definition shall include townhouses, each as a separate dwelling unit and classified as single-family attached dwelling. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A building designed exclusively to contain two dwelling units. A two-family dwelling is a duplex. 
    Dwelling, multiple family. A building designed exclusively to contain three or more dwelling units, but not including townhouses. 
    Dormitory. A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family group in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms. 
    Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building which is exclusively arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters for one family; a separate, independent living quarter consisting of one or more connected rooms with permanently installed bathroom and kitchen facilities. 
    Enforcement officer. The official designated herein or otherwise charged with the responsibilities of administering this Code, or the official's authorized representative. 
    Establishment. Any structure or premises used as a business or for conducting business. 
    Exterior property areas. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
    Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rats, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
    Family. Any number of people occupying a single dwelling unit living together as a single housekeeping unit, related by blood, marriage, or formal adoption plus not more than two additional people not so related, except that foster children shall be considered as formally adopted. A family may also include up to but not more than three unrelated people living together in one single dwelling unit. Any grouping of unrelated people in excess of three shall not be considered a family. 
    Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Habitable space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
    Hotel. Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed for occupancy for sleeping purposes by guests on a compensation basis. 
    Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests. 
    Junk/inoperable vehicle. Any motorized vehicle which is without a currently valid license plate or plates and is in either a rusted, inoperable, wrecked, discharged, dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative, or abandoned, or unable to perform the function or purpose for which it was originally assembled. 
    Land. Except where specifically limited or where the context would require limitation, the use of the term land or real property shall refer to residential land, nonresidential land, and vacant lots. 
    Landlord. The owner, lessor, or sublessor of the dwelling unit, or the building of which it is a part. 
    Let for occupancy or let . To permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, building, or structure by a person who shall be legal owner or not be the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
    Maintenance. Conformance of a building and its facilities to the code under which the building was constructed. 
    Motel. A hotel as defined in this Code. 
    Occupant. Any person (including owner or operator) living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual possession of said dwelling or rooming unit. 
    Openable area. That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
    Operator. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or premises which are let or offered for occupancy. 
    Owner. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property. 
    Person. A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid. 
    Petition. A formal request addressed to a person or body of persons in authority. 
    Plumbing. The practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances. 
    Plumbing fixture. A receptacle or device which is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and demands a supply of water there from, or discharges used water, liquid-borne waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises, or which requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises. 
    Premises. A lot, together with all improvements thereon. 
    Public nuisance. Includes the following: 
A.  The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law; or 
B.  Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; or 
C.  Any premises which have inadequate or unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or 
D.  Any premises where overcrowding a room with occupants exists; or 
E.  Any premises which has insufficient ventilation of illumination; or 
F.  Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use; or 
G.  Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or are manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb, or property; or 
H.  Any premises from which the plumbing, heating, and/or facilities required by this Code have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided; or 
I.  Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with rubbish or garbage, or which have an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or 
J.  Any structure or building that is: in a state of dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises 
K.  Any structure, roof or associated construction for which a building permit is required and is not obtained prior to commencement of construction. 
    Reasonable times. The hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. 
    Renovation. A building and its facilities made to conform to present day minimum standards of sanitation, fire, and life safety. 
    Residence building. A building in which sleeping accommodations or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided, except when classified as an institution under the building code. 
    Rooming house. Any residence, building, or any part thereof, which contains one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than five persons who are not members of the family. 
    Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and/or noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishments, including yard wastes and items commonly referred to as "trash." 
A.  Bulky rubbish: Items either too large or too heavy to be loaded in solid waste collection vehicles with safety and convenience by solid waste collectors, with the equipment available therefore, including but not limited to appliances, furniture, large auto parts, and trees. 
B.  Commercial rubbish: Rubbish resulting from commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural activities. 
C.  Residential rubbish: Rubbish resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units. 
    Storage. The uninterrupted placement of materials for a period exceeding 48 hours. 
    Structure. That which is built or constructed, including without limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents, or anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored, or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground. 
    Supplied. Installed, furnished, or provided by the owner or operator. 
    Tenant. A person entitled under a rental agreement or lease, or under any agreement, written or oral, embodying the terms and conditions of the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit and premise. 
    Trash. See "Rubbish." 
    Vacant. Unoccupied for residential or commercial use. 
    Vacant land. Any real property on which there is situated no structure. 
    Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
A.  Mechanical: Ventilation by power-driven devices. 
B.  Natural: Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks without wind-driven devices. 
    Workmanlike. Whenever the words "workmanlike state of maintenance and repair" are used in this Code, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner. 
    Yard. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, extending along the entire length of street, or rear or interior lot line. 
    Yard wastes. All forms of botanical waste, including but not limited to grass clippings, leaves, and tree trimmings. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 9-201. - International Property Maintenance Code incorporated. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as if it were fully set out in this article, except for those portions that are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
Sec. 9-202. - Same. 
    Not less than three (3) copies of the 2003 International Property Maintenance Code, marked or stamped in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-3010, with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted clearly marked and showing portions that are amended and to which shall be attached a copy of amendments, shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be open to inspection and available to the public at reasonable business hours. Official copies of such Code shall be supplied at the cost of the City to the officials and agencies in the manner listed and set forth in K.S.A. 12-3010. Subsequent references to the "International Property Maintenance Code" or "Standard Code" shall mean the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition", as adopted herein. 
Sec. 9-203. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. 
Sec. 9-204. - Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition is amended or changed as follows. The amendment of any section shall not serve to amend or repeal any other discretely numbered provision of the code, whether or not such provision is considered a section or subsection, unless that section or subsection is specifically referenced in the ordinance. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code and the indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 106 of the International Property Maintenance Code is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 108 of the International Property Maintenance Code and the indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
108.1.1 Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is reasonably possible. 
108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this Code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this Code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
108.3 Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 107.2. 
108.4 Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment, or removing the placard. 
108.4.1 Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code. 
108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premise or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premise or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this Code. 
108.6 Declaration. Any building declared a substandard building under this Code shall be made to comply with one of the following: 
A.  The building shall be repaired in accordance with the Current Building Code or other current Code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair; or 
B.  The building shall be demolished at the option of the building owner; or 
C.  If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public, it may be vacated, secured and maintained in accordance with Article 5 of this Code. If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or of the occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
111.1 Appeal Committee. The governing body shall serve as the appeal body for any appeals sought pursuant to the International Property Maintenance Code. The term "board of appeals" shall mean the Governing Body. 
111.2 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
111.3 Enforcement of the order of the Building Official; compliance. After any order of the Building Official made pursuant to this Code becomes final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a public offense. Every day during on or which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
111.3.1 Chairman. The Chairman of the board shall be the mayor and the vice chairman shall be the Council President. 
111.3.2 Recovery of cost of repair or demolition; repayment of repair and demolition fund. All money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale of the property at foreclosure sale shall be paid to the treasurer of this jurisdiction. 
111.3.3 Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest. 
111.3 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 30 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
111.4 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than a majority of committee members. 
111.4.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public the procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
111.5 Postponed hearing. When the required majority of the board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. 
111.6 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of a required quorum. 
111.6.1 Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official. 
111.6.2 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
111.7 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
Section 202 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by adding the following definitions: 
Building Official shall mean the Community Development Superintendent or his/her authorized representatives charged with the enforcement of this Code. 
Electrical Code is the National Electrical Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. 
Substandard Building is any building, or portion thereof, which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with this article or any other ordinance of the Lansing City Code. 
Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted. 
Section 302.8 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted. 
Section 303 of the International Property Maintenance Code is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 304 of the International Property Maintenance Code and the indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
304.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). 
304.4 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
304.8 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
304.9 Overhand extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
304.11 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
304.12 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door, and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
304.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable. 
304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to swelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3. 
304.16 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
304.17 Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents. 
304.18 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. 
304.18.2 Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. 
304.18.3 Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
Section 307 of the International Property Maintenance Code and its indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
307.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
307.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner. 
307.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner. 
Section 402 of the International Property Maintenance Code and its indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
Exceptions: 
A.  Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
B.  In lieu of required exterior glazed openings for natural light, approved artificial lighting may be used. 
402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads. 
402.3 Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
Section 602 of the International Property Maintenance Code and its indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68F (20C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68F (20C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65F (18C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
A.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
B.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
602.5 Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914mm) above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall. 
Section 605 of the International Property Maintenance Code and indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
605.1 Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. 
605.3 Luminaries. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminary. 
Section 702 of the International Property Maintenance Code and indicated subsections are hereby amended to read as follows: 
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code. 
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be unobstructed. 
702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code. 
702.4 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. Basements used as sleeping rooms shall comply with the International Residential Code as adopted by the City of Lansing. 
Sec. 9-205. - Supplemental to existing codes. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not be construed to impair or limit the force and effect of any other applicable ordinance, code or statute excepting those hereby expressly repealed. This Code shall be construed to be consistent with other applicable law to the maximum extent possible. In the event of clear conflict between the provisions of this Code and other applicable law, the more restrictive shall apply. 
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENT 

Sec. 9-301. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions for maintenance of exterior property, premises, and structures. Premises shall comply with the conditions herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable. 
Sec. 9-302. - Responsibility. 
    The owner of the premises shall maintain such structures and premises in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another, for occupancy or use, premises which do not comply with the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 9-303. - Vacant structures and land. 
    All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition as provided herein, so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
Sec. 9-304. - Sanitation. 
    All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
Sec. 9-305. - Containers. 
    The operator or occupant of every establishment or dwelling producing garbage, vegetable wastes, rubbish, trash or other decaying material or other type of refuse shall provide, and at all times cause to be used, leak proof containers, provided with tight-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
    Residential containers shall not have a capacity of more than 30 gallons and shall not exceed 65 pounds in weight when full. Plastic bags of not less than 1.5 mil of thickness may be substituted for plastic trash containers when refuse is stored in an enclosed structure on the occupant's premises, except on the date for collection. All plastic bags shall be securely closed when placed at curbside. 
Sec. 9-306. - Trash. 
A.  One- and two-family residential. Each and every owner, tenant, housekeeper, or other person occupying any one or two-family dwelling within the City of Lansing shall provide and renew when necessary, a sufficient number of trash containers, with tight-fitting covers in accordance with Section 9-305. Such trash containers shall be placed at the curb no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the evening preceding the day on which the trash is anticipated to be collected by the regular trash collection service subscribed to by the occupant or owner. If plastic bags are used in place of containers in accordance with Section 9-305, said bags shall be placed at the curb no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the evening proceeding the day on which the trash is anticipated to be collected by the regular trash collection service. 
B.  Multi-family. Each multi-family complex consisting of more than two dwelling units shall provide and renew when necessary sufficient trash dumpsters of rigid construction with tight-fitting covers to adequately contain the refuse and waste produced at such location. Such containers shall be screened as set forth in the City of Lansing Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Commercial and industrial. Each and every business and industry shall provide and renew when necessary sufficient trash containers of rigid construction with tight-fitting covers to adequately contain the refuse and waste produced at such location and such containers shall be kept closed except when depositing and removing materials. Such containers shall be screened in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Lansing Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 9-307. - Grading and drainage. 
    All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon. Surface water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance to owners or occupants of adjacent property. All detention and retention storm water basins shall be maintained by the owner, developer, custodian, or other person responsible for the property. Such maintenance shall include but not be limited to: 
A.  The cleaning of storm sewers and other drainage appurtenances serving the said basin so that the said installations function as designed; and 
B.  The removal of any garbage, rubbish, silt, topsoil, or other foreign material which creates an unsanitary condition or prevents or impedes the leaching action of the said basin. 
Sec. 9-308. - Loading/parking/driveway areas. 
    All loading, parking and driveway areas, shall be paved with bituminous, asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete, and shall be free from dirt and other litter and kept in good repair. When lighted for nighttime use, lights shall not be permitted to cast directly upon dwellings nearby. 
Sec. 9-309. - Insect and rat/vermin control. 
    An owner of any structure or property shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests, in all areas of the premises. 
Sec. 9-310. - Mosquito control. 
    An owner of property shall be responsible for the prevention, control, and treatment of mosquitoes. Prevention and control mean that all areas of a property and particularly bodies of water shall be treated so as not to allow the breeding of mosquitoes. Treatment shall consist of the application of chemicals approved and tested for the use intended to an infected area which will exterminate the mosquito egg, larva, or adult stage of the insect. Treatment shall not endanger the general health, safety, and welfare of the general public. 
Sec. 9-311. - Property maintenance. 
    Property owners or designated agents in control of property shall maintain the sidewalks adjacent to public right-of-way as required for safety and welfare of the general public. Other hard surfaces, walkways, and driveways on private property shall be the responsibility of the homes associations and/or the individual property owner. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces, and similar paved areas shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be filled, or necessary repairs or replacement carried out. All off-street parking facilities shall be kept free of debris including, but not limited to, trash, gravel, mud, blowing paper, etc. 
Sec. 9-312. - Public areas. 
    Grass, landscaping, and trees located within subdivision traffic control islands shall be the maintenance responsibility of the homes associations. Monuments, landscaping, trees, fountains, and lighting located on private property at the entrance to residential subdivisions and/or commercial property shall be the responsibility of the homes association and/or the individual property owner. 
Sec. 9-313. - Weeds and grass. 
    All areas shall be kept free from uncontrolled growth of weeds, grass, or plants which are noxious or detrimental to the public health and welfare. Weeds, grass, or plants shall be deemed uncontrolled growth if by their placement or growth they create a dangerous situation to the public or if they exceed 12 inches in height in any platted area or within 100 feet of any platted area, developed area, or any public street or right-of-way. A property owner is responsible for property maintenance for his or her property and the public right-of-way to the center line of the street. 
Sec. 9-314. - Storage areas. 
    All existing open storage areas shall be completely obscured from surrounding property by a solid screen up to 6 (six) feet in height, as required by the code official. 
Sec. 9-315. - Exhaust vents. 
    A person shall not construct, maintain, or operate pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers discharging gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors, or other gaseous or particulate wastes so as to discharge directly upon abutting or adjacent public and private property. 
Sec. 9-316. - Accessory structures. 
    All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, and walls, shall be maintained per this Code. 
Sec. 9-317. - Motor vehicles. 
    Inoperative vehicles which are junked, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, discarded, unregistered, unlicensed, or abandoned in and upon property within the City shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 9-318. - Motor vehicle repair. 
    Repair of occupant owned vehicles within residential areas shall only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Nothing in this section shall supersede the enforcement of the City's public nuisance or disturbing the peace ordinance. 
Sec. 9-319. - Open fires. 
    Open fires shall be prohibited except as specifically approved by the fire official. 
    (For additional information refer to Chapter 7). 
Sec. 9-320. - Bush and lawn trimmings. 
    No grass trimmings shall be blown or deposited on any public street, sidewalk, or in drainage ways or banks of drainage ways. Each and every owner, tenant, or occupant of any dwelling or other building in the City shall place lawn trimmings, bush/tree trimmings, and other yard wastes in suitable containers or tied in bundles. The containers and bundles shall not be placed at the street curb prior to 6:00 p.m. of the preceding day on which the trash is scheduled to be collected. All trimmings prior to collection shall be placed behind the front building line or front line of the house, whichever is greater. 
Sec. 9-321. - Dumping, storage of refuse, equipment, etc. 
    No person shall dump, deposit, or store on any property whether owned, dedicated to public use or upon the property of any person, nor to allow to fall or be washed upon any street or upon any property of any other person, dirt, earth, building materials, debris, refuse, cans, garbage, or grass clippings. Also, no person shall dump, deposit, or store on any property whether dedicated to public use, property of any person or their own property junked or otherwise inoperative equipment, vehicles, machinery or appliances. Operable farm equipment or implements which are used in the agricultural areas are excluded. 
Sec. 9-322. - Mud. 
    No soil, gravel, or debris shall be allowed to be deposited onto any street, easement, right-of-way, gutter, waterway, or in drainage ways or banks of drainage ways. 
Sec. 9-323. - Compost. 
    All compost materials shall be placed in containers designed or constructed for same; be located in rear yards only; be a maximum height of 4 (four) feet and be located a minimum of 10 (ten) feet from any property line. Such containers shall be designed or be constructed to prevent rodent infestation. All compost areas shall be visually screened from adjoining property view. 
Sec. 9-324. - Trees and shrubbery. 
    All trees and shrubbery shall be maintained free of disease and/or decay. In the event that death occurs in any tree, shrub, or other plant material, the owner of the premises shall without delay remove same. Upon notice from the code official, the owner shall remove dead or dying tree(s) or other plant material so specified within 30 days from legal notice as required by this Code. 
    (For additional information refer to Chapter 14, Section 14-917) 
ARTICLE IV. - ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 9-401. - Premises violations. 
    Persons violating the provisions of Article 3 shall be given notice of a violation by the code official and that notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner and/or occupant. Conditions as cited are to be corrected within ten (10) days (except in the case of Section 9-324, where 30 days are provided) after the mailing date. If the correction is not made within the prescribed time period, the Code Enforcement Officer shall at his/her discretion, issue a citation for non compliance or the City shall initiate action to correct the nuisance, and the violator shall pay the City for the actual cost of the correction in an amount determined by the City. If such cost is not paid within ten days following the City's abatement of nuisance, the cost will be assessed and charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located, and the City shall, at the time of certifying other special assessments to the County Clerk, certify the aforesaid cost to be collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City. Liability for such cost shall be separate from and in addition to any criminal penalties. If a citation is issued, the fine for a violation shall be in accordance with Section 9-115. Each day shall constitute a new violation. The notice for an inoperative vehicle shall be sent to the person in possession or the owner of real property on which such inoperable vehicle is located. If the violation is not corrected within ten days, the vehicle shall be removed by the City at the property owner's cost. No application for approval of rezoning, preliminary plat, preliminary plan, final plat, or final plan will be considered by the Planning Commission until such time that the owner of the property pays all outstanding debts as charged by the City for property maintenance on such land. No application for approval of a building permit will be approved until such time that the owner of the property pays all outstanding debts as charged by the City for property maintenance on such lot. The City will determine such costs. The City will notify the county when the costs are paid directly to the City. 
Sec. 9-402. - Mosquito control violations. 
    Notice of a violation shall be made by the code official in person or by telephone and then documented by mail. The property owner shall make corrections to the satisfaction of the code official within three days of the written notice of violation. If the correction is not made within this time period, the City shall initiate action to correct the matter, and the property owner shall pay the City for actual and administrative costs in an amount determined by the City. If the cost is not paid within ten days following the postmarked date of billing sent to the owner, charges will be assessed against the property causing the nuisance in the manner prescribed in Section 9-115. 
ARTICLE V. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS-GENERAL PREMISES CONDITIONS 

Sec. 9-501. - Pests. 
    All dwelling units and premises shall be maintained free of vermin and/or infectious insects including, but not limited to, fleas, cockroaches, and ants. 
Sec. 9-502. - Garbage/refuse/trash containers. 
    All garbage, refuse, and trash containers shall not have a capacity of more than 30 gallons, shall not exceed 65 pounds in weight when full and shall be stored in accordance with Chapter 16 of this Code. 
    Multiple unit premises utilizing dumpsters for garbage, refuse, and/or trash collection shall provide an area that is serviceable and screened from view in accordance with Chapter 16 of this Code. 
Sec. 9-503. - Trash/debris. 
    All premises shall be kept free and clear of trash, debris, and weeds including, but not limited to, unsightly vegetation, junk, garbage, rodent harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials (except those in acceptable containers), and similar items. 
Sec. 9-504. - Sewage disposal. 
    All dwelling units shall be connected to an approved sanitary sewer system and be serviceable and maintained in a satisfactory condition to prevent health hazards. 
    (For additional information refer to Chapter 16). 
Sec. 9-505. - Telephone. 
    Telephone service shall be made available to each premise. 
Sec. 9-506. - Fireplaces. 
    Fireplaces shall be maintained in a safe condition including, but not limited to, chimneys, fireboxes, fireproof grouting where required. 
Sec. 9-507. - Structural requirements. 
A.  General. Buildings or structures may be of any types of construction permitted by the Building Code. Roofs, Floors, Walls, Foundations and all other structural components shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and loads to which they may be subjected. Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness. All wood shall be protected against termite damage and decay as provided in the Building Code. 
B.  Exits. Dwelling Units of Guest Rooms shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. Sleeping Rooms below the fourth story shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the use of separate tools. 
Sec. 9-508. - Sanitation. 
A.  Dwelling units, lodging houses and congregate residences shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower. 
B.  Commercial properties, where both sexes are accommodated, shall contain at least two separate toilet facilities which are identified for male or female use, each of which contains at least one water closet. Additional water closets shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional 10 guests, or portion thereof. 
C.  Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every kitchen shall be provided with a sink. Wooden sinks or sinks of similarly absorbent material shall not be permitted. 
D.  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an industry approved nonabsorbent material. 
E.  Room Separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this Code shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. 
F.  Installation and Maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Plumbing Code. 
Sec. 9-509. - Mechanical requirements. 
A.  Heating. Dwelling units, guest rooms, and congregate residences shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 F at a point 3 feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the most recent adopted edition of the building code, mechanical code, and all other applicable laws. Unvented fuel-burning heaters are not permitted. 
B.  Electrical. All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances shall be of an approved type and installed and maintained in a safe manner and in accordance with the most recent adopted edition of the National Electrical Code. Every habitable room shall contain at least two electrical convenience outlets or one convenience outlet and one electric light fixture. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hallway shall contain at least one electric light fixture. All electrical fixtures shall be serviceable and maintained in a safe condition and shall be adequate for the load requirements of the expected occupancy. 
Sec. 9-510. - Space and occupancy standards. 
A.  Room dimensions. 
1.  Ceiling heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet. Kitchens, halls, bathrooms, and toilet compartments may have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet, measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. No portion of the room measuring less than 5 feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. 
2.  Floor area. Dwelling units and rooming houses shall have at least 1 room which shall have not less than 120 square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than 2 persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of 2. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than 7 feet in any dimension. Each water closet shall be located in a clear space not less than 30 inches in width and a clear space in front of the water closet of not less than 24 inches shall be provided. 
B.  Light. Guest rooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit or congregate residence shall be provided natural light by means of exterior glazed opening with an area not less than 10 square feet. 
C.  Ventilation. Guest rooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling or congregate resident shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less than 5 square feet. In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilating system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all guest rooms, dormitories, habitable rooms, and public corridors. Bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms, and similar rooms, shall be provided natural ventilation by means of openable exterior windows of not less than 11/2 square feet or a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside. 
Sec. 9-511. - Public nuisances. 
    All dwelling units and premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as not to become a public nuisance as defined in Article I of this chapter. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXTERIOR STRUCTURE CONDITIONS 

Sec. 9-601. - General. 
    The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the environment. 
Sec. 9-602. - Structural members. 
    All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration, and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them including, but not limited to, foundation, flooring surface and supports, walls, partitions, vertical supports, roofs, and ceilings. 
Sec. 9-603. - Exterior surfaces (foundations, walls, and roofs). 
    Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rats. 
Sec. 9-604. - Foundation walls. 
    All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, so as not to be detrimental to public safety and welfare. 
Sec. 9-605. - Exterior walls. 
    Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface materials, including wood, or composition siding, shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface coated when required to prevent deterioration. Brick, stucco, and/or stone shall be maintained in a weatherproof condition and shall be free from loose materials, including mortar joints. 
Sec. 9-606. - Wall surfaces. 
    Wall surfaces, other than brick, stucco, or stone, shall be treated to prevent deterioration in a manner that creates a harmonious and uniform appearance. Aggregate wall areas (complete sides or sections) shall be similarly treated with like substances (i.e., paint or stain) to create a cohesive look. Such treatment shall give the wall section a uniform appearance in color and at no time shall portions of wall surfaces be allowed to deteriorate or treated with dissimilar substances, creating a patchwork appearance. If deterioration in surface materials exists in excess of 25% of the gross wall area per wall it will constitute a public nuisance. The only exceptions to this requirement is when a wall surface is being primed prior to final application of wall surface treatment or trim work that may be a different color to provide contrast. 
Sec. 9-607. - Roofs. 
    The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and not have defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
Sec. 9-608. - Decorative features. 
    All cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with the proper anchorage, and in a safe condition, and be treated in a similar manner as wall surfaces. 
Sec. 9-609. - Overhang extensions. 
    All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored and kept in a safe and sound condition. They shall be protected from the elements and against decay and rust by the periodic application of a weather-coating material such as paint or other protective treatment. 
Sec. 9-610. - Chimneys. 
    All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
Sec. 9-611. - Stairs and porches. 
    Every stair, porch, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every flight of stairs, which is more than 4 carries of the foot, shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the building code, and every portion of a stair, porch, landing, and balcony which is more than 30 inches above grade shall have guardrails. 
    Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained in a good, safe condition. 
Sec. 9-612. - Window and door frames. 
    Every window, door, and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible, and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling or structure. 
Sec. 9-613. - Weathertight. 
    Every window and exterior door shall be fitted reasonably in its frame and be weather tight. Weather stripping shall be used to exclude wind or rain from entering the dwelling or structure and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
Sec. 9-614. - Glazing. 
    Every window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing materials which are without open cracks and holes. 
Sec. 9-615. - Openable windows.. 
    Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. 
Sec. 9-616. - Insect screens. 
    Every door and window or other outside opening required or used for ventilation purposes shall be supplied with approved insect screening, and every swinging screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition, except that such screens shall not be required for areas on a floor above the fifth floor and screen doors shall not be required on non-residential structures or structures where the doors are required to swing out as required in the building code. 
Sec. 9-617. - Door hardware. 
    Every exterior door, door hinge, and door latch shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks in dwelling units shall be in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door. 
Sec. 9-618. - Basement hatchways. 
    Every basement shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rats, rain, and surface water into the structure. 
Sec. 9-619. - Guards for basement windows. 
    Every basement window which is openable shall be supplied with rat-proof shields, or storm windows or other material affording protection against the entry of snakes, vermin, insects or other pests. 
Sec. 9-620. - Other appurtenances. 
    Guttering, downspouts, splash blocks, fences, pools, hot tubs, decks, walls, tennis courts and similar appurtenances shall be maintained in a serviceable, sanitary and safe condition. 
ARTICLE VII. - INTERIOR STRUCTURE CONDITIONS 

Sec. 9-701. - General. 
    The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants, and to protect the occupants from the environment. 
Sec. 9-702. - Structural members. 
    The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. In every existing building used for business, industrial, mercantile or storage occupancy, in which heavy loads or concentrations occur or in which machinery is introduced, the owner or occupant shall cause the weight that each floor will sustain to be calculated by a registered architect or engineer and filed with the building official, and after such acceptance by the building official, posted on each floor in a conspicuous place. 
Sec. 9-703. - Interior surfaces. 
    Floors, walls, including windows and doors, ceilings, and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean, and sanitary condition. 
    Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be eliminated. 
Sec. 9-704. - Lead-based paint. 
    Lead-based paint with a lead content of more than 0.5 percent shall not be applied to any interior or exterior surface of a dwelling unit or child care facility, including fences and outbuildings at these locations. 
Sec. 9-705. - Bathroom and kitchen. 
    Every toilet, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water, except when carpeting is used, and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All dwelling units, lodging houses, and congregate residences shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen which includes a kitchen sink. Every water closet, bathtub, or shower required by this Code shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. 
Sec. 9-706. - Free from dampness. 
    Every building, basement, and crawl space shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure. 
Sec. 9-707. - Sanitation. 
    The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, refuse, or garbage. Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under Section 9-306. 
Sec. 9-708. - Storage. 
    Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in public halls or stairways. 
Sec. 9-709. - Insect and rat harborage. 
    All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat infestation, and where insects or rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. 
    After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
Sec. 9-710. - Exit doors. 
    Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened easily from the inside. 
Sec. 9-711. - Stairs, porches, and railings. 
    Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in the building code. Every flight of stairs, which is more than 3 risers high, shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the building code, and every open portion of a stair, porch, landing, and balcony which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
Sec. 9-712. - Exit facilities. 
    All exterior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped, or loose. Every inside stair shall be constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads. 
Sec. 9-713. - Smoke detectors. 
    Smoke detectors, installed and operable, shall be required and maintained on each floor of single or multiple dwelling units and in exit corridors of multiple rental unit premises. Battery powered smoke detectors may be utilized. 
Sec. 9-714. - Premises egress. 
    Adequate means of egress shall be maintained in a safe manner, i.e. clear and uninterrupted from storage and material clutter. 
Sec. 9-715. - Plumbing fixtures. 
    All plumbing fixtures shall be serviceable and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation. 
Sec. 9-716. - Household appliances (built-ins). 
    All built-in household appliances shall be serviceable and maintained in a sanitary condition. 
Sec. 9-717. - Security. 
    Door and window locks shall be in place or installed and be serviceable. 
Sec. 9-718. - Utilities. 
    Adequate gas and/or electrical, water, and sewer service shall be provided and maintained to each premises. 
Sec. 9-719. - Fire extinguishers. 
    At least one operable fire extinguisher for each dwelling unit shall be provided and maintained and shall be located in the kitchen area. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS-GENERAL 

Sec. 9-801. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall govern the responsibilities of persons for the maintenance of structures, the equipment and premises thereof. 
Sec. 9-802. - Sanitary condition. 
A.  Cleanliness. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall keep that part of the structure or premises thereof which that occupant occupies, controls, or uses in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
B.  Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in rubbish/trash containers equipped with tight fitting covers as required by this Code. 
C.  Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in garbage containers equipped with tight fitting covers as required by this Code. 
D.  Garbage storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be any adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder), for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage container as required in Section 9-205. Such facilities shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants. 
E.  Rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and tight fitting covers for storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator, or agent in control of such dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish. 
F.  Food preparation. All spaces used or intended to be used for food preparation shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare, and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage when necessary. 
G.  Supplied fixtures and equipment. The owner or occupant of a structure or part thereof shall keep the supplied equipment and fixtures therein clean and sanitary, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation. 
H.  Furnished by occupant. The equipment and fixtures furnished by the occupant of a structure shall be properly installed, and shall be maintained in good working condition, kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks, or obstructions. 
I.  Registration of agents. Nonresident owners of rental residential property within the City of Lansing shall designate an agent who shall either reside within the City or metropolitan area, and shall be authorized to accept service of notice under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the owner's responsibility to register said agent with the City. 
Sec. 9-803. - Extermination. 
A.  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest extermination (see Section 9-709) within the structure at all times. 
B.  Continued rat/vermin infestation. Continuing or repeated (three or more) incidents of rat/vermin infestation determined from the official records as provided in Section 9-112 of this Code shall require the installation of rat and vermin proof walls. The rat and vermin proof walls shall be installed in accordance with the building code. 
Sec. 9-804. - Non-discrimination statement. 
    In accordance with various state and federal civil rights legislation, the City of Lansing does not discriminate against individuals regardless of race, ethnicity, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, marital status, medical condition, or disability. 
CHAPTER 10 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-101. - Municipal Court established. 
    There is hereby established a Municipal Court for the City of Lansing, Kansas. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine cases involving violations of the ordinances of the City. 
Sec. 10-102. - Same-Practice and procedure. 
    The Code for Municipal Courts, as set forth in K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq., 12-4201 et seq., 12-4301 et seq., 12-4401 et seq., 12-4501 et seq., 12-4601 et seq. and 12-4701 et seq. and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto shall govern the practice and procedure in all cases in the Municipal Court. 
Sec. 10-103. - Officers. 
    The officers of the Municipal Court of this City shall be the Municipal Judge, Clerk(s) of the Municipal Court, the Chief of Police, and the Police Officers of the City. 
Sec. 10-104. - Municipal Judge-Appointment; qualifications; power. 
    The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the Governing Body, a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court. The Municipal Judge shall hold an initial term of office of not to exceed one year and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. If the Municipal Judge is reappointed he or she shall hold the office for a term of one year and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The Municipal Judge shall be a citizen of the United States; a graduate of a high school or secondary school or the equivalent thereof; a resident of Leavenworth County, Kansas and an attorney licensed by the State of Kansas. The Municipal Judge shall have such powers and duties as set forth in the Kansas Code for Municipal Courts and as specifically stated in K.S.A. 12-4106. 
(K.S.A. 14-201; 12-4105 and 12-4106) 
Sec. 10-105. - Same-Absence. 
    In the event the Municipal Judge is temporarily unable to preside due to absence, illness or disqualification, the Municipal Judge shall designate an attorney or other qualified person to act as Judge Pro Tempore. In the event the Municipal Judge fails to appoint a Judge Pro Tempore, the Judge Pro Tempore shall be appointed in the same manner as the Municipal Judge is selected. The Judge Pro Tempore shall receive compensation at the same rate and payable in the same manner as the compensation of the regular Municipal Judge on a prorated basis. 
(K.S.A. 12-4107) 
Sec. 10-106. - Same-Vacancy in office. 
    In the event a vacancy shall occur in the office of Municipal Judge, a successor shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term in the same manner as the Municipal Judge was appointed. 
(K.S.A. 12-4105; 12-4107 and 14-201) 
Sec. 10-107. - Same-Salary. 
    The Municipal Judge shall receive semi-monthly salary of $500.00 and shall only be modified by ordinance. 
(K.S.A. 12-4105) 
Sec. 10-108. - Court costs. 
    Pursuant to Charter Ordinance No, 1-2004, whenever any person is convicted of a violation of any provisions of this Code, the offender shall be assessed costs for the administration of their case in Municipal Court. The court costs for each offense designated an ordinance traffic infraction shall be $50.00, $5.00 of which is designated to be paid to the Police Department Equipment Reserve Fund, court costs on any other offense shall be $90.00, $5.00 of which is designated to be paid to the Police Department Equipment Reserve Fund, and when applicable, $100.00 for supervised probation; and $10.00 for fingerprinting performed pursuant to K.S.A. 12-4517 for anyone convicted of conduct comparable to a class A or B misdemeanor or assault. Additional court costs and fees may be assessed by the Municipal Court for service of process, for transcripts and depositions, for expenses incurred in issuing or serving a warrant, failure of defendant to pay court costs and fine or failure to appear. A fee in the amount of $100.00 shall be assessed against a defendant in each case in which the Municipal Court Judge appoints counsel for said defendant. The Municipal Court Judge shall assess costs of $55.00 per day for jail time served for which the City incurs costs. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall assess all State imposed fees as required by statute. In the event the Municipal Court utilizes the service of a contracting agent for debts owed the court, the cost of collection shall be paid by the defendant as additional court costs pursuant to K.S.A. 12-4119. 
(K.S.A. 12-4112; 12-4117) 
(Ord. No. 958,  1, 1-21-2016; Ord. No. 962,  1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-109. - Court; time, place. 
    The City shall provide at the expense of the City a suitable courtroom for the Municipal Court, together with all necessary supplies and records. Municipal Court shall be held on the second and fourth Wednesday of the month and the third Friday of the month unless otherwise designated by the Municipal Court Judge. Municipal Court shall be held at 800 First Terrace, Lansing, Kansas 66043. 
(K.S.A. 12-4109) 
CHAPTER 11 - POLICE 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11-101. - Chief of Police; appointment. 
    The City Administrator shall appoint the Chief of Police pursuant to Charter Ordinance 1-2016 and the City of Lansing Employee Handbook. 
Sec. 11-102. - Police Chief: Powers; duties. 
    The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the general management and control of the Police Department subject to supervisory control by the City Administrator, and shall administer the Police Department in a manner consistent with the ordinances of the City, the laws and Constitution of the state of Kansas and the United States Constitution. The Chief of Police shall be subject to the employment conditions set forth in the Lansing Police Policy Manual, the City of Lansing Employee Handbook and Charter Ordinance 1-2016. 
Sec. 11-103. - Vacancy in office of Chief of Police. 
    If a vacancy shall occur in the office of Chief of Police, the City Administrator shall appoint a supervising officer of the Police Department who shall perform all duties and be vested with all authority herein given to the Chief of Police. Such supervising officer's authority shall immediately cease when the office of Chief of Police is filled in the manner provided in 11-101. 
Sec. 11-104. - Powers and duties of members. 
    The members of the department, when on duty, shall devote their time and attention to the discharge of their respective duties consistent with the ordinances of the City, the laws and Constitution of the state of Kansas and the United States Constitution and the Lansing Police Policy Manual and City of Lansing Employee Handbook as amended from time to time. 
Sec. 11-105. - Reserve Police Force. 
A.  A Reserve Police Force is hereby established for the City, for better and more efficient police protection of the City. 
B.  The City Administrator shall appoint members of the Reserve Police Force. Those members of the Reserve Police Force shall hold their office at the pleasure of the Chief of Police. 
C.  The Reserve Police Force shall be under the general supervision of the Chief of Police and shall not draw any compensation and/or other benefits for their services. 
D.  The Chief of Police shall formulate all necessary rules of the Reserve Police Force relating to training, conduct and duties to be performed by the Reserve Police Force and as stated in the Lansing Police Policy Manual and the City of Lansing Employee Handbook as amended from time to time. 
Sec. 11-106. - Neglect of duty. 
    Any member of the Police Department who shall neglect or refuse to perform the duties required of him or her by this Code or other ordinances of the City, or who, while in the discharge of his or her official duty, shall be guilty of any fraud, exertion, oppression, favoritism, partiality or willful cruelty, or of taking or receiving directly or indirectly any bribe, or of unnecessary, unreasonable and malicious trespass upon private premises, shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 1-106 and 1-107 regarding scope and general penalties of this Code and, pending trial, shall be suspended from duty by the City Administrator. Upon conviction from the court, the Officer shall be immediately dismissed from the Department as required by law. 
Sec. 11-107. - Reward monies; disposition. 
    All monies due to, or received by the Chief of Police or any law enforcement personnel on account of any reward accruing to him or her in consequence of any action in the line of duty shall be deposited in the City's general fund. 
Sec. 11-108. - All persons to aid on demand. 
    Whenever any additional Police Force is necessary to quell any riotous or disorderly conduct, or to secure any person accused of crime, or violation of the law or ordinances of the City, any member of the department is hereby authorized to call on any inhabitant or other person in the City for assistance. 
CHAPTER 12 - PUBLIC OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - UNIFORM OFFENSE CODE 

Sec. 12-101. - Incorporating Uniform Public Offense Code. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating public offenses within the corporate limits of the City of Lansing, Kansas, that certain code known as the "Uniform Public Offense Code," 34th Edition of 2018, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas. One official copy of said Uniform Public Offense Code shall be marked or stamped "official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1006," and to which shall be attached a copy of this ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. 
(Ord. No. 982,  1, 8-3-2017; Ord. No. 1006,  1, 8-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-102. - Modifications. 
    Article 5: Section 5.7 of said Uniform Public Offense Code, relating to selling/giving/furnishing tobacco products to a minor, is hereby declared to be and is omitted and deleted. 
    Article 6: Section 6.8 of said Uniform Public Offense Code, relating to criminal littering, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Criminal Littering. 
(a)  Criminal littering is recklessly depositing or causing to be deposited any object or substance into, upon or about: 
(1)  Any public street, highway, alley, road, right-of-way, park or other public place, or any lake, stream, watercourse, or other body of water, except by direction of some public officer or employee authorized by law to direct or permit such acts; or 
(2)  Any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property. 
(b)  Criminal littering is an unclassified offense punishable: 
(1)  Upon a first conviction by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000; 
(2)  Upon a second conviction by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000; and 
(3)  Upon a third or subsequent conviction by a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than $4,000. 
(c)  The provisions of Standard Traffic Ordinance Section 112.1, Littering from a motor vehicle, are excepted from the application of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1006,  2, 8-16-2018) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1006, adopted Aug. 16, 2018, has been included as Section 12-102 at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 12-201. - Disturbance of religious assemblies. 
    Disturbance of religious assemblies is the disturbing of any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making a noise or by rude and indecent behavior within their place of worship or so near the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting. Disturbance of religious assemblies is a Class C violation. 
Sec. 12-202. - Loitering; streets, public places. 
    Loitering in streets and other public places is the loitering on the public streets, school buildings or school grounds or any other public place or place accessible to the public without being engaged in some business demanding the person's presence upon such street, school building, school grounds or at such public place or place accessible to the public or habitually lurking in a public place or a place accessible to the public without being engaged in some legal business. 
    Loitering in streets and other public places is a Class C violation. 
Sec. 12-203. - Obscenity; building or structure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to write or inscribe any obscene or vulgar picture, design or words at or on any place open to public view. Violation of this section is a Class C violation. 
Sec. 12-204. - Obscene advertising matter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post or paste or cause to be posted or pasted, any obscene pictures or other obscene advertising matter, on any billboard or sign of any kind in the City. 
    Violation of this section is a Class C violation. 
Sec. 12-205. - Curfew. 
A.  Persons under 16. It shall be unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to be or to remain upon any street or alley or other public place, including but not limited to any motor vehicle, in the City between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or a person of the age of 21 years or more with parental or guardian approval, or unless such person is engaged in some business or occupation which such person may lawfully engage in making it necessary to be in such places after 10:30 p.m. 
B.  Persons over 16. It shall be unlawful for any person over 16 years of age and under 18 years of age to be or to remain upon any street or alley or other public place, including but not limited to any motor vehicle, in the City, between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or a person of the age of 21 years or more with parental or guardian approval, or unless such person is engaged in some business or occupation which such person may lawfully engage in making it necessary to be in such places after 12:30 a.m., or unless any person specified in this subsection is attending, with the consent of a parent or guardian, an approved school function that would extend beyond the curfew deadline specified in this subsection. 
C.  Penalty. A violation of the provisions of this section shall subject the offender's parent or guardian to a fine not to exceed $25.00 for each offense. 
Sec. 12-206. - Criminal littering. 
    Criminal littering is recklessly depositing or causing to be deposited any object or substance into, upon or about: 
A.  Any public street, highway, alley, road, right-of-way, park or other public place, or any lake, stream, watercourse, or other body or water, except by direction of some public officer or employee authorized by law or ordinance to direct or permit such acts; or 
B.  Any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property. 
C.  Criminal littering is an unclassified misdemeanor punishable: 
1.  Upon a first conviction, a fine shall be imposed of no less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00; 
2.  Upon a second or subsequent conviction, a fine shall be imposed of no less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,000.00. (K.S.A. 21-5815) 
D.  Except this ordinance does not apply if the littering occurs from a motor vehicle onto or upon any highway, road or street. (See K.S.A. 8-15, 103 or Article 14 Section 126.3 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities as adopted and amended by the City of Lansing.) 
Sec. 12-207. - False alarm. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a property owner, lessee or any person occupying or otherwise on any premises within the City of Lansing, to make or cause to be made, a false fire or security alarm, directly or indirectly to any Fire Department or emergency response agency responding to alarms within the City, when the false alarm is caused by faulty detection or alarm equipment or by the negligence of said property owner, lessee or person. 
B.  Penalty: 
1.  A third false alarm in any one calendar year shall be subject to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
2.  A fourth false alarm in any one calendar year shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
3.  A fifth and subsequent false alarms in any one calendar year shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
4.  Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  Remedies: In addition to the above stated penalties, the City may institute an action in equity to prevent, restrain, correct, abate or enjoin such violation. (See also K.S.A. 21-6207) 
Sec. 12-208. - Use of force in resisting arrest. 
    A person is not authorized to use force to resist arrest which he or she knows is being made either by a law enforcement officer or by a private person summoned and directed by a law enforcement officer to make the arrest, even if the person arrested believes that the arrest is unlawful. (K.S.A 21-5229) 
Sec. 12-209. - Aiding or abetting. 
    Any person who aids and/or abets another person who has been charged or who has been convicted of violating any ordinance of this City shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Aiding and/or abetting is defined as knowingly assisting in the attempt or commission of a violation of any City ordinance. 
Sec. 12-210. - Urinating or defecating in public. 
A.  No person shall urinate, defecate or otherwise discard or dispose of human wastes or excretions on or in any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, parkway, parking lot, building, right-of-way, easement or other public place or on any private property exposed to the public view, except in a toilet or urinal receptacle within a permanent or temporary structure or enclosure of a restroom, bathroom, locker room or another toilet facility. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the person charged, by reason of illness, infection, disease or other physical infirmity, is unable to control his or her excretory functions, unless such loss of control is due to the voluntary ingestion of alcohol, illegal drugs or other intoxicants, depressants or hallucinogens. 
C.  Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished for that violation by a fine of not less than $50.00, but not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not more than 180 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 12-211. - Selling, giving or furnishing cigarettes or tobacco products to a person under 21 years of age. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Sell, furnish or distribute to any person under the age of 21 years any cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products; or 
2.  Buy any cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products for any person under 21 years of age. 
B.  It shall be a defense to a prosecution under subsection A. of this section if: 
1.  The defendant is a licensed retail dealer, or employee thereof, or a person authorized by law to distribute samples; 
2.  The defendant sold, furnished or distributed the cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products to the person under 21 years of age with reasonable cause to believe the person was of legal age to purchase or receive cigarettes, electronic cigarettes or tobacco products; and 
3.  To purchase or receive the cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products, the person under 21 years of age exhibited to the defendant a driver's license, Kansas non driver's identification card or other official or apparently official document containing a photograph of the person and purporting to establish that the person was of legal age to purchase or receive cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products. 
C.  It shall be a defense to a prosecution under subsection A. of this section if: 
1.  The defendant engages in the lawful sale, furnishing or distribution of cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products by mail; and 
2.  The defendant sold, furnished or distributed the cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products to the person by mail only after the person had provided to the defendant an unsworn declaration, conforming to K.S.A. 53-601, that the person was 21 or more years of age. 
D.  For purposes of this section, the person who violates this section shall be the individual directly selling, furnishing or distributing the cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products to any person under 21 years of age, or the retail dealer who has actual knowledge of such selling, furnishing or distributing by such individual or both. 
E.  Electronic cigarette means a device that delivers nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including but not limited to any electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. Electronic cigarette shall not include any products that have been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
F.  As used in this section, sale means any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange, barter, distribution or gift of cigarettes or tobacco products, with or without consideration. 
G.  It is unlawful for any person who is a retail dealer to fail to post and maintain in a conspicuous place in the dealer's establishment the following notice: "BY LAW, CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS MAY BE SOLD ONLY TO PERSONS 21 YEARS OF AGE AND OLDER." 
H.  Violation of this section is a Class B violation punishable by a minimum fine of $200.00. 
Sec. 12-212. - General penalties and violations. 
A.  Classes of violations and confinement. 
1.  For the purpose of sentencing, the following classes of violations and the punishment and the terms of confinement authorized for each class are established: 
a.  Class A, the sentence for which shall be a definite term of confinement in the City or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and shall not exceed one year; 
b.  Class B, the sentence for which shall be a definite term of confinement in the City or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and shall not exceed six months; 
c.  Class C, the sentence for which shall be a definite term of confinement in the City or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and shall not exceed one month; 
d.  Unclassified violations, which shall include all offenses declared to be violations without specification as to class, the sentence for which shall be in accordance with the sentence specified in the section that defines the offense; if no penalty is provided in such law, the sentence shall be the same penalty as provided herein for a Class C violation. 
2.  Upon conviction of a violation a person may be punished by a fine, as provided in Section 12-211B. of this article instead of or in addition to confinement, as provided in this section. 
3.  In addition to or in lieu of any other sentence authorized by law, whenever there is evidence that the act constituting the violation was substantially related to the possession, use or ingestion of cereal malt beverages or alcoholic liquor by such person, the court may order such person to attend and satisfactorily complete an alcohol or drug education or training program certified by the administrative judge of the judicial district or licensed by the secretary of social and rehabilitation services. 
B.  Fines. 
1.  A person convicted of a violation may, in addition to or instead of the confinement authorized by law, be sentenced to pay a fine which shall be fixed by the court as follows: 
a.  Class A violation, a sum not exceeding $2,500.00. 
b.  Class B violation, a sum not exceeding $1,000.00. 
c.  Class C violation, a sum not exceeding $500.00. 
d.  Unclassified violation, any sum authorized by the section that defines the offense. If no penalty is provided in such law, the fine shall not exceed the fine provided herein for a Class C violation 
2.  As an alternative to any of the above fines, the fine imposed may be fixed at any greater sum not exceeding double the pecuniary gain derived from the crime by the offender. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 12-301. - Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or allow to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary, unusual or loud noise which creates a nuisance or injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others, or which interferes with the use or enjoyment of property of any person of reasonable sensibilities residing in or occupying the area unless the making and continuing of such noise is necessary for the protection and preservation of property or the health and safety of some individual. 
B.  The following acts, which enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, are hereby declared to be noise nuisances in violation of this section and are unlawful: 
1.  The playing or permitting or causing the playing of any radio, radio receiving set, television, phonograph, "boom box," loudspeaker, drum, juke box, nickelodeon, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound when done in such a manner or with such volume, intensity, or with continued duration so as to annoy, to distress, or to disturb the quiet, comfort, or vicinity or hearing thereof. This subsection shall not apply to persons who have written authorization for an event which includes use of such a device, or to the police or public authorities who are using such a device in the performance of their duties. 
2.  Motor Vehicles. The use of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle so out of repair or in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise which shall annoy, distress, or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person of reasonable sensibilities within the vicinity. 
3.  Peddlers, Hawker, Etc. The raucous shouting, whistling, yelling, singing, hooting, or crying of peddlers, hawkers, vendors before eight a.m. or after ten p.m. 
4.  Construction. The erection, including construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair work, or the permitting or causing thereof, of any building or other structure, or the operation or the permitting or causing the operation of any tools, or equipment used in construction, excavation, drilling, demolition, alteration or repair work: 
a.  Other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
b.  This subsection shall not apply in cases of extreme and urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience. 
5.  Loading and Unloading. The creation of loud, excessive and unreasonable noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, in the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers or in the handling of ash, trash and garbage cans, either in the loading or unloading, or the creation by improper loading of excessive and unreasonable noise by the transportation of any materials over and along streets. 
6.  Animals. The owning, keeping or harboring of any animal that continuously, repeatedly, or persistently for thirty (30) minutes or more, without provocation by the complainant, howls, barks or emits audible sounds which shall annoy, distress, or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person of reasonable sensibilities within the vicinity. 
C.  It shall be a defense to charges filed pursuant to Section 12-301 that such noise levels did not exceed those set forth in Section 12-303. Such measurements shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of Section 12-302 pertaining to noise levels. It shall be the burden of the individual charged to present evidence of decibel readings obtained from properly calibrated testing equipment operated by an individual trained to operate such equipment. Such evidence shall be submitted to the City Attorney's Office no later than seven days prior to the trial date of any complaint. Failure to submit such evidence to the City Attorney's office will waive any such defense. 
Sec. 12-302. - Classification and measurement of noise. 
    For the purposes of determining and classifying any noise from a fixed, stationary source as loud, unusual or unnecessary as declared to be unlawful and prohibited by Section 12-301 herein, the following test measurements and requirements may be applied: 
A.  Noise occurring within the jurisdiction of the City shall be measured at a distance of at least twenty-five feet from a noise source if located within the public right-of-way, and if the noise source is located on private property or property other than the public right-of-way, at least twenty-five feet from the property line of the property on which the noise source is located. 
B.  The noise shall be measured on the "A" weighing scale on sound level meter of standard design and quality and having characteristics established by the American National Standards Institute. 
Sec. 12-303. - Excessive noise levels. 
A.  A noise measured or registered as provided herein from any source not exempted by this chapter at a level which is equal to or in excess of the db(A) established for the time period and zones listed below or that exceeds the background level by five db(A), whichever is greater, is declared to be excessive, unusual, loud and unnecessary, for the purposes of Section 12-301: 
Area 6:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m.-6:00 a.m. Residential 60 dB(A) 55 dB(A) Commercial 70 dB(A) 65 dB(A) Industrial 80 dB(A) 75 dB(A)  
Background noise means noise from all sources other than that under specific consideration, including traffic operating on public thoroughfares, and is established by measuring the noise level over a fifteen-minute period of time. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the aforementioned zones shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Residential area. Property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6, or property upon which a legal non-conforming residential use is operating. 
2.  Commercial area. Property zoned B-1, B-2 and B-3, or property operating under a special use permit for a commercial use. 
3.  Industrial area. Property zoned I-1, and I-2. 
C.  Adjacent zones. When a noise source can be measured from more than one zone, the permissible sound level of the more restrictive zone shall govern. 
Sec. 12-304. - Exceptions. 
    The following activities, as long as they are conducted in daytime hours as a normal function of a permitted use and the equipment is maintained in proper working condition, are excepted from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Lawn and yard maintenance; 
B.  Repair of personal use vehicles; 
C.  Home repair of place of residence. 
Sec. 12-305. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall not be considered loud and unnecessary noise for purposes of this article: 
A.  Sound from law enforcement motor vehicles and other Emergency Motor Vehicles including, but not limited to, snow-clearing equipment. 
B.  Sound from vehicles or equipment belonging to the City, state, county, federal government, school or other governmental agencies or utilities engaged in preparing for or remedying a potentially hazardous situation. 
C.  Sound that a person is making or causing to be made when said person has received and maintains a valid license or permit which specifically allows sound levels in excess of those set forth in this ordinance from any department, board, commission or Governing Body of the City authorized to issue such license or permit. 
Sec. 12-306. - Application. 
    To receive written authorization for the use of sound amplification equipment as authorized by Section 12-301B.1. or to apply for a permit or license to allow sound levels in excess of those set forth in this ordinance authorized by Section 12-305C., a person must complete and file an application for such authorization with the City Clerk's Office, on a form approved by the City. The applicant must provide the following information: 
A.  The type of proposed event or activity; 
B.  The number of participants for the proposed event or activity; 
C.  The location, including street address of the area to be utilized for the activity; 
D.  The date or dates and specific times for the activity; 
E.  The plans for sound control and sound amplification, including the number, location and power of amplifiers and speakers, mufflers etc.; 
F.  The name, address and phone number of the party responsible for the event or activity. 
Sec. 12-307. - Review process. 
A.  In determining if written authorization should be granted as allowed by Sections 12-301B.1. and 12-305C. of the Code of the City of Lansing, the following factors are to be considered by the City Administrator or his designee: 
1.  The volume of the noise; 
2.  The volume of the existing background noise, if any; 
3.  The zoning of the area within which the noise emanates, as well as where the noise can be heard; 
4.  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
5.  The duration of the noise: 
B.  No authorization may be issued for noise levels in excess of 100 db(A). 
Sec. 12-308. - Appeal. 
    Any person denied written authorization for the use of sound amplification devices, a permit or license for sound levels in excess of those set forth in this ordinance shall have a right of appeal from the denial to the Lansing Governing Body by filing a written request therefore with the City Clerk. The notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of the denial of such application and shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled Governing Body meeting. 
    The Governing Body's decision may be appealed to the First Judicial District Court. 
Sec. 12-309. - Enforcement. 
    In addition, the following personnel employed by the City shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this section: 
A.  Law Enforcement Officers; 
B.  Code Enforcement Officers. 
Sec. 12-310. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section within the corporate limits of the City is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars or be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed one month, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 13 - PARKS/PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note- (Tree Board; also see Chapter 14) 

ARTICLE I. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 13-101. - Parks designated. 
    The public parks of the City are hereby designated as follows: 
City Park, 400 N. 2nd Street; 
Willow Park, 127 W. Gilman Road; 
Highland Playground, 217 Highland; 
Kelly Grove Park, 320 East Gilman Road; 
Woodland Gazebo, 150 Woodland; 
Kenneth W. Bernard Park, 15650 Gilman Road. 
    The parks shall include any lake, pond, pool, stream or body of water of any nature or description whatsoever located in or upon such park. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2018(2)) 
Sec. 13-102. - Driving in public parks. 
    No person shall drive or park any motor vehicle except on a street, driveway or parking lot or to park or leave any such vehicle at any place other than one established for public parking in any public park or on public grounds; provided, that nothing in this section shall restrict the use of City or contract vehicles in performing maintenance or other purposes approved by the director of parks and recreation. For purposes of this section, "motor vehicle" means and includes every vehicle, except wheelchairs, which is self-propelled, including motorized bicycles which may be propelled by either human power or helper motor, or by both. 
Sec. 13-103. - Animals in park. 
    Unless specifically designated, no person shall ride, lead or permit any livestock in any City park. No person shall allow domestic animals to run at large in any public park of the City, except on a leash or in designated off leash areas, and under care of the owner or such other person having charge of the animal. 
Sec. 13-104. - Injuring park property. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and without authority cut, pull, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees growing in or around any public park or other public grounds within the City, or to willfully bring or permit to be brought in or around any public park or other public grounds within the City any dogs, either loose or on a leash, or any other animals which, while in or around any public park or other public grounds, may injure in any manner whatsoever flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees growing in or around any public park or other public grounds or to willfully and without authority tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon a park or public grounds. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any property of any kind in or from any public park of the City. This shall include tramping, painting, staining, writing, printing, stamping or marking upon, breaking, upsetting, cutting, carving or chopping upon, severing, pulling or tearing up, or in any other way or manner injuring, mutilating, defacing, destroying, moving or carrying away structures, fixtures, tables, benches, chairs, seats, field markings, prepared fields, or any swimming pool or any other property in, upon or about any public park. 
Sec. 13-105. - Littering parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or deposit any filth, slops, offal, garbage, sewerage, refuse, vegetable or animal matter or any other thing that is detrimental to the public health, or any sweepings, rags, excrement, compost, waste paper, paper containers, excelsior, straw, hay, shavings, barrels, boxes, wooden crates, lumber, stable manure, ashes, vegetables or litter of any kind except the same be placed in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
Sec. 13-106. - Public speeches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make a public address or deliver a sermon or preach, exhort, or lecture in or upon any public park or grounds in the City without first having obtained a permit from the City Clerk to do so. 
Sec. 13-107. - Park hours. 
    The Governing Body shall cause signs to be posted in appropriate places indicating the open hours of any City park. Except for any program being sponsored by the City in which the Governing Body may set the hour or closing or opening, all of the public parks in the City shall be closed for any and all use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., with the following exceptions: 
A.  Kenneth W. Bernard Park shall be closed for any and all use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
B.  Kelly Grove Park shall be closed for any and all use between dusk and dawn. 
C.  Parks may be temporarily closed or opening hours may be extended temporarily in case of emergency, adverse weather conditions, or unusual circumstances as determined and ordered by the Parks and Recreation Director. 
Sec. 13-108. - Violation of park hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any City park or to use the park except during the hours that the park is open as set forth in Section 13-107 where the Governing Body pursuant to Section 13-107 has determined special hours for any park, and such special hours have been posted in appropriate places in such park, it shall be unlawful for any person to be in such park or use the park except during the hours that the park has been posted as being open. 
Sec. 13-109. - Park amenities. 
    Park amenities to include playgrounds and shelters are available for public use unless a special event permit is granted by the Council in accordance with Section 13-118. This shall exclude sports fields which may be reserved based on availability. 
Sec. 13-110. - Hunting and trapping animals within parks prohibited. 
A.  No person shall maintain or engage any trap designed for the purpose of capturing any animal within any park, recreation or open space area owned by the City of Lansing. 
B.  No person shall hunt any animal within any park, recreation or open space area owned by the City of Lansing. "Hunt" means take, in any manner, any animal. "Take" means shoot, wound, kill or capture. 
C.  Nothing herein shall prevent any authorized health official, law enforcement official, or City official authorized by the City Administrator from carrying out duties imposed by law in relation to the control of diseased animals, disease carriers or injured animals. 
D.  Any person violating this provision of this section shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00. 
Sec. 13-111. - Fireworks prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, fire, discharge or use or cause to be shot, fired, discharged or used, fireworks of any nature or kind in or upon the public park of the City. The Governing Body for the public display of fireworks may grant special permission when the individual or group sponsoring the display has adequately provided for the supervision of such display. 
    (For additional information regarding Fireworks regulations, see Chapter 7.) 
Sec. 13-112. - Fires. 
    It shall be unlawful to build or start any fires in any public park of the City, except within containers designed and intended for such purposes and City staff performing duties to maintain City parks. 
Sec. 13-113. - Bill posting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to affix to, post, place or inscribe upon or cause to be affixed, posted, placed or inscribed upon, any handbill, poster, card, sign or device upon or against any fence, utility pole, structure, tree or property within any public park of the City. 
Sec. 13-114. - Alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense, convey or consume or cause to be dispensed, conveyed or consumed any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages in any public park of the City. Special permission may be granted by the Governing Body for the consumption of cereal malt beverages or wine at special events when the individual or group sponsoring the special event has adequately provided for the supervision of the event and made such arrangements as are necessary to prevent consumption by persons under age. 
    (For additional information regarding Alcoholic Beverages on City Property, See Chapter 3.) 
Sec. 13-115. - Sale of merchandise; permit. 
    With the exception of fundraising conducted by non-profit organizations and approved by the City Administrator, no person shall sell, dispense or convey or cause to be sold, dispensed or conveyed or erect or place or cause to be erected or placed a stand, building, structure, wagon, tent, vehicle, car, trailer or any other thing for the purpose of selling, dispensing or conveying merchandise, refreshments, service, food, beverages, sports goods and supplies, or articles or service of any kind in or upon the public park of the City unless such person has been issued a City-issued Temporary Event Permit. 
Sec. 13-116. - Ordinances apply. 
    All laws of the City shall apply to the public parks of the City unless otherwise provided herein or elsewhere in the code. 
Sec. 13-117. - Code conflict. 
    In the event that various sections of the City Code conflict with one another, the stricter provision shall be applicable. 
Sec. 13-118. - Special events on park property. 
    All requests for exceptions to the regulations set forth in this Article shall be referred to the Governing Body for approval or disapproval. 
    An application for a special event must be in writing on a form provided by the City Clerk, and accompanied by proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 and such other information as may reasonably be requested under the circumstances pertaining to the event requested. Applications must be submitted to the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the intended event date. 
    Such permit may be subject to such conditions and safeguards as the Government Body may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These conditions may include but shall not be limited to: 
A.  Restrictions on the hours of operation, duration of the event, size of the activity or other operational characteristic. 
B.  The posting of a performance bond to help ensure that the operation of the event and subsequent restoration of the site are conducted according to Government Body expectations. 
C.  The provision of traffic control or security personnel to increase the public safety and convenience. 
D.  Obtaining liability and personal injury insurance in such form and amount as the Government Body may find necessary to protect the safety and general welfare of the community. 
Sec. 13-119. - Swimming. 
    No person may swim or enter the water for any reason in any bodies of water in the Lansing park system except for any areas designated for such activity. 
Sec. 13-120. - Boats. 
    No person may operate or use any type of boat or other vessel in any bodies of water in the Lansing park system. This includes, but is not limited to boats, canoes, kayaks, rafts, inflatables, and paddle boards. 
Sec. 13-121. - Remote control aircraft. 
    No person may fly any remote controlled or self-propelled aircraft, including, but not limited to, radio controlled or control line model airplanes, drones, helicopters, and gliders, in Lansing Parks. Special permission for events may be granted through the special event application process. 
Sec. 13-122. - Parking. 
    No vehicle shall be parked or permitted to remain in City park parking lots or the Activity Center parking lot overnight. 
Sec. 13-123. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum of not less than $50.00 or more than $100.00. 
Sec. 13-124. - Enforcement. 
    The Lansing Police Department shall enforce the provisions set forth in this section of the code. 
ARTICLE II. - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 13-201. - Applicability of article. 
    This chapter relates to and embraces all lost, stolen, strayed, abandoned, unclaimed, or confiscated property which of itself is not contraband or the possession of which is not unlawful, which is now or may hereafter come into the possession of the authorized officers of the City. 
Sec. 13-202. - Custody; reclamation by owner within thirty days. 
    All personal property of the character described in Section 13-201, shall be delivered to the custody of the Chief of Police who shall retain the possession of such property for a period of at least thirty days, except as elsewhere herein provided, unless the owner or person entitled to possession of such property shall sooner claim such property and establish his ownership and right to possession thereof. 
Sec. 13-203. - Notice of intent to dispose of property; authorized disposition of property; etc. 
    If the owner or person entitled to possession of property as described in this chapter shall fail to claim such property within thirty days, then at such time or at any time thereafter, the Chief of Police may cause a notice to be published in the official City paper, setting forth a detailed description of such property and stating that unless the same be claimed within ten (10) days, such property will be disposed of according to provisions of Section 13-206; provided, that if such property be livestock, the value of which is less than the cost of keeping the same for the periods described in this section, such property shall be advertised immediately and disposed of after a three (3) days' notice given as herein provided. 
Sec. 13-204. - Failure of owner to claim before sale. 
    If the owner or person entitled to possession of property advertised under the preceding section shall fail to claim the same within the prescribed time, the property shall be disposed of as provided in Section 13-206. 
Sec. 13-205. - Costs to be paid by owner if property claimed after publication. 
    If the owner or person entitled to possession of property as described in this chapter shall claim such property after publication as provided in Section 13-203, the owner or person entitled to possession shall pay the actual cost of publication, together with the actual cost of keeping such property during its custody. 
Sec. 13-206. - Disposal of property. 
    All property not claimed after notification as provided in Section 13-203 shall be disposed in the manner dictated by resolution of the Governing Body, including: 
A.  Disposal by public auction to the highest bidder for cash, with the proceeds to be paid to the General Fund; or 
B.  Disposal by donation to a charity designated in said resolution; or 
C.  Disposal by any other lawful means. 
Sec. 13-207. - Title to property. 
    Any purchaser or donee of property under this article shall acquire good and perfect title thereto. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1014,  1, adopted Dec. 20, 2018, amended Article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article III, Sections 13-201-13-305 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original codification. 

Sec. 13-301. - Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
    The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board (PRAB) is to serve as an advisory board to the Governing Body of the City of Lansing on the conduct of parks and recreational activities. 
(Ord. No. 1014,  1, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 13-302. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    City is the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
    Director is a person so designated and in charge of the Parks and Recreation Department. 
    Governing Body is the Governing Body of the City of Lansing. 
    Park is a park, playground, facility, or any other area in the City owned or leased by the City, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted expressways, parkways, trails, triangles and traffic circles maintained by the City, except the parkway strips between curb or gutter and sidewalks, or, if none, the front property line along the several streets and highways of the City. 
    Program is any organized parks and recreation activity funded by the City and operated under the auspices of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
    PRAB Manual is the compilation of the rules, regulations, report, policies, procedures and other writings as described and called for in Section 13-304: Powers and Duties. 
(Ord. No. 1014,  1, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 13-303. - Establishment of the Parks and Recreation Board. 
A.  Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval from the City Council. 
B.  There shall be eleven (11) voting board members that will be community volunteers residing in Lansing USD #469, one of which will be a representative of the Unified School District #469. 
C.  Six (6) voting members in attendance at a meeting shall constitute quorum. 
D.  Three (3) Governing Body Representatives will be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council and shall serve until the end of their elected term or until replaced by another Governing Body member approved by the City Council. The Governing Body Representatives shall be ex-officio and serve in an advisory capacity. 
E.  Members shall serve without compensation. 
F.  Parks and Recreation Director is an employee of the City and shall serve until the termination of his or her employment and the position shall be filled by a newly hired Director or a duly-authorized designee approved by the Governing Body. 
G.  The Lansing School District USD #469 representative shall be a resident of USD #469 and a community volunteer or district employee appointed by the Lansing School Board and approved by the Governing Body for a term of two (2) years. In the event the Lansing School Board chooses not to appoint a representative to the PRAB, the Governing Body will make such appointment of a community volunteer for a two (2) year term. 
H.  The remaining community volunteers will be recommended by the PRAB and appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Governing Body to a term of two (2) years. 
I.  In the event any member does not complete his or her term, the PRAB will recommend a replacement for Governing Body approval to fulfill the unexpired term. 
J.  A Chairperson and Vice-chairperson of the PRAB will be elected by a majority of the PRAB members at its first meeting of each calendar year. The Chairperson and Vice-chairperson will serve one (1) year terms and may be elected to no more than two (2) consecutive terms. The Chairperson, Vice-chairperson, and Secretary's respective duties will be as follows: 
1.  Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall be entitled to vote upon each issue. In the event a question over procedure arises, the City of Lansing Code of Procedure, January 5, 2006, shall govern the proceedings. 
2.  Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-chairperson shall assist the Chairperson in directing the affairs of the Advisory Board. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-chairperson shall assume all duties of the Chairperson. 
3.  Secretary. The Secretary will be an employee of the City and shall keep minutes of all meetings and provide administrative support to the PRAB as needed. 
K.  The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be an ex-officio member of the Board, with the responsibility to participate in discussions but without the right to vote. 
L.  Absence from three (3) consecutive meetings without formal consent of the Board shall be deemed to constitute the removal of that member. 
(Ord. No. 1014,  1, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 13-304. - Powers and duties. 
    The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall have the following powers and perform the following duties: 
A.  It shall act principally in an advisory capacity to the City staff and the Governing Body in all matters pertaining to parks and recreation; shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and review of the complete parks and recreation services of the City; and shall advise staff and the Governing Body from time to time as to the present and future maintenance, operation, planning, acquisition, development, enlargement, and use policies of the City's park and recreation services. 
B.  It shall study and encourage the development of parks and recreation areas and study and encourage the development of wholesome recreation for all residents of the City of Lansing and the patrons of USD #469. 
C.  It shall advise the Parks and Recreation Director on problems of development and/or maintenance of recreation areas, facilities, programs, and improved recreational services. 
D.  It shall recommend the adoption of standards, areas, facilities, programs and financial support. 
E.  The members of the Board shall study and review the Lansing Comprehensive Plan for parks and recreation and become familiar with such plan and its relation to existing and proposed facilities and shall become aware of and participate in any revision or updating thereof. 
F.  It shall advise and recommend to the Parks and Recreation Director on the development of the 5-year capital improvement program updated annually and, when in its opinion the need exists for additional park and recreation facilities, grounds, or premises, it shall make appropriate recommendations to the Governing Body. It shall also recommend the acquisition of additional parks, park and recreational equipment and supplies. It shall make any other recommendations to the Governing Body regarding park and recreation matters that it considers advisable. 
G.  It shall develop, for Governing Body review, rules and regulations and policies governing the use of park and recreational facilities and program. Such rules, regulations, and policies shall be outlined in the PRAB Policies and Procedures Manual. 
H.  It may solicit for the City, gifts, revenues, bequests, or endowments of money or property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject to the approval and acceptance by the Governing Body. 
I.  It may recommend to the Governing Body amendments to or change in this Article. 
J.  PRAB, through its Chairperson, shall provide approved minutes of all meetings to the Governing Body. 
K.  PRAB's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment, or termination of employees of the Parks and Recreation Department. No supervisory power of the Board is created or should be implied. 
L.  The PRAB shall develop and recommend written policies and procedures for the Parks and Recreation Director to follow in the conduct of all recreational activities, which policies and procedures shall be subject to approval by the Governing Body and outlined in the PRAB Policies and Procedures Manual. 
M.  The PRAB will assist in the development of the proposed budget for the Parks and Recreation Department. However, the Board is not authorized to add, delete, or change in any way the budget as prepared by the Parks and Recreation staff and approved by the Governing Body. 
N.  PRAB will develop for Governing Body approval a set of governing rules of procedure for its meetings and operation as outlined in the PRAB Policies and Procedures Manual. 
O.  PRAB shall not have the power to obligate the City or any funds or expenditures or incur any debt on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1014,  1, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 13-305. - Meetings, rules and regulations. 
    The PRAB shall meet at such times and places as it shall agree upon or upon call by the Governing Body. The Board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson at its first meeting of each calendar year. The Governing Body must approve any bylaws or other rules and regulations relating to its meetings and procedures. The Board shall keep minutes of its meetings and provide a copy thereof to the Governing Body. A majority of the members appointed to the PRAB shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 1014,  1, 12-20-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - LANSING COMMUNITY LIBRARY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1008, adopted Sept. 6, 2018, amended Article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article IV,  13-401-13-406, pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 13-401. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context requires a different meaning, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    City shall mean the City of Lansing, Kansas. 
    Governing Body shall mean the Governing Body of the City. 
    Library or Lansing Community Library shall mean the public library in the City serving the public and is supported in whole or in part with tax revenue. 
    Library Advisory Board or Lansing Community Library Advisory Board shall mean a board appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Governing Body of the City to advise the Governing Body, City Administrator, and Library Director concerning library matters. 
    Mayor shall mean the City-wide elected position of Mayor of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-402. - Establishment and responsibility. 
A.  The public library is a department of the City and is hereby established, continued, and maintained for the City of Lansing, Kansas under the provisions of Charter Ordinance No. 1-2018, this Ordinance, and any related Ordinances and/or Charter Ordinances adopted by the Governing Body and any by-laws adopted by the Library Advisory Board. 
B.  The public library shall be called the Lansing Community Library. 
C.  The Lansing Community Library shall be the public agency responsible for providing library and information services that are freely accessible to all eligible patrons. 
D.  The Library Director and library staff shall be hired and employed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-403. - Financing and levy of taxes. 
A.  The Lansing Community Library shall be financed through the use of general fund monies, library mill levy revenues, library operational revenues (including, but not limited to, fines and fees established by resolution of the Governing Body), intergovernmental agreements, grants, gifts, donations and bequests received and designated to be used for library purposes, and any other tax levies that may be authorized by the Governing Body of the City under the authority of Charter Ordinance No. 1-2018, and in accordance with the Kansas cash-basis law (K.S.A. 10-1101 et seq., and any amendments thereto), and any other applicable provisions otherwise set forth in this Chapter or under Kansas law. 
B.  The Governing Body shall annually levy a tax for the operation, maintenance, and support of the Library, including employee benefits, in such sum as it may choose. Such tax levy may be based, in part, on the recommendation of the Library Advisory Board, but shall be levied by the Governing Body without limitations, except those limitations which may control as set forth in any applicable statute fixed by law. 
C.  Such levied and collected tax revenue shall be maintained and identified in a separate fund to be known as the "Library Fund" as itemized with the City's annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-404. - Administrative policies and procedures. 
A.  The Library Director, as an employee of the City, shall be responsible for the fiscal and internal administrative operations of the Library, except as determined by the City Administrator in collaboration with the Library Director, in order to optimize operational efficiencies. 
B.  The Library shall operate in conformance with City administrative policies and procedures, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to: 
1.  Personnel, including recruitment, selection, classification and pay for Library personnel. 
2.  The City Administrator may consult with the Library Advisory Board regarding the selection of a Library Director. 
C.  Receipt, disbursement, and accounting of all revenues, from whatever source it is derived, dedicated for the operation of the library. 
D.  Maintenance of general books, cost accounting records, and other financial documents. 
E.  Budget administration. 
F.  Operation and maintenance of equipment and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-405. - Removal of materials and penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to take from the Lansing Community Library, or any premises thereof, any property, whether public or personal, belonging to or under the control of the Library unless authorized by the Library Director or his or her designated representative, and in compliance with the policies of the Library. It shall be unlawful for any persons to retain and convert any property belonging to the Library to their possession or keep the same longer than permitted by Library policy. 
B.  The penalty for violating this Article shall be fined as established by the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-406. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established a Lansing Community Library Advisory Board. The Library Advisory Board advises the Governing Body, City Administrator, and Library Director concerning Library matters based on the duties and responsibilities enumerated in Section 13-410 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-407. - Membership. 
    The Lansing Community Library Advisory Board shall consist of eight members: 
A.  Seven (7) voting members shall reside within the Lansing USD 469 district. 
B.  The Mayor shall be a non-voting ex-officio member. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-408. - Appointment, terms, vacancies, removal, compensation. 
A.  The members of the Library Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the Lansing City Council. 
B.  The term of appointment for each member of the Advisory Board shall be four (4) years with no limit on the number of terms a member may serve. 
C.  Terms shall expire on the last day of April of a given year. 
D.  Vacancies occurring before the expiration of a term shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the consent and approval of Lansing City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
E.  The Advisory Board members may vote to remove any appointed member of the Advisory Board due to excessive absences. Advisory Board members shall be expected to attend at least seven (7) meetings in a calendar year. 
F.  The members of the Advisory Board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-409. - Appointment of officers and conduct of meetings. 
A.  The Advisory Board shall select from its membership a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a secretary. 
1.  Officers serve one (1) year terms and may be re-elected to consecutive officer terms with no limit on the number of officer terms. 
B.  The Advisory Board shall establish the time and place of when and where its meetings will be conducted. 
C.  The Advisory Board may make and establish such reasonable bylaws, rules and regulations as may be necessary for its own governance, and for the full and complete execution of its duties and responsibilities. 
D.  General or special meetings may be held at such time as the chairperson or majority of the members direct. 
E.  Four (4) members of the Advisory Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
F.  A record of all proceedings shall be kept. 
G.  All regular and special meetings shall be subject to the Kansas Open Meeting Act. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 13-410. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The Lansing Community Library Advisory Board shall be an advisory board for the Governing Body, City Administrator, and Library Director concerning Library matters. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any statutory authority under federal, state, or municipal law or ordinance of any City elected or appointed official. The Library Advisory Board shall have the following functions, duties and responsibilities: 
A.  Abide by all applicable City ordinances. 
B.  Act in an advisory capacity to the Governing Body, City Administrator, and Library Director. 
C.  Provide opinion and guidance, as appropriate, for the annual Library budget. 
D.  Pursue possible grant opportunities, when available and appropriate, for the development of the City's library or programs. 
E.  Advise in the establishment and review of policies and procedures to ensure efficient and effective operation of the Library and its programs. 
F.  Assist in strategic planning. 
G.  Provide a public forum for communication on library issues. 
H.  Attend annual Northeast Kansas Regional Library System training. 
I.  Provide opinions and guidance, as appropriate, on issues such as income producing opportunities, the expansion of existing Library facilities and services, and new facilities. 
J.  Engage in public relations activities for the purpose of educating and informing the public about Lansing Community Library and its various programs offered to the public. 
K.  Participate in advocacy initiatives at the local, state, and federal levels as needed. 
L.  Identify and recommend possible candidates to the Governing Body for open library board positions, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1008,  1, 9-6-2018) 
CHAPTER 14 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-101. - Removing portions of sidewalks and/or improved trails; accumulations. 
    No person shall loosen or remove any plank, brick, block, or support from any sidewalk or crosswalk or any curbing or gutter. This section shall not apply to persons making repairs on any such sidewalk, gutter, curb, or crosswalk, or any person temporarily removing the same on account of building operations providing that they have obtained the appropriate permit for work in the right-of-way from the Lansing Public Works Department. No owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of ground shall permit earth or other substances to accumulate on the sidewalk along such property. 
Sec. 14-102. - Animals and motor vehicles on sidewalks and/or improved trails. 
    No person shall allow any animal or motorized vehicle other than single occupant devices designed to transport handicapped individuals to be ridden or driven upon any sidewalk. 
Sec. 14-103. - Hedge fences. 
    No person owning or controlling any hedge fence, tree, or other landscaping bordering on any street or sidewalk in this City shall permit the same to overhang and obstruct any sidewalk; or to obstruct traffic on the street, safe site distance, or traffic control devices. 
Sec. 14-104. - Sidewalk hazards. 
    No owner of any property having a sidewalk adjacent thereto shall permit any plank, brick, stone or segment of such sidewalk to be raised above the established level of such sidewalk more than one-half (1/2) inch, in any manner which might catch the foot of a pedestrian, or to permit any holes or depressions to occur in the sidewalk in which a pedestrian might step or catch their foot in a manner to cause injury. 
    For additional information, See [Section] 14-210. 
Sec. 14-105. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-106. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-107. - Gutter drainage: obstructions; changes. 
    No person shall place anything in any street or alley, the effect of which is or might be to interfere with the free flow of water along the drains or gutters placed in such streets or alleys for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another along such street or alley. 
    Only new material of a type approved by the Public Works Department shall be used for entrance pipes. Installation and/or repair of driveway entrances require a permit from the Public Works Department for the portion in the street right-of-way. 
    No person shall in any way change or interfere with the drainage of any street, curb, gutter, or alley, except in the instance of driveway installation or repair and with the appropriate permit from the Public Works Department. 
Sec. 14-108. - Change in street or alley grade. 
    No person shall in any way change or interfere with the grade of any street or alley without the approval of the Governing Body, and without the appropriate permit from the Public Works Department for work in right-of-way. 
Sec. 14-109. - Driving on unfinished construction. 
    No person shall walk upon, drive or ride over or across any pavement in course of construction before the same has been opened for public travel or upon any uncompleted grading or sidewalk construction that has not been opened for travel. 
Sec. 14-110. - Interference with protective devices around construction. 
    No person shall remove, throw down, run over or interfere with any barricades, lights lanterns, signals, signs, cones, channelizers, or any traffic control device, markers, or construction fence placed to guard and protect any grading, paving, sidewalk or other construction work. 
Sec. 14-111. - Standards for curb cuts. 
A.  More than one curb cut shall not be permitted on lots where narrow dimension on the abutting public right-of-way is less than 100 feet. 
B.  The curb cuts on corner lots shall be at least 50 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way line of the adjacent streets extended. 
C.  The Governing Body may waive the provisions of this section. 
D.  Width of curb cuts shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the Lansing Technical Specifications and Design Guidelines. 
Sec. 14-112. - Removal of snow or ice from public sidewalks. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of record or the occupant of property immediately adjacent to a public sidewalk on public right-of-way to remove from the sidewalk any snow or ice which accumulates on such sidewalk or obstructs such sidewalk within twenty-four (24) hours after the storm ceases. Where the ice accumulated is of such character as to make removal thereof impossible, the sprinkling or placement of sand and de-icer thereon within the time specified for removal in such a manner as to make such sidewalk safe for travel of pedestrians shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  In the case of any property owner of record or occupant refusing or neglecting to comply with the provisions of subsection A. for a period of forty-eight (48) hours, and after a verified inspection of a public complaint of such non-compliance, inspection personnel of the Code Enforcement Department shall notify the occupant of the violation(s) and if the occupant is not the property owner of record, the Department shall deliver or mail a written notice of violation to the property owner of record ordering the prompt removal of the snow or ice. Failure to remove the snow or ice within twenty-four (24) hours after notice of violation has been delivered to the occupant, or if unoccupied, 48 hours after the notice of violation has been mailed to the property owner of record may result in the citation of the property owner of record or occupant pursuant to subsection C. 
C.  Violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered a municipal offense and upon an adjudication of guilty, the violator shall be fined $20.00. Each day of a continuing violation, beginning with the day after the storm ceases, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 14-113. - Maintenance of designated sidewalks. 
    The City of Lansing shall be responsible for all future maintenance, including snow and ice removal, of certain portions of the City Trail System, and certain portions of sidewalks identified in the most currently adopted City of Lansing Snow and Ice Removal Operation Plan. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 14-201. - Application for, commercial and industrial building or land use permits. 
    (All uses not specified in Section 14-202.) Any person hereinafter applying for a building or land use permit for any structure or purpose, including any residential use of a density four-plex or greater, and including the major remodeling of any structure, which shall be defined as remodeling costing twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the appraised value of said structure, for use other than single family or two-family occupancy, shall, as a condition thereof, be required to construct a sidewalk along any public street or streets adjacent to the parcel of land associated with such building or land use building permits. In lieu of construction of the sidewalk, and at the discretion of the Governing Body, the person applying for a building or land use permit may contribute to the Capital Improvements Sidewalk Fund an equivalent amount per linear foot, based on sidewalk type and current construction cost estimate as set forth in a schedule updated annually by the Public Works Department, of the required sidewalk along the entire street frontage of said tract or building lot. Such contribution shall take the form of cash or certified check, and shall be nonrefundable. 
Sec. 14-202. - Single-family and two-family, dwelling requirement. 
    Where sidewalks are required on tracts or other locations as identified on the engineering plans for the subdivision, any person hereinafter applying for a building permit for any structure for single family or two-family occupancy shall, as a condition thereof, be required to construct sidewalks adjacent to such parcels of property. Where sidewalks were not identified as a requirement on the engineering plans of the subdivision, and were not previously installed on lots, tracts, or other locations, any person hereinafter applying for a building permit for any single-family or two-family structure shall, as a condition thereof, contribute to the Capital Reserve Sidewalk Fund an equivalent amount per linear foot, based on sidewalk type and current construction cost estimate as set forth in a schedule updated annually by the Public Works Department, of the required sidewalk along the entire street frontage of said lot, tract, or other location. Such contribution shall take the form of cash or certified check, and shall be nonrefundable. 
Sec. 14-203. - Revocation of permits. 
    In the event any person shall fail to provide sidewalks as set forth in this chapter, prior to the occupancy of such building, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
Sec. 14-204. - Sidewalks across park land and vacant lots in new subdivisions. 
A.  All sidewalks crossing property donated to the City for use as a park shall have the sidewalk(s) across said property constructed by the developer before such time as the final acceptance of the subdivision streets and release of any maintenance bond. 
B.  In order to provide continuous sidewalks throughout a development, all sidewalks across vacant lots within the development shall be constructed across said lots by the developer before such time as the final acceptance of the subdivision streets and release of the maintenance bond. 
Sec. 14-205. - Petitions. 
    When a petition, signed by not less than 10 citizens owning real estate in a ward of the City and abutting the proposed sidewalk, is filed with the City Clerk, requesting construction of said sidewalk, the governing body may in its discretion, by a resolution, order such sidewalk constructed as herein provided. (K.S.A. 12-1803) Sidewalk construction shall be financed in accordance with K.S.A. 12-1809 through 12-1811. 
Sec. 14-206. - Right of landowner. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the owner of property abutting on a street, who desires to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk at his or her own expense after submitting plans which are in compliance with the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for the City of Lansing, and which meet such other requirements as would have to be met if the sidewalk were constructed or reconstructed by the City, and upon obtaining the required permit from the Public Works Department, to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk on public right-of-way adjacent to his/her property without any petition or a condemning resolution by the governing body. 
Sec. 14-207. - Ramps for handicapped persons. 
    In the course of all new sidewalk construction, ramps for handicapped persons shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for the City at all street crossings, and other crossings that would otherwise interfere with accessibility. Curbs at ramp locations must provide a gradual transition from gutter line to back of curb, not exceeding one inch in height. If the street curb has not been constructed to receive the sidewalk ramp, the sidewalk constructor shall remove a section of the curb and reconstruct as required. 
Sec. 14-208. - Persons owning land on which sidewalk is constructed are responsible for maintenance. 
    All persons owning land adjacent to public right-of-way or easement upon which there is presently constructed or will be constructed in the future a sidewalk, are deemed and held responsible for the repair of the sidewalks and the cleanliness and the removal of snow and ice and other debris therefrom. 
Sec. 14-209. - Notice to repair. 
    Whenever the director of public works or his/her authorized representative shall find that such public sidewalks are in need of repair or otherwise a safety hazard, the director of public works shall issue notice to the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk, informing the owner of the required repair or maintenance of the sidewalk and the maximum time period of which the owner will be allowed to make such repairs, not to exceed 60 days (except as provided for in Section 14-116). 
Sec. 14-210. - Failure to comply with notice; repairs by City. 
    If the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the notice within the time specified in the notice, then the public works department shall proceed to have such repairs made by City forces performing such work, or the governing body may contract with such competent person, company, or corporation for the performance of such work. The actual construction cost of performing such work shall be reported to the City Clerk by the director of public works. 
Sec. 14-211. - Costs; assessment to landowner. 
    An account of the cost of repairs shall be kept and reported to the governing body. The City shall by ordinance levy a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land abutting on the sidewalk so repaired for the cost of repairs, and if the abutting property owner does not pay the assessment within 30 days, upon the City Clerk mailing to the owner or his or her designated agent, if known, a printed or written notice of the amount of such repairs, the full amount shall be certified by the City Clerk to the county clerk to be put on the tax roles for collection like other taxes. The cost of such construction shall be paid from the general fund or other proper fund of the City; and such fund shall be reimbursed when payments therefore are received or when such assessments are collected and received by the City. 
Sec. 14-212. - Condemnation and reconstruction. 
    When any sidewalk, in the opinion of the governing body, becomes inadequate or unsafe for the travel thereon, the governing body shall adopt a resolution condemning such walk and providing for the construction of a new walk in place of the walk condemned. (K.S.A. 12-1804) 
Sec. 14-213. - Notices to landowners. 
    The resolution of condemnation and providing for the construction or reconstruction of a sidewalk shall give the owner of the abutting property not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after its publication in which to construct or cause to be constructed or reconstructed the sidewalk at his or her own expense. Such resolution shall be published once in the official City newspaper. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to serve a written or printed notice to construct or reconstruct as contemplated by K.S.A. 12-1805 or cause such a notice to be served on the owner or authorized agent for the owner of the property in front of which or adjacent to which the new sidewalks have been ordered constructed or sidewalks have been ordered reconstructed or repaired under Section 14-208 of this article. The notice shall be served on a nonresident property owner by publication in the City's official newspaper, when the address of the owner or agent is unknown to the City Clerk. If the property owner does not construct the sidewalk within the time specified, the governing body shall cause the work to be done by contract and cost assessed to the abutting property owner. (K.S.A. 12-1805, 1809:1811) 
Sec. 14-214. - Costs; assessment to landowner. 
    An account of the cost of construction shall be kept and reported to the governing body. The City shall by ordinance levy a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land abutting on the sidewalk so repaired for the cost of repairs, and if the abutting property owner does not pay the assessment within 30 days, upon the City Clerk mailing to the owner or his or her designated agent, if known, a printed or written notice of the amount of such repairs, the full amount shall be certified by the City Clerk to the county clerk to be put on the tax roles for collection like other taxes. The cost of such construction shall be paid from the general fund or other proper fund of the City; and such fund shall be reimbursed when payments therefore are received or when such assessments are collected and received by the City. 
Sec. 14-215. - Repair/replacement by City at large. 
    The Governing Body may, at its discretion, undertake at City at large expense, the repair or replacement of sidewalks that have deteriorated or need replacement for causes not attributable to actions or neglect of the property owner. 
Sec. 14-216. - Obstructing sidewalks and/or improved trails. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or construct any step or other obstruction, whether temporary or permanent, or to store, leave, or allow to be left, any implements, tools, merchandise, goods, containers, benches, display or show cases, on any sidewalks or other public ways in the City, or to obstruct the same longer than necessary for loading or unloading any such article or object. 
Sec. 14-217. - Same-Exception. 
    The Public Works Director may authorize the granting of temporary permits in connection with a building or moving permit for limited times only to the owner of property abutting on any sidewalk to use or encumber such sidewalk or public way of the City during the construction of any building or improvement thereon. No permit shall be issued for such purpose until plans for warning and safeguarding the public during such use of sidewalks shall have been submitted by the owner or his or her contractor. 
Sec. 14-218. - Sidewalks and/or improved trails covered with earth. 
    No lot or piece of land abutting on any sidewalk shall be allowed to become or remain in such condition that earth or other substance therefrom shall accumulate on the sidewalk, and it shall be the duty of the owner of such lot or piece of land to place the same in such condition as to prevent the accumulation of such earth or other substance on such sidewalk. 
Sec. 14-219. - Equipment/vehicles on sidewalks and/or improved trails. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive or park automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, or construction equipment across or on sidewalks without first obtaining a permit from the City Public Works Department, as provided for in Section 14-217, and complying with permit conditions for protection of the sidewalk. 
Sec. 14-220. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum of not less than $20.00 or more than $100.00. Each day such violation occurs shall be considered a distinct and separate offense. 
Sec. 14-221. - Failure to pay costs prior to time of certification; action. 
    In the event such expenses and costs are not paid prior to the time of certification to the county clerk, the costs and expenses shall be so certified to the county clerk and collected as other taxes. If the amount thereof is in excess of $50.00, interest at current rate of prime per year from the date the expense is paid by the City through December 31st, next succeeding, shall also be certified to the county clerk for collection. 
Sec. 14-222. - Appeals. 
    All requests for appeals relating to sidewalks and sidewalk construction shall be referred to the Governing Body. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 

Sec. 14-301. - Sidewalk design and construction standards. 
    All sidewalks constructed or reconstructed upon public right-of-way or sidewalk easements within the City shall be in accordance with the sidewalk design standards and specifications as set forth the most current edition of the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for the City. 
Sec. 14-302. - Plan approval. 
    Any person proposing to construct, replace, repair, or modify a sidewalk adjacent to or upon any public right-of-way or easement shall apply to the City Public Works Department for approval of a permit for the location, dimensions, design, and construction methods and materials of such sidewalk. The application shall be a development plan submitted and shall contain such detailed drawings and specifications as the Public Works Director may require. If the Public Works Director finds that any such sidewalk will conform to the standards as set in the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for the City of Lansing, he/she shall issue his/her approval. The property owner acting under this article must satisfy the Public Works Director of his or her competency to construct such sidewalk or may contract with a properly bonded contractor approved by the Public Works Director. (K.S.A. 12-1806) No additional plan approval shall be required when a detailed sidewalk plan has been approved as part of a building plan or when the governing body has approved a plat or plan of the sidewalks. 
Sec. 14-303. - Supervision and inspection. 
    All sidewalk construction, reconstruction or repair on City rights-of-way, easements, or property within the City limits shall be done with the approval of and under the supervision of the Public Works Director or his or her representative and according to plans approved by the Public Works Director, and in accordance with the most recent edition of the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria of the City. The contractor shall not commence placing concrete until such time as inspection has been made by the Public Works Director or his/her authorized representative and form locations and grades, slopes and subgrade have been approved for placing of concrete. 
Sec. 14-304. - Construction: bonds, permits. 
    No person, firm or corporation may construct, modify, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk or part thereof without first obtaining a special permit for the same from the Public Works Department. All sidewalk construction, modification, reconstruction and/or repair must comply with the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas. 
Sec. 14-305. - Sidewalk contractors' bonds. 
    Any person who shall contract to build sidewalks for the City shall give a good and sufficient surety bond in the amount of the total contract price that he or she will construct the same according to specifications and in a manner acceptable to the Governing Body or its authorized agent and maintain the same in good condition under ordinary conditions for a period of one (1) year from the completion of the work. 
Sec. 14-306. - Establishment of sidewalk grades. 
    All sidewalk grades shall be established by the Public Works Director or his/her designee prior to the time of construction. Ten (10) days notice shall be given to the Public Works Director or his/her designee when sidewalk grade has not been established previously, prior to commencing construction. 
Sec. 14-307. - Same. 
    All sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in this City shall be constructed on the established grade approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. (K.S.A. 12-1802, 1807) 
Sec. 14-308. - Conformity to connecting sidewalk. 
    All sidewalks hereafter constructed or reconstructed shall as nearly as possible conform to the grade of the connecting permanent sidewalk. 
Sec. 14-309. - Nonconforming work. 
    Any sidewalk, which shall not be constructed as provided in this article, may be torn out and reconstructed and the cost thereof assessed as provided in Section 14-211 of this article. 
Sec. 14-310. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum of not less than $20.00 or more than $100.00. Each day such violation occurs shall be considered a distinct and separate offense. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREETS 

Sec. 14-401. - Cutting public streets/excavations; permit. 
    No person, firm or corporation excepting the City, shall cut any pavement, or make any excavation in any street easement or right-of-way, alley or other public grounds in the City for any purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the public works department, authorizing the same. 
Sec. 14-402. - Same-Permit fees. 
    The applicant for a permit shall pay the public works department an inspection fee in accordance with the most current established fee schedule for each excavation and/or cut. In the case of an activity that is continuous across an intersection(s), the fee shall be $25.00 for each block. A completed application form with construction plans and traffic control plans certified by the applicant to be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for the work shall be provided to the public works department for processing. In the case of cuts and/or excavations in right-of-way for emergency repairs, the applicant may receive a permit number by calling the public works department, and shall submit a completed permit application form and pay an emergency permit fee in accordance with the most current established fee schedule within one business day of beginning the repair. All requirements except submittal of construction plans and traffic control plan shall apply to emergency permits. The permit fee may be waived for work done exclusively by the direct employees of a utility company with whom the City of Lansing has a franchise agreement. 
Sec. 14-403. - Bond required. 
    All applications for permits required under section 14-201 of this article shall be accompanied by a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the amount of $10,000.00, executed to the City by the applicant for the permit, and conditioned that the principal on such bond will hold the City harmless from any damage to persons or property resulting from or in any way growing out of any opening resulting from, or in any way growing out of any opening or excavation made by the principal, his or her agent, servants or employees under the permit; and providing further, that the principal shall pay any and all loss or damage occasioned by himself, herself, his or her agents, servants or employees, and will comply with all ordinances of the City; providing, however, no bond shall be required of any utility which has a franchise agreement with the City and has on file with the Finance Director a Certificate of Liability Insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00, provided the work will be performed by employees of the utility. The applicant may, in lieu of posting surety bond, deposit a cash bond with the Director of Public Works in the sum of $5,000.00. At such time as the director of public works is satisfied that the applicant has complied with the ordinances and regulations of the City, the corporate bond may be terminated or the cash bond may be returned, upon proper application by the permit holder. In addition to bonds, the applicants must provide a Certificate of Liability Insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00. 
Sec. 14-404. - Replacement and repairs cost. 
    If streets, pavements, sidewalks, or curb and gutter have been damaged by any person operating under a permit issued under the provisions of this article, the permit holder shall repair or replace the same in accordance with the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public and Private Improvement Projects at his or her own expense, and shall be liable on his or her bond for the satisfactory repair of same. If the total amount of the bond is inadequate to make satisfactory repairs or pay damages, which may have been sustained, the permit holder shall be liable for any additional amount required to make the repairs or pay damages. The permit holder shall under no circumstances be considered as an agent of the City. All work or repairs shall be done under the supervision of the director of public works or their authorized representative. If repairs are not made, or are unsatisfactorily made, within 30 days following written notification thereof by the public works department to the permit holder, the City may complete the work or cause the work to be completed in a satisfactory manner and charge the costs to the permit holder. The permit holder shall also be subject to punishment under the criminal provisions of this article. 
Sec. 14-405. - Duty in guarding excavations and other work obstructing streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, or alleys. 
    Any person, firm or corporation making excavations in any of the streets, rights-of-way, alleys or public grounds of the City shall at all times during the work, maintain the proper barricades, warning signs, delineation, safety-guards and lights in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for the protection of the traveling public. Prior to closure of any street, the applicant shall notify the Lansing Police Department, director of public works, and the Leavenworth County Emergency Dispatch Center. The applicant shall notify the same parties immediately upon re-opening of the street. All fills made in excavations shall be securely backfilled in accordance with the most recent edition of the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public and Private Improvement Projects and the excavation shall be properly shored so as to prevent caving or injury and damage to adjoining premises. Open unattended excavations shall at all times be secured by safety fencing. The party making the excavation and his or her bondsman shall at all times be liable to the City for damages arising by reason of any neglect or carelessness, in any respect, concerning the excavation. 
Sec. 14-406. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-407. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-408. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-409. - Depositing of material in curbs, gutters and streets; exceptions. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit the curbs and gutters in the City to be filled with any material which tends to restrict or divert the flow of water therein except that the director of public works or his or her duly authorized representative may upon request grant written permission for an exception thereto. No person, firm, or corporation shall place or distribute grass clippings, leaves, yard debris, snow, ice, or any other debris or substance in the curbs and gutters or streets 
Sec. 14-410. - Altering drainage. 
    No person shall change or alter any gutter, storm sewer, drain or drainage structure which has been constructed, or is being lawfully maintained or controlled by the City unless such change or alteration has been authorized or directed by the director of public works by evidence of the appropriate permit. 
Sec. 14-411. - Unfinished pavement. 
    No person shall walk upon, drive or ride over or across any pavement, sidewalk or incomplete grading, which has not been opened for traffic. 
Sec. 14-412. - Fuel pumps, distance from street. 
    Any gasoline or oil pump or other device for the dispensation of motor fuel, devices for the inflation of pneumatic tires, devices for filling radiators of motor vehicles and all equipment for the lubrication of motor vehicles shall be no closer than 15 feet from any public street, highway, right-of-way or any other public property. 
Sec. 14-413. - Building materials in street. 
    Any person, firm or corporation desiring to use the sidewalk or any part of the street for the temporary deposit of building material during the construction or repair of any building, or during the temporary use of any sidewalk while excavating any cellar, shall apply to the governing body for permission for such use. Upon such an application, the governing body may grant permission to use the street and/or sidewalk temporarily for the purpose to be named. Not more than 1/3 of the width of the street shall be used, and in case the sidewalk is obstructed, a temporary walkway shall be provided around such obstruction, and the gutter shall be kept open for flow of water. No person shall use or temporarily appropriate any sidewalk or street or any material part thereof without the consent of the governing body. 
    Upon the completion of any building, the material in the street shall be removed within 10 days. Any such obstruction shall be protected by traffic control signing in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and shall be adequately lighted from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise to give warning to the drivers of vehicles. (K.S.A. 12-1630) 
Sec. 14-414. - Yard debris; grass clippings in street; prohibition. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall place or distribute leaves, grass clippings, yard debris, snow, or ice in the street. 
Sec. 14-415. - Dangerous objects in street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or cause to be placed or thrown in or on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds of the City, any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, wire or other dangerous objects that might wound any person or animal, or cut or puncture any pneumatic tire while passing over the same. 
Sec. 14-416. - Harmful products in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit or throw any waste oil, fuel oil, kerosene, gasoline or other products of petroleum or any acids or caustic substances, or any liquids or fluids of any kind into or upon any street or public grounds of the City, or willfully to permit the same to be spilled, dripped or otherwise to come into contact with the surface of any street, alley, or sidewalk within the City. 
Sec. 14-417. - Discharging water on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw or discharge water into any ditch, street, avenue or alley in the City or to cause any water to stand or form pools or to flow in a stream thereon. This section shall not apply to persons cleaning or flushing such streets, avenues or alleys under the authority of the governing body, nor to members of the fire department in the discharge of their duties. 
Sec. 14-418. - Burning in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any fire upon any of the paved streets, alleys, or street intersections within the City. 
Sec. 14-419. - Throwing in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to throw or bat any ball, stone, or other hard substance into, on or across any street or alley or at or against any building or vehicle. 
Sec. 14-420. - Hauling loose material. 
    It shall be unlawful to haul over the streets or alleys of this City any loose material of any kind except in a vehicle having a tight box so constructed as to prevent the splashing or spilling of any of the substances therein contained upon the streets or alleys. 
Sec. 14-421. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation, without first complying with the provisions of this article, shall upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a violation of this code and shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $500.00. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
ARTICLE VI. - TEMPORARY USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 14-601. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate activities and the placement of materials or devices upon the public rights-of-way to assure public access to and safe use of all public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 14-602. - Notice. 
    Notice is hereby given that the City has the right to make immediate use of the entire public right-of-way for street, sidewalk, utility and drainage purposes and for the installation, inspection, maintenance, and removal of the same. The City will generally not compensate an adjoining landowner for damage to plants, underground sprinklers and other private improvements located upon the public right-of-way, resulting from the installation, inspection, maintenance or removal of streets, sidewalks, utilities or drainage ways. 
Sec. 14-603. - Prohibited uses of right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful to do any of the following without a right-of-way use permit as provided in this article: 
A.  Place any table, rack, machine or other device for the storage or display of merchandise upon the public right-of-way. 
B.  Leave or allow to be left any implements, tools, boxes, merchandise or goods on any of the sidewalks of this City longer than is necessary for loading and unloading. 
C.  Intentionally obstruct traffic on any street, sidewalk, or other right-of-way of this City. 
D.  Continue to obstruct traffic on any street, sidewalk or other right-of-way of this City after having been ordered by a police officer to end such obstruction. 
    For the purposes of this section, "obstruct traffic" means to walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in a manner as to: block lawful passage by another person or vehicle, or to require another person or driver to take evasive action to avoid physical contact, or to block the entrance of any private or public building or establishment from any public street or sidewalk. 
Sec. 14-604. - Exceptions. 
A.  This article shall not apply to newsstands, news racks, and other devices for the distribution or sale of newspapers, pamphlets and handbills. 
B.  This article shall not apply to activities for which the City has issued a separate permit. 
C.  This article does not apply to the construction or maintenance of sidewalks and driveways upon the public right-of-ways. The City separately regulates such sidewalks and driveways. However, this article does apply to the activities carried on upon such sidewalks and driveways. 
D.  The restrictions of this section pertaining to obstruction of traffic do not apply to the following: 
1.  Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket, or to legally protest, but only to the extent that such rights would be impermissibly restricted by operation of this section. 
2.  Utilizing a wheelchair, walker or other similar device to move about the sidewalk, street or right-of-way as a result of a disability. 
3.  Sitting or lying on a street, sidewalk or right-of-way due to a medical emergency. 
4.  Patronizing or operating a commercial establishment lawfully conducted on the sidewalk pursuant to this code. 
5.  Attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration or other similar event lawfully conducted on a public sidewalk, street or right-of-way. 
6.  Sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk supplied by a public agency or abutting property owner, or waiting for public or private transportation at a bus stop. 
Sec. 14-605. - Application for permit. 
    An applicant for a right-of-way use permit shall: 
A.  File a written application on a form to be determined by the Director of Public Works that includes the following information: the date or dates for which the permit is sought; the name of the applicant; the location of the encroachment or obstruction; the type of encroachment or obstruction; and such other information as the Director of Public Works may deem necessary. The form shall be made available to the public at the Public Works office. 
B.  The application shall be filed with the City Clerk at least two (2) weeks before the first date for which the permit is sought. 
C.  If the applicant is not the owner or tenant of the land adjoining the right-of-way sought to be used; the permit must be accompanied by a written statement from such owner or tenant consenting to such use of the adjoining right-of-way. 
D.  Pay an application fee in the amount of $100.00. 
Sec. 14-606. - Issuance of permit. 
A.  All applications for a right-of-way use permit shall be forwarded to the Director of Public Works or designee for approval. The Director of Public Works or designee shall issue such a permit upon a finding that in view of the location or area proposed to be used and the type of encroachment or obstruction proposed to be carried on, the proposed encroachment or obstruction does not constitute a traffic hazard or destroy or impair use of the right-of-way or land by the public, or serves a purpose that otherwise cannot be accomplished and it is a temporary obstruction of the right-of-way. 
B.  All applications must be accompanied by a traffic control plan in compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, most current edition that provides adequate protection for and from the use applied for. 
C.  The Director of Public Works or his or her designee may impose conditions on the issuance of the permit if failure by the permittee to comply with the conditions would constitute a safety or traffic hazard or would destroy or impair use of the right-of-way by the public. 
D.  The Director of Public Works or his or her designee may condition the issuance of a permit upon the applicant providing proof that the applicant has obtained general liability insurance for which the permit is being issued. The minimum policy limits shall be $1,000,000.00, unless the Director of Public Works or his or her designee determines that higher or lower limits are warranted by the particular circumstances. A surety bond in the amount of $10,000.00 or a cash bond in the amount of $5,000.00 shall also be provided to the City prior to the permit being issued. At the City's discretion, the required insurance coverage may be reduced commensurate with the potential risk to the public. 
E.  The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any conditions placed on the permit, for restoration of any damage resulting from activities associated with the permitted use, and for providing traffic control by qualified person in accordance with the traffic control plan ([Section] 14-606B). 
F.  Any application for a right-of-way use permit not granted, conditionally granted or denied within eight (8) business days after the date such application was filed with the City Clerk shall be presumed to have been denied. 
Sec. 14-607. - Display of permit. 
    Any person making use of the right-of-way under the authority of a right-of-way use permit shall at all times when so making use of the public right-of-way, either: 
A.  Prominently display the permit at the site where the public right-of-way is being used pursuant to the permit; or, 
B.  Have the permit in his or her possession at the site where the public right-of-way is being used and display the same to any officer or employee of the City upon demand. 
Sec. 14-608. - Revocation of permit. 
    The Director of Public Works or designee, the Chief of Police or the Codes Enforcement Officer, may suspend or revoke a permit issued under this article if: 
A.  The permittee fails to meet the conditions imposed on the issuance of the permit; 
B.  The permittee violates any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City governing the activities permitted by the permit; or, 
C.  The permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. 
Sec. 14-609. - Hazards prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding that a permit may have been issued for the private use of the public right-of-way pursuant to this article, no person shall make any use of the public right-of-way that constitutes an immediate hazard requiring immediate action to protect the public. 
Sec. 14-610. - Penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates the requirements of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00, or be imprisoned for not less than one (1) day nor more than three (3) months, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day that a person violates the requirements of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The violation of any condition imposed on the issuance of a permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
Sec. 14-611. - Appeal. 
    Any person may appeal to the Governing Body from the denial, suspension or revocation of a right-of-way use permit or the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit by the Director of Public Works or designee. Notice of such appeal must be given in writing to the City Clerk within fifteen (15) day of the denial, suspension, revocation or conditional issuance of the permit. 
ARTICLE VII. - USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 14-701. - Definition of right-of-way. 
    For purposes of this article, Right-of-Way shall mean present and future streets, alleys, right-of-way and public easements, including easements and right-of-way dedicated in plats or other instruments to the City. 
Sec. 14-702. - Written permission of the City required. 
    No person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, shall enter upon the right-of-way of the City, or in any manner establish a physical presence on, upon, in or over the right-of-way of the City, for the purpose of installing, construction, maintaining or operating lines, conduits, wires, fiber optic wires, cables, pipes, pipelines, poles, towers, vaults or appliances, or related facilities or appurtenances thereto, or for the purpose of constructing or modifying an entrance, or for placement of any private object or facility without an approved permit from the Public Works Department. The permission of the City may be granted by a franchise agreement pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq. to operate in the rights-of-way, but a permit from the Public Works Department is required for any disturbance in or obstruction of the rights-of-way by the utility. 
A.  Lawn watering systems in rights-of-way. No person, firm or corporation may construct any part of a lawn watering system in the public street right-of-way without first obtaining a special permit for the same from the Lansing Public Works Department. Lawn watering systems in the right-of-way are for personal convenience, and may be removed or disrupted without notice at any time by the City or by a public utility in the performance of its work, and any costs associated with such removal or disruption including water loss, repair, and replacement shall be solely the responsibility of the owner of the watering system. Lawn watering systems constructed in the right-of-way shall include a branch valve placed at the right-of-way line and adjacent to the driveway that shall isolate the portion of the system in the right-of-way from the rest of the system. 
B.  Entrance permits. No person, firm or corporation may construct, modify, or reconstruct any part of an entrance to a public street without first obtaining a special permit for the same from the Public Works Department. All entrance construction, modification, and/or reconstruction must comply with the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas. 
C.  Other private improvements in rights-of-way. No person, firm or corporation may construct, plant, or otherwise place any private improvement, including shrubs and trees, in the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit for the same from the Public Works Department. Private improvements in public rights-of-way are for personal convenience, and may be removed or destroyed without notice at any time by the City or by a public utility in the performance of its work, and any costs associated with such removal or disruption shall be solely the responsibility of the owner of the private improvement. Private improvements may not be placed in public rights-of-way if they impair traffic or pedestrian safety, emergency services, or routine street and utility maintenance. 
Sec. 14-703. - Compliance with, Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity entering upon the right-of-way of the City, or in any manner establishing a physical presence on the right-of-way of the City, for the purpose of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating lines, conduits, wires, fiber optic wires, cables, pipes, pipelines, poles, towers, vaults or appliances, or related facilities or appurtenances thereto, shall comply with the provisions of Standards and Guides for Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction, Maintenance, Utility, and Incident Management Operations Part VI of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, most current edition. 
Sec. 14-704. - Penalty provision. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, or agent, contractor or subcontractor thereof, violating any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a municipal offense, and shall upon conviction be subject to a minimum fine of $150.00 and a maximum fine of $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
Sec. 14-705. - Permit, fees. 
    The applicant for a permit under this section shall pay the public works department a fee in accordance with the most current established fee schedule adopted by the Governing Body for each desired temporary activity within City-owned rights of ways. 
ARTICLE VIII. - USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY BY FRANCHISEES 

Sec. 14-801. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to those franchisees of the City of Lansing, Kansas that have no right-of-way use provisions in their franchise ordinances with the City of Lansing or have right-of-way use provisions in their franchise ordinances that are less stringent than those contained in this article. 
Sec. 14-802. - Use of right-of-way. 
    In the use of the right-of-way under this Ordinance, the franchisee shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power and are subject to all applicable laws, orders, rules and regulations adopted by the governmental bodies now or hereafter having jurisdiction. In addition, the franchisee shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to permits (except that a permit fee will not be charged when the direct employees of the franchisee are doing all the work involved), sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, tree care, and other requirements on the use of the right-of-way and shall comply with the following: 
A.  The franchisee's use of right-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's use of the right-of-way for any public purposes. The franchisee shall coordinate the placement of its facilities in a manner, which minimizes adverse impact on public improvements, as reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not otherwise regulated, the facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public improvement. 
B.  All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements or improvements of any kind injured, damaged or removed by the franchisee in its activities under this Ordinance and its Franchise Ordinance shall be fully repaired or replaced within a reasonable time by the franchisee at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City and the franchisee. 
C.  The franchisee shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings depicting the accurate location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or relocated in the right-of-way after the date hereof and provide the above information to the City upon request. Where such information is available electronically, upon request from the City, franchisee agrees to provide such information in an electronic format. City agrees to use information obtained pursuant to this subsection only to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to disclose such information to anyone other than City employees requiring such information to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects, except as required by law. 
Franchisee and the City agree that such information is confidential and proprietary and agree that such information shall remain the sole property of the Investor-owned utility and agree that pursuant to the Kansas Open Records Act, K.S.A. 45-215 et seq., as amended, such information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45-218, as amended. In the event that the City is required by law to disclose such information, the City shall provide the franchisee advance notice of its intended disclosure of such information and shall take such action as may be reasonably required to cooperate with the franchisee to safeguard such information. 
The franchisee agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all penalties or costs, including attorney's fees, arising from the actions of the franchisee, or of the City at the written request of the franchisee, in seeking to safeguard the confidentiality of information provided by the franchisee to the City under this section. 
In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the franchisee shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City with such information. Such facilities shall be horizontally and vertically located at least every 100 feet and at any other alignment change. 
All points of facilities shall be horizontally located from street centerline or section or quarter section lines or corners. Vertical locations or all points of facilities shall consist of elevations in either City datum or United States Geological Survey datum. 
D.  Except in cases of an emergency, a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to construction, reconstruction or relocation of any facilities in the right-of-way, the franchisee shall submit to the City Engineer, or her or his designee, for approval, plans and specifications of the proposed installation. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. City review shall only concern matters related to the interests of the City as set forth in this Ordinance. 
E.  The franchisee shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all measures necessary to provide accurate and complete information regarding the nature and locations, both horizontal and vertical, of its facilities located within right-of-way when requested by the City or its authorized agents for a public project. Such location and identification shall be at the sole expense of the franchisee, without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. The franchisee shall designate an agent to provide the City with timely information when required by this subsection. 
F.  As reasonably necessary, the franchisee shall relocate or adjust any facilities located in the right-of-way for a public project within a reasonable time. Such relocation or adjustment shall be performed by the franchisee at its sole expense, without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules and regulations of the City not inconsistent with this Ordinance pertaining to such. 
G.  It shall be the sole responsibility of the franchisee to take adequate measures to protect and defend its facilities in the right-of-way from harm and damage. If the franchisee fails to accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, the franchisee has no claim for costs or damages against the City and its authorized contractors or any other party authorized to be in the right-of-way, except to the extent such harm or damage is caused by such party's negligent or intentional conduct. City and its authorized contractors agree to take reasonable precautionary measures, including, but not limited to, calling for utility locations and observing marker posts, when working near franchisee facilities. 
H.  Except in the event of an emergency, the franchisee shall notify the City not less than ten (10) days in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair or relocation of facilities, which would require any street closure that reduces traffic flow to less than two lanes of moving traffic. The City shall follow its policies in the grant or denial of such authority, which shall not be unreasonably delayed. Except in the event of an emergency, no such closure shall take place without such notice and prior authorization from the City. 
In addition, all work performed in the traveled way or which in any way impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected. For all work within the right-of-way, the franchisee shall erect and maintain signs and other devices as required by City ordinances, regulations and rules. 
I.  All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with applicable present and future federal, state and City law and regulations. 
Sec. 14-803. - Compliance with street tree ordinance. 
    The franchisee shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 14, Article IX, and any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the Code of the City of Lansing, Kansas and amendments thereto, in the care, pruning, trimming, and removing of trees located in or on the City right-of-way. 
Sec. 14-804. - Location of underground equipment and facilities. 
    Franchisee's equipment shall be placed underground as required by Franchise Agreements, City ordinances, including Subdivision Regulations, the Code of the City of Lansing, and amendments thereto. Where underground construction is made, the equipment and any necessary trenching shall be installed and maintained or provided by the franchisee in accordance with the ordinances of the City including but not limited to the Lansing Technical Specifications and Design Guidelines for Public Improvement Projects without expense to the City. 
Sec. 14-805. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. 
Sec. 14-806. - Penalty provision. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, or agent, contractor or subcontractor thereof, violating any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a municipal offense, and shall upon conviction be subject to a minimum fine of $150.00 and a maximum fine of $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
ARTICLE IX. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 14-901. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Park trees shall mean trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all areas owned by the City, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Street trees shall mean trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on or above land lying within the rights-of-way of the City. 
Sec. 14-902. - City Tree Board; establishment. 
    There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City of Lansing. The City Tree Board shall consist of seven members of the Lansing community, which shall mean community volunteers residing in Lansing USD #469, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. 
Sec. 14-903. - Term of office. 
    The term of the seven persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three years except that the term of three of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
Sec. 14-904. - Compensation. 
    Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
Sec. 14-905. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the board to develop, administer, and update annually a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, or replanting of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to the Governing Body for acceptance and approval. It shall be the duty of the board to promote trees in the community and to advise staff and residents on issues concerning trees. The board, when requested by the Governing Body, shall consider, investigate, make findings of fact, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
Sec. 14-906. - Operation. 
    The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
Sec. 14-907. - Tree species to be planted. 
    The City tree board develops and maintains a list of desirable trees for planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small (under 20 feet), medium (20 to 40 feet) and large (over 40 feet). Desirable trees placed on the list shall have root systems unlikely to damage streets, curbs, and sidewalks. 
Sec. 14-908. - Review by Governing Body. 
    The Governing Body shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the City tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the City tree board to the Governing Body which may hear the matter and make final decisions. 
Sec. 14-909. - Spacing. 
    The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in Section 14-907, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect or commercial landscape designer. 
Sec. 14-910. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
    In areas where sidewalks exist, trees listed in the list of desirable trees and otherwise in compliance with this article may be planted by property owners two feet back of the property line or right-of-way line. It is the property owner's responsibility to establish where the property line lies. 
Sec. 14-911. - Permit required for planting trees in street rights-of-way, alleys, public easements. 
    No person or firm unless acting under contract with the City may plant a tree in the street right-of-way or an alley or other public easement without first obtaining a permit for the work from the Public Works Department. ([Section] 14-702C.) 
Sec. 14-912. - Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. 
    No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curb lines, and in no case shall such tree infringe upon the intersection site triangle as set forth in the Lansing Technical Specifications. No street tree shall be planted within 10 feet of any fire hydrant. 
Sec. 14-913. - Utilities. 
    No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in Section 14-907 may be planted under or within 10 feet of any overhead utility wire. 
Sec. 14-914. - Public tree care. 
    The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all street rights-of-way, alleys, avenues and lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The City may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with Sections 14-907 through 14-913. 
Sec. 14-915. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted form this article at the determination of the City tree board. Where public safety concerns call for the expeditious pruning, trimming, or removal of trees, City crews or their designees may proceed without a City tree board determination. 
Sec. 14-916. - Pruning, corner clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the City shall prune the branches or that such branches shall not interfere with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections and shall not severely obstruct the light from any street lamp, and so that there shall be a clear space of 14 feet above the street surface or 10 feet above the sidewalk surface. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight. The electric utility company in compliance with state laws and regulations and with any applicable franchise agreements shall maintain tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors clear or such conductors, and shall provide their most current tree trimming policy to the City Tree Board. 
Sec. 14-917. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
    The City shall have the right to cause the removal at the property owner's expense of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the City, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the City. The City Code Enforcement Officer shall notify in writing the owners of such trees, or notice to remove may be served as per [Section] 14-921. The decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may be appealed to the Governing Body. 
Sec. 14-918. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall be six inches below adjoining grade. 
Sec. 14-919. - Arborists license and bond. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of cutting, trimming, pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the City without first applying for and procuring a license. Please refer to Chapter 5, Article XV for licensing requirements and procedures. No license shall be required of any public service company including electric utilities and their agents and contractors or City employees doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. 
Sec. 14-920. - Interference with City work crews. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with City work crews, or any designated City agent, while engaging in and about the planting, surveying, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
Sec. 14-921. - Notice served. 
    Notice shall be served by a police officer and/or code enforcement officer by delivering a copy thereof to the owner, and the person in possession of such property, or if the same be unoccupied or the owner a nonresident of the City, then the Public Works Director and/or his authorized designee shall notify the owner by mailing a notice by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
Sec. 14-922. - Failure of owner; duty of City. 
    If the owner or agent shall fail to comply with the requirements of the notice within the time specified in the notice, then the Public Works Director and/or his authorized designee shall proceed to have the designated tree, tree material or shrub treated or removed and report the cost thereof to the City Clerk. In lieu of City employees performing any such work, the governing body may contract with any competent person, company or corporation for the performance of such work. 
Sec. 14-923. - Prevent spread of disease. 
    No tree, tree materials or shrubs as mentioned herein which have been cut down, either by the property owner or by the City shall be permitted to remain on the premises, but shall be immediately disposed of. 
    These materials must be disposed of in a manner that is appropriate based upon the affliction that is present in the tree in order to reduce the spread of disease. This may include burning, chipping, burying, or disposal at a landfill. An appropriate burn permit is required to burn the material on the premises. 
Sec. 14-924. - Trees on public property; cost borne by City. 
    The City shall have the authority to treat or to remove any tree as defined in Section 14-914 of this article, or to remove any dead tree as mentioned herein, which is located within or above the limits of any public right-of-way within the City. The adjacent property owners shall not be responsible for the cost of treatment or removal of any such trees within the public right-of-way and this expense shall be borne by the City at large. 
Sec. 14-925. - Costs on tax rolls. 
    The City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying other City taxes to the county clerk, certify the unpaid costs for treatment or removal performed under the authority of Sections 14-916, 14-917, 14-918, and 14-922 and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the county against said lot or parcel of ground. The cost of such work shall be paid from the general fund or other proper fund of the City, and such fund shall be reimbursed when payments therefore are received or when such assessments are collected and received by the City. 
Sec. 14-926. - Penalty provision. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, or agent, contractor or subcontractor thereof, violating any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a municipal offense, and shall upon conviction be subject to a minimum fine of $150.00 and a maximum fine of $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
ARTICLE X. - TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN CRITERIA FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS 

Sec. 14-1001. - Incorporating technical specifications and design criteria for public improvement projects. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating public improvements within the corporate limits of the City of Lansing, Kansas, that certain code known as the "Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas" save and except such articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed, such incorporation being authorized by the Governing Body. No fewer than three copies of said code shall be marked or stamped "Official City Copy as Incorporated by Ordinance No. _______" and to which shall be attached a copy of this ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk and Public Works Director to be open to inspection and available to the public during all business hours. 
Sec. 14-1002. - Enforcement. 
    The Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas shall be enforced by the Director of Public Works and/or their authorized representative. 
Sec. 14-1003. - Amendments. 
    The amendments to the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas, adopted by reference in Section 14-1001 shall be placed with official copies in the office of the City Clerk. All reference to section and chapter numbers in this text shall be construed as if followed by the words, "Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas", unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
Sec. 14-1004. - Supersedings. 
    If any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, portion or part of the Code of the City of Lansing, to include the subdivision regulation and zoning ordinances, shall in any way be determined to be in conflict with the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas, as adopted and incorporated herein by reference, then, and in that event, the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvements Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas, as incorporated by reference and adopted herein, and any amendments thereto, shall supersede and control any such other article found to be in violation or in conflict with the Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, City of Lansing, Kansas. 
ARTICLE XI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY 

Sec. 14-1101. - Traffic impact data: when required. 
    Collection of traffic impact data is required for all nonresidential new developments or redevelopments and all residential developments of eleven (11) or more lots or dwelling units. 
Sec. 14-1102. - Minimum traffic impact data requirements. 
    Traffic data collected shall include the following minimum seven (7) items: 
A.  Identify the specific development plan under study and any existing development on and/or approved plans for the site (land use types and intensities and the arrangement of buildings, parking and access). Also, identify land uses (including types and the arrangement of buildings, parking and access) on property abutting the proposed development site, including property across public streets. 
B.  Identify the land uses shown in the Lansing Comprehensive Plan for the proposed development site under study, as well as the ultimate arterial and collector street network in the vicinity of the site (at least the first arterial or collector street in each direction around the site). 
C.  Identify the functional classification of the public street(s) bordering the site and those streets on which access for the development is proposed. The functional classification is shown on the KDOT Functional Classification Map, and/or as adopted as a part of the Lansing Comprehensive Plan. 
D.  Identify allowable access to the development site as defined by criteria included in the Lansing Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for arterial and collector streets in Lansing. This list includes, but is not limited to: Main Street, Desoto Road, Ida Street, West Mary Street, 4-H Road, and the K-7 Highway Corridor study and shall include any adopted access management plans. 
E.  Document current public street characteristics adjacent to the site, including the nearest arterial and collector streets [number and type of lanes, speed limits or 85th percentile speeds, and sight distances along the public street(s) from the proposed access(es)]. 
F.  Compare proposed access with AASHTO established design criteria (driveway spacing, alignment with other streets and driveways, City driveway standards, and minimum sight distances.) Assess the feasibility of access connections to abutting properties, including shared access with the public street system. 
G.  Estimate the number of trips generated by existing and proposed development on the site for a typical weekday and weekday peak hours using the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Local trip generation characteristics may be used if deemed to be properly collected and consistent with the subject development application. The Public Works Director shall make such determination. Calculate the net difference in trips between existing and proposed uses. If the development site already has an approved plan, also estimate the number of trips that would be generated by the approved land uses. If the development application is proposing a land use DIFFERENT THAN indicated in Lansing Comprehensive Plan, also estimate the number of trips that would be generated by the land use indicated in said Lansing Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 14-1103. - Additional studies: When required. 
    When a development generates 100 or more trips in a peak hour, additional analysis may be required including such items as trip distribution, expansion of the study area, and/or other appropriate and pertinent transportation information necessary to provide a comprehensive impact study. 
Sec. 14-1104. - Traffic impact study: When mandated by peak hour data. 
    A traffic impact study shall be required and completed for developments that generate 100 or more trips in a peak hour. A traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified and experienced professional who has specific training in traffic and transportation engineering related to preparing such studies for land development. 
CHAPTER 15 - TRAFFIC 
ARTICLE I. - STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1005, adopted Aug. 16, 2018, amended Article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article I, Sections 15-101-15-104, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 981, Section 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2017. 

Sec. 15-101. - Incorporating Standard Traffic Ordinance. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating traffic within the corporate limits of the City of Lansing, Kansas, that certain standard traffic ordinance known as the Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities, 46th Edition of 2018, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas, save and except such articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed. One official copy of said Standard Traffic Ordinance shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1005," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to which shall be attached a copy of this ordinance, and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. The police department, municipal judge and all administrative departments of the city charged with enforcement of the ordinance shall be supplied, at the cost of the city, such number of office copies of such Standard Traffic Ordinance similarly marked as may be deemed expedient. 
(Ord. No. 1005,  1, 8-16-2018) 
Sec. 15-102. - Omissions, changes, additions and deletions to the Standard Traffic Ordinance For Kansas Cities. 
    Article 1: Section 1 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance, relating to definitions, is hereby amended to add as follows: 
Motorized Mini Bikes. Any motorized mini bike not more than 51 inches in length, 14 inches in width and 30 inches in height, by the manufacturer's specifications which may be propelled by either gasoline or electric power and having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, except a motorized bicycle and electric-assisted bicycle. 
(All other definitions not modified, deleted or changed shall remain in effect.) 
    Article 4: Section 17 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as follows: 
Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any official traffic control device bearing thereon any commercial advertising, except for business signs included as part of official motorist service panels or roadside area information panels approved by the secretary of transportation. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the governing body is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(e)  Traffic regulations on Private Property. Whenever the person in possession or control of any private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic by permission of the owner shall cause to be posted at each entrance thereto a permanently lettered clearly legible sign with the following legend: 
"TRAFFIC REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF LANSING ENFORCED ON THIS PROPERTY. SPEED LIMIT 10 MPH." (OR AS POSTED.) 
Then such private property shall thereafter be deemed to be under the traffic regulations of the city as provided by law. 
    Article 7: Section 33 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as follows: 
Maximum Speed Limits. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) and except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with K.S.A. 8-1557, and amendments thereto, the limits specified in this subsection or established as hereinafter authorized by law shall be maximum lawful speeds, and no person shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of such maximum limits: 
(1)  All vehicles 20 miles per hour in any business district; 
(2)  All vehicles 20 miles per hour in any park; 
(3)  All vehicles 20 miles per hour in any posted school zone or any public thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during school days, including the following locations and times: 
Ida Street from Brookridge Street to 416 Ida Street 7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. 
3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Bittersweet Street from West Mary Street to Ida Street West Mary Street from 200 ft. west of Bittersweet Street to 200 ft. east of West Kay Street West Kay Street from West Mary Street to J Street South 2nd Street from East Mary Street to East Olive Street 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. 
3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. East Olive Street from 206 East Olive Street to South 2nd Street  
(4)  All vehicles 20 miles per hour in any residential district and on other streets within the city, if said limits were set prior to 1994. All speed limits set after 1994 shall be 30 miles an hour in any residential district or other streets within the city except where modified by engineering and traffic investigation as provided hereafter in subsection (c) of this section. 
The maximum speed limit established by or pursuant to this paragraph shall be of force and effect regardless of whether signs are posted giving notice thereof, and, notwithstanding any signs giving notice of minimum speed limit in excess of the limits established by or pursuant to this paragraph, shall not be of any force or effect, subject to the following exception. 
Whenever the Public Works Director shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit herein set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist, the Public Works Director shall determine and declare a reasonable and safe speed limit consistent with applicable state and local statutes which shall be effective at all times or during daytime or nighttime or at such other times as may be determined when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected pursuant to Governing Body action and K.S.A. 8-1560 and 8-2002. 
(b)  No person shall drive a school bus to or from school, or interschool or intraschool functions or activities, at a speed greater than 45 miles per hour on any roadway having dirt, sand or gravel surface, and in no event shall a school bus be driven to and from school or activities in excess of 55 miles per hour, notwithstanding any maximum speed limit in excess thereof. The provisions of this subsection shall also apply to buses used for the transportation of students enrolled in community junior colleges or area vocational schools, when such buses are transporting students to or from school functions or activities. 
(c)  Speed limits on certain streets within the City of Lansing. The Governing Body, having determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed limit permitted under state law and Section 33 of the "Standard Traffic Ordinance" is greater or less than is reasonable under the conditions found to exist within the city, hereby determines and declares that the reasonable and safe speed limit on the portion of the streets is as listed below. The Public Works Director is hereby directed to cause to have erected appropriate signs giving notice of such speed limit along the streets maintained by the city. 
Street Portion Controlled Applicable Speed Limit 147th Street 4-H Road to South City Limits 40 mph 155th Street South to City Limits 25 mph 4-H Road Within City Limits 40 mph Centre Drive 4-H Road to West Mary 25 mph Centre Drive West Mary to East Kansas 25 mph Clearview Drive Stone Lane to Rock Creek Drive 20 mph DeSoto Road West Eisenhower to 4-H Road 35 mph East Eisenhower Road North Main to North 8th Street 35 mph East Gilman Road South Main to East City Limits 35 mph East Mary Street US Highway 73 to 1/2 mile east of US Highway 73 20 mph East Mary Street 1/2 mile east of US Highway 73 to City Limits 35 mph Granite Street Clearview Drive to Ridge Drive 20 mph Hickory Trail North of 4-H Road 25 mph Ida Street Entire Road 25 mph Main Street South City Limits to Rock Creek Loop 65 mph Main Street Rock Creek Loop to Gilman Road 50 mph Main Street Gilman Road to Olive Street 50 mph Main Street Olive Street to Eisenhower Road 40 mph Maple Lane Hickory Trail to South Valley Drive 25 mph McIntyre Road South Main to 147th Street 35 mph McIntyre Road South Main to East City Limits 25 mph Ridge Drive 147th Street to Granite Street 20 mph Sherwood Forest Entire Subdivision 30 mph Stone Lane Clearview Drive to Ridge Drive 20 mph West Eisenhower Road New Lawrence to West City Limits 50 mph West Eisenhower Road New Lawrence to North Main 40 mph West Gilman Road Entire Road 25 mph West Mary Street Entire Road 35 mph  
    Article 14: Section 114.1 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as follows: 
Unlawful Operation of All-Terrain Vehicle. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (b), (d), (e), and (f), it shall be unlawful for any person to operate an all-terrain vehicle: 
1.  on any interstate highway, federal highway or state highway; or 
2.  on any city street, alley, public parking lot, right-of-way or upon property owned by the City of Lansing. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), all-terrain vehicles owned and operated by a county noxious weed department, or all-terrain vehicles owned and operated by persons contracting with a county noxious weed department or the Kansas Department of Transportation may be allowed to operate such all-terrain vehicles upon the right-of-way of any federal highway or state highway for the purpose of eradicating noxious weeds and such all-terrain vehicles may be operated incidentally upon such federal highway or state highway and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the fulfillment of its eradication duties. 
C.  No all-terrain vehicle shall be operated on any public highway, street or road between sunset and sunrise unless equipped with lights as required by law for motorcycles. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), all-terrain vehicles owned and operated by the City of Lansing, Kansas, or all-terrain vehicles owned and operated by persons contracting with the City of Lansing, Kansas may be allowed to operate such all-terrain vehicles upon and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the performance of its duties. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), all-terrain vehicles owned and operated by those agencies providing emergency and first-responder services for the City of Lansing, Kansas may be allowed to operate such all-terrain vehicles upon and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the performance their duties. 
F.  Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle pursuant to (b), (d), (e) and (f) shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a vehicle imposed by law. (K.S.A. Supp. 8-15, 100) 
    Article 14: Section 114.2 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as follows: 
Unlawful Operation of a Micro Utility Truck. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a micro utility truck: 
1.  on any interstate highway, federal highway, or state highway; or 
2.  within the corporate limits of any city unless authorized by such city. 
B.  No micro utility truck may be operated on any public highway, street, or road unless such vehicle complies with the equipment requirements under the provisions of Article 17 of Chapter 8 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto. 
C.  The provisions of subsection (A), shall not prohibit a micro utility truck from crossing a federal or state highway. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), micro utility trucks owned and operated by a county noxious weed department, or micro utility trucks owned and operated by persons contracting with a county noxious weed department or the Kansas Department of Transportation may be allowed to operate such micro utility trucks upon the right-of-way of any federal highway or state highway for the purpose of eradicating noxious weeds and such micro utility trucks may be operated incidentally upon such federal highway or state highway and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the fulfillment of its eradication duties. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), micro utility trucks owned and operated by the City of Lansing, Kansas, or micro utility trucks owned and operated by persons contracting with the City of Lansing, Kansas may be allowed to operate such micro utility trucks upon and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the performance of its duties. 
F.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), micro utility trucks owned and operated by those agencies providing emergency and first-responder services for the City of Lansing, Kansas may be allowed to operate such micro utility trucks upon and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the performance their duties. 
G.  Any person operating a micro utility truck pursuant to (d), (e) and (f) shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a vehicle imposed by law. (K.S.A. Supp. 8-15, 106) 
    Article 14: Sec. 114.5 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as follows: 
Unlawful Operation of a Work-Site Utility Vehicle. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a work-site utility vehicle: 
1.  On any interstate highway, federal highway, or state highway; or 
2.  Within the corporate limits of any city unless authorized by such city. 
B.  No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any public highway, street, or road between sunset and sunrise unless equipped with lights as required by law for motorcycles. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), work-site utility vehicles owned and operated by a county noxious weed department, or work-site utility vehicles owned and operated by persons contracting with a county noxious weed department or the Kansas Department of Transportation may be allowed to operate such work-site utility vehicles upon the right-of-way of any federal highway or state highway for the purpose of eradicating noxious weeds and such work-site utility vehicles may be operated incidentally upon such federal highway or state highway and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the fulfillment of its eradication duties. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), work-site utility vehicles owned and operated by the City of Lansing, Kansas, or work-site utility vehicles owned and operated by persons contracting with the City of Lansing, Kansas may be allowed to operate such work-site utility vehicles upon and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the performance of its duties. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), work-site utility vehicles owned and operated by those agencies providing emergency and first-responder services for the City of Lansing, Kansas may be allowed to operate such work-site utility vehicles upon and within the corporate limits of the city as required in the performance of their duties. 
F.  Any person operating a work-site utility vehicle pursuant to (c), (d) and (e) shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a vehicle imposed by law. (K.S.A. Supp. 8-15, 109) 
    Article 14: Sec. 114.6 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby added to read as follows: 
Unlawful Operation of a Motorized Mini Bike. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for the owner to permit the operation of, a motorized mini bike upon a street, highway, public parking lot, or property owned by the City of Lansing. 
    Article 17: Section 181.1 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby added to read as follows: 
One-way glass and sun screening devices on vehicles registered out of state; requirements, exceptions; penalties. 
(a)  No motor vehicle which is required to be registered in another state and which is operated on the streets and highways of the City of Lansing shall be equipped with one-way glass or any sun screening device, as defined in Section 1, used in conjunction with windshields, side wings, front side windows, the side windows behind the driver, and/or rear windows that do not meet the following requirements: 
(1)  A sun screening device when used in conjunction with the windshield shall be nonreflective and shall not be red, yellow or amber in color. A sun screening device shall be used only along the top of the windshield and shall not extend downward beyond the AS1 line which is clearly defined and marked; 
(2)  a sun screening device when used in conjunction with the side wing or side windows located at the immediate right and left of the driver, the side windows immediately behind the driver and the rear most window shall be nonreflective; and 
(3)  the total light transmission shall not be less than 19% when a sun screening device is used in conjunction with other existing sun screening devices. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(3) shall not apply to a window of a law enforcement motor vehicle that is clearly identified as such by words or other symbols on the outside of the vehicle. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit labels, stickers or other informational signs that are required or permitted by state law. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a traffic offense and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500. 
    Article 19: Section 194 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as follows: 
Driving While License Canceled, Suspended or Revoked; Penalty. 
(a)  1.  Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any street or highway at a time when such person's privilege so to do is canceled, suspended or revoked or while such person's privilege to obtain a driver's license is suspended or revoked pursuant to K.S.A. 8-252a and amendments thereto, shall upon a first conviction be punished by imprisonment for not more than six months or fined not to exceed $1,000, or both such fine and imprisonment. On a second conviction of a violation of this section such person shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than one year or fined not to exceed $2,500, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
2.  No person shall be convicted under this section if such person was entitled at the time of arrest under K.S.A. 8-257 and amendments thereto, to the return of such person's driver's license. 
3.  Except as otherwise provided by subsection (a)(4), every person convicted under this section shall be sentenced to at least five days' imprisonment and fined at least $100 and upon a second conviction shall not be eligible for parole until completion of five days' imprisonment. 
4.  If a person: 
A.  is convicted of a violation of this section, committed while the person's privilege to drive or privilege to obtain a driver's license was suspended or revoked for a violation of K.S.A. 8-2,144 or K.S.A. 8-1567, and amendments thereto, or any ordinance of any city or resolution of any county or a law of another state, which ordinance or resolution or law prohibits the acts prohibited by those statutes; and 
B.  is or has been also convicted of a violation of K.S.A. 8-2,144 or K.S.A. 8-1567, and amendments thereto, or any ordinance of any city or resolution of any county or law of another state, which ordinance or resolution or law prohibits the acts prohibited by those statutes, committed while the person's privilege to drive or privilege to obtain a driver's license was so suspended or revoked, the person shall not be eligible for suspension of sentence, probation or parole until the person has served at least 90 days' imprisonment, and any fine imposed on such person shall be in addition to such a term of imprisonment.. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining whether a conviction is a first or second conviction in sentencing under this section, conviction includes a conviction of a violation of any ordinance of any city or resolution of any county or a law of any state which is in substantial conformity with this section. (K.S.A. Supp. 8-262) 
    Article 19: Section 195.1 of said Standard Traffic Ordinance relating to Operation of a Motor Vehicle When a Habitual Violator is hereby declared to be and is omitted and deleted. 
(Ord. No. 1005,  1, 8-16-2018) 
Sec. 15-103. - Traffic infractions and traffic offenses. 
A.  An ordinance traffic infraction is a violation of any section of this ordinance that prescribes or requires the same behavior as that prescribed or required by a statutory provision that is classified as a traffic infraction in K.S.A. 8-2118. 
B.  All traffic violations which are included within this ordinance and which are not ordinance traffic infractions, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be considered traffic offenses. 
(Ord. No. 1005,  1, 8-16-2018) 
Sec. 15-104. - Penalties. 
    (See Article 20: Section 201 of the Standard Traffic Ordinances) 
(Ord. No. 1005,  1, 8-16-2018) 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Moved to Sections 8-314-8-319. 

ARTICLE III. - LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- See also Chapter 14, "Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way." 

Sec. 15-301. - Garage keepers to report damaged vehicles. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious accident or struck by any bullet shall report to the Police Department immediately after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
Sec. 15-302. - Main trafficways (eligibility for bond funding). 
    The following are designated as main traffic ways in the City, all in accordance with K.S.A. 12-685 et seq.: 
A.  Ida Street between DeSoto Road and U.S. Highway 73 (State Highway 7). 
B.  147th Street between Dempsey and 4-H Road and DeSoto Road from intersection with 4-H Road and proceeding northerly through its intersection with Eisenhower Road. 
C.  Mary Street between DeSoto Road and Kansas Highway 5. 
D.  McIntyre Road from 1/2 mile East of K-7/US-73 Highway and 147th Street. 
E.  4-H Road from K-7/US-73 Highway to 147th Street (DeSoto Road). 
F.  West Mary Street (a/k/a US Highway 73 and Kansas Highway 7), beginning at its intersection with Main Street and proceeding in a westerly direction through its intersection with De Soto Road. 
G.  Main Street from the beginning at its southern point of the City limits of Lansing and proceeding in a northerly direction to Main Street's termination at the northern City limits of Lansing. 
H.  DeSoto Road from 4-H Road to Eisenhower Road. 
I.  147th Street from Dempsey Road to 4-H Road. 
Sec. 15-303. - Trucks; defined. 
    Whereas the City is empowered by K.S.A 8-1912 to prohibit the operation of trucks on designated streets. The following words and phrases, when used in Sections 15-303-15-308, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Truck shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and rated with a GVWR greater than 9,200 pounds. 
    Truck-tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles or trailers. 
Sec. 15-304. - Same-Truck routes. 
    The following shall be designed as routes for trucks and truck tractors: 
A.  US-73/K-7 from the south City limits to the north City limits. 
B.  K-5 from the south City limits to north City limits. 
C.  Eisenhower Road, from K-5 to US-73/K-7. 
D.  East Mary Street from US-73/K-7 to the east City limits. 
Sec. 15-305. - Same-Exceptions for delivery. 
    Truck and truck tractor traffic is prohibited from all streets within the corporation limits of the City, excepting those streets listed in Section 15-304. If it becomes necessary to collect or deliver merchandise or household goods within the City, or if it is necessary to transport machinery and goods from industrial and production sites this shall be done only by the most direct route between the proscribed truck route and the delivery point, industrial site, or production site. All other deviations from the proscribed truck routes are unlawful and prohibited. 
Sec. 15-306. - Parking certain vehicles in districts allowing residential structures. 
A.  No person shall stand or park any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of more than 9,200 pounds on any street or alley or on any public property within districts allowing residential structures except under the provisions contained in subsection C. 
B.  No person shall park a recreational vehicle to include, but not limited to, camper, van, boat, four-wheeler, a trailer or other operable vehicle on any street, alley or right of way within the City limits of Lansing for a period exceeding seven (7) consecutive days. Slight movement of the vehicle within the same residential area shall not restart the counting of the time period of seven (7) consecutive days. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection A., a person may stand or park the following vehicles on private property within any district allowing residential structures subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of not more than 9,200 pounds; 
2.  Any vehicle for which the Governing Body has issued a special permit; or 
3.  Any vehicle while loading or unloading such vehicle or while the vehicle is being used in the performance of a service to, or upon, property in the block where the vehicle is parked, subject to all other provisions regulating parking. 
4.  No more than three (3) recreational vehicles as defined in subsection B. shall be allowed to be parked on private property, and viewable from the street, at any one time. 
D.  No person shall stand or park any vehicle in any residential district between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. with an auxiliary motor, air conditioner, or any refrigeration unit in operation. 
Editor's note- See also Chapter 14, "Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way." 
Sec. 15-307. - Signs. 
    The Director of Public Works shall cause appropriate signs to be installed at the entrances of all streets designated as truck routes. 
Sec. 15-308. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of [Sections] 15-301-15-307 is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Sec. 15-309. - Parking restrictions during snow and/or ice events. 
    Whenever snow has accumulated on the street to such a depth that snow removal operations will be required, or when ice has accumulated on the street to such an extent that ice removal operations will be required, and where signs are posted with the legend "No Parking During Snow", it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on the designated part of the street until snow or ice has been removed. The chief of police, during a traffic emergency, is empowered to waive or suspend enforcement of parking restrictions. 
Sec. 15-310. - Same-Citations. 
    Vehicles found parked in a "No Parking During Snow" zone whenever snow has accumulated to such a depth that snow removal operations will be required, or when ice has accumulated on the street to such an extent that ice removal operations will be required, a police officer may issue a citation for improper parking. 
Sec. 15-311. - Same-Removal of vehicles. 
    In an instance when a traffic emergency has been declared, as provided for in Section 15-401, all vehicles parked in "No Parking During Snow" zones must be removed within one hour after notice of traffic emergency has been given. Any vehicle parked in a "No Parking During Snow" zone after such period of time may be removed upon a police officer's request to the nearest garage or other place of safety. The vehicle shall not be returned to the owner until the towing and storage charges are paid by or for the owner. 
Sec. 15-312. - Same-Establishment of "No Parking During Snow" zones and posting of signs. 
A.  The Public Works Department (hereinafter referred to as the Department) is authorized to post signs restricting parking during snow and ice events in Cul-de-sacs or other specific areas where the Department has experienced repeated difficulty safely performing snow and ice removal operations due to parked vehicles. The sign legend shall be "No Parking During Snow", and shall be enforceable as noted in Sections 15-311 and 15-312. Parking may be resumed when snow and/or ice has been removed. 
B.  After a full winter season of compliance with no observed violations, and at such time as the Department determines that parking is unlikely to interfere with snow and ice removal operations in the future, the Department is authorized to remove the signs. 
Sec. 15-313. - Same-Penalties. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a violation of this Code. Any person who violates these sections or fails to comply with any of their requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00, unless specifically stated otherwise within this article. 
ARTICLE IV. - SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES 

Sec. 15-401. - Declaration of traffic emergency. 
A.  Whenever snow has accumulated or there is a possibility that snow will accumulate to such a depth that snow removal operations will be required, the mayor, the City Administrator or in their absence, the chief of police may declare a traffic emergency and until such traffic emergency is terminated it shall be unlawful: 
1.  To park a vehicle on any street designated an emergency snow route. 
2.  To operate a motor vehicle on any emergency snow route in such manner or condition that such motor vehicle stalls and is unable to proceed by reason of the fact that the driving wheels are not equipped with tire chains or adequate all weather tires. 
3.  The chief of police, during a traffic emergency, is empowered to waive or suspend enforcement of parking restrictions. 
Sec. 15-402. - Same-Notice. 
    Upon declaring a traffic emergency the mayor, the City Administrator, or chief of police shall forthwith cause appropriate notice thereof to be given through the local press, radio, and other media. The traffic emergency shall be terminated by notice given substantially in the same manner as the traffic emergency was declared. 
Sec. 15-403. - Same-Removal of vehicles. 
    All vehicles parked on emergency snow routes must be removed within one hour after notice of traffic emergency had been given. Any vehicle parked on an emergency snow route after such period of time may be removed by a police officer to the nearest garage or other place of safety and the vehicle may not be recovered until the towing and storage charges are paid by or for the owner. 
Sec. 15-404. - Same-Establishment of routes and posting of signs. 
A.  The following streets are hereby established as emergency snow routes within the City: 
East Eisenhower from 7-73 Highway to North 8th. 
North 7th Street from East Eisenhower to Connie Street. 
Connie Street from North 7th Street to 7-73 Highway. 
Emile Street from 7-73 Highway to North 2nd Street. 
North 2nd Street from Emile Street to American Avenue. 
American Avenue and E. Fairlane from North 2nd Street to 7-73. 
East Kansas Avenue from 7-73 Highway to South 2nd Street. 
South 2nd Street from East Kansas Avenue to East Mary Street. 
All of East Mary Street. 
South 2nd Street from East Mary Street to East Olive Street. 
East Olive Street from South 2nd Street to 7-73 Highway. 
First Terrace south from East Olive Street to Lansing Lane. 
Lansing Lane from First Terrace to 7-73 Highway. 
Fawn Valley from First Terrace to Hithergreen Drive. 
Hithergreen Drive from Fawn Valley to Hillbrook Drive. 
Hillbrook Drive from Hithergreen Drive to East Mary. 
All of East Gilman Road. 
All of Industrial Street. 
139th St. 
Nottingham Drive from 139th Street to Robin Road. 
Robin Road from Nottingham Drive 139th Street. 
All of West McIntyre Road. 
All of 147th Street. 
All of Rock Creek Loop. 
West Gilman Road from 7-73 Highway to Willow Drive. 
Willow Drive from West Gilman Road to Southfork Road. 
Southfork Road from Willow Drive to Cottonwood Drive. 
All of Cottonwood Drive. 
All of DeSoto Road and 147th Street. 
4-H Road from Desoto Road to 7-73 Highway. 
Southfork Street from 4-H Road to Ash Lane. 
Ash Lane from Southfork Street to Wyndham Drive. 
All of Wyndham Drive. 
All of South Valley Drive. 
West Olive Street from South Valley Drive to South Bittersweet Lane. 
South Bittersweet Lane from West Olive Street south to Maple Lane. 
Maple Lane from Hickory Trail to South Valley Drive Hickory Trail from Maple Lane to 4-H Road. 
All of West Mary St. All of Ida St. 
South Ethel Lane from Ida Street to Brookmeadow Road. 
Brookmeadow Road from South Ethel Lane to Bittersweet. 
Bittersweet from Mary St. to Ida Street. 
Continental from Ida Street to Englewood Street. 
Englewood from Continental to Brookridge. 
Brookridge from Englewood to Ida. 
All of Valley Drive. 
All of Carriage Crossing. 
All of Brookwood Street. 
Hillcrest Street from Englewood Street to Holiday Drive. 
All of Holiday Drive. 
Fairlane from 7-73 Highway to Holiday Drive. 
All of Woodland Road. 
Karen Lane from Woodland Road to Valley Drive. 
All of Oakmont Drive. 
Pebble Beach Drive from Oakmont Drive to Eisenhower Road. 
Progress Drive. 
Mount Calvary Drive. 
Sec. 15-405. - Same-Penalties. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a violation of this Code. Any person, who violates these sections or fails to comply with any of their requirements, shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00. 
CHAPTER 16 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 16-101. - Disposal of refuse code. 
    There is hereby adopted by the City of Lansing, Kansas, the following rules and regulations for the collection and disposal of refuse in the City, including contracts for such services, charges therefore and providing penalties for violations thereof. 
Sec. 16-102. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Commercial wastes means all solid wastes emanating from establishments engaged in business and waste from institutions. This category includes but is not limited to solid wastes originating in stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, theaters, churches and schools, and shall also include all structures which consist of more than two (2) dwelling units. 
    Construction and demolition wastes mean building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings or other structures and pavement. 
    Contractor means a person with whom the City of Lansing has a contract to collect and dispose of refuse. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, processing, storage, packaging, preparation, sale, cooking and serving of meat, produce and other foods. 
    Hazardous wastes means material determined to be hazardous waste as specified by KDHE regulations. 
    Household residential wastes means all normal solid wastes emanating from homes, apartments, and mobile homes which are occupied as residences. Household residential wastes shall include garbage, waste paper, cans, bottles, boxes and other normal household refuse and shall also include grass clippings, leaves, brush and tree limbs when the waste is contained as set forth in Section 16-111 of this article or securely bagged or bundled into bales or bundles not more than 42 inches in length and weighing not more than 65 pounds and otherwise shaped in such a manner to allow the easy handling by one person. 
    Industrial wastes mean solid wastes resulting from manufacturing and industrial processes and liquid wastes resulting from manufacturing or industrial processes, which are not suitable for discharge to a sanitary sewer or treatment in the City sewage treatment plant. 
    Nuisance means anything which: 
(1)  Is injurious to health or is offensive to the senses or any obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or 
(2)  Adversely effects an entire community or neighborhood or any substantial number of persons even though the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal, and 
(3)  Is caused by or is a result of the mingling or disposal of solid waste. 
    Permit trash hauler means any person duly licensed by the City of Lansing to collect and dispose of his or her own trash. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind, or a governmental body or agency. 
    Premises means a lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or structure thereon. 
    Refuse means the putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, and also bakery, and market waste from the handling and storage for sale of bakery goods or produce as well as all putrescible and non-putrescible wastes consisting of miscellaneous materials including among other things, paper, tin cans, glass, crockery, fabric, coffee grounds, utensils, pliable cartons, boxes, excelsior, packing, sweepings of dust and direct, grass trimmings, leaves, wood, non-pliable cratings, boxes or cartons, barrels, wood shavings, metal shavings, shrubbery and tree trimmings, discarded furniture, bedding, tires, metals, junk, rock, concrete, masonry, ashes, clinkers and other discarded materials, provided that trash shall not include any materials resulting from building excavation, demolition or remodeling work, or any construction work nor shall it include stumps, tree trunks, tree trimmings and limbs resulting from operations of professional tree trimmers, or the tree trimmings resulting from the cutting down, or the topping of any tree, regardless of who performs the work nor shall it include refuse resulting from tornado, cyclone, extreme wind storms, ice storms, flood or other act of God, or the burning of any buildings. 
    Sanitation officer shall be the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her representative authorized by the Governing Body of the City. 
    Sanitary landfill means the method of disposing of refuse by depositing the same in an open natural ditch or excavation and compacting the refuse in place and covering the same with sufficient earth, also compacted, to eliminate as far as practicable, unsightliness and the escape of offensive odors. 
    Storage container means the container in which refuse is to be placed by the occupant of any premises. 
    Wastes means any and all commercial wastes, construction and demolition wastes, hazardous wastes, household residential wastes and industrial wastes. 
    The Governing Body of the City may, by ordinance, limit or extend these definitions and may give interpretations to words and phrases used in this article. 
Sec. 16-103. - Disposal of hazardous waste. 
    The City may classify certain wastes as Hazardous Wastes which shall require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner acceptable to the City and which will meet all local, state and federal regulations. 
Sec. 16-104. - Collection of solid wastes. 
    The City is hereby granted the exclusive control over the refuse and wastes within the City. The City shall provide for the collection of all household residential wastes, commercial wastes, and certain industrial wastes, and refuse within the City, provided however, that the City may provide the collection service by contracting with or licensing a person or persons as deemed to be in the best interest of the City. 
Sec. 16-105. - Contracts. 
    The Governing Body of the City shall have the right to enter into a contract with any responsible person providing that the contractor shall collect and dispose of all refuse within the City, and the terms of the contract to be arranged and determined by the Governing Body of the City and the contract to be awarded to a responsible person after proper negotiation or after receiving bids, whichever, in the judgment of the Governing Body, shall seem proper, provided that the contract for the collection and disposal of refuse as herein defined shall in no way conflict with the terms and conditions of this article. Contracts entered into by the City for the collection and disposal of refuse and wastes prior to the effective date of this article or now in force are hereby confirmed, ratified and validated. 
Sec. 16-106. - Contract in writing. 
    Such contract shall be in writing, signed by the mayor and attested by the City Clerk, in duplicate and when duly executed, one copy thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk. The contract shall include in its terms by reference, the provisions of this article. The contract shall require the contractor to maintain an office, equipped with telephone and an employee in charge, to answer all calls, and complaints; and shall require the contractor to promptly attend to all complaints concerning his or her duties under the contract; shall provide for the removal and disposal of all refuse and wastes, and fix the fee, approved by the Governing Body of the City, to be charged therefore. 
Sec. 16-107. - Bond of contractor. 
    The contractor shall execute a bond or letter of credit in the City to be approved by the Governing Body, in the sum of $30,000.00 with surety by a responsible surety company, conditioned upon the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract that save the City harmless from any loss or damage on account of the contractor's conduct of business. 
Sec. 16-108. - Cancellation of contract. 
    The Governing Body shall reserve the right, at any time after due notice, and opportunity to be heard has been given said contractor, to cancel and revoke the contract, for failure to comply with its terms. 
Sec. 16-109. - Enter private premises. 
    Solid waste collectors employed by the City or operating under contract with the City are hereby authorized to enter in and upon private property for the purpose of collecting refuse and waste therefrom as required by this article. 
Sec. 16-110. - Frequency of collection. 
    Refuse and wastes in residential areas shall be collected not less than once weekly. All commercial solid waste shall be collected at intervals as may be fixed by the sanitation officer, but in no event, less than weekly. 
Sec. 16-111. - Duty of owner or occupant. 
    Every owner or occupant of a dwelling or commercial establishment shall keep at his or her own expense his or her premises in a clean and sanitary condition and free from any accumulations of garbage, rubbish, trash, or other type of refuse, and each owner or occupant of any such premises shall dispose at his or her own expense of all garbage and trash and other refuse in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such refuse in an approved storage container at times and places hereinafter described; provided that refuse may be burned at times and places and in a manner prescribed in Sections 16-113, 16-114 of this article. 
Sec. 16-112. - Residential, commercial and improper containers. 
    The City's designated contractor will provide to the owner or tenant residing in any single family residence and duplex within the City of Lansing, Kansas, a garbage and refuse container, and a separate container for approved, designated recyclables. Said containers shall be used by each resident for deposit of ordinarily accumulated refuse at such residence during the intervals between collections made by the City's contractor. Each numbered container will be assigned to that residence and remain at that residence unless removed by the City or its contractor. Additional refuse containers may be obtained from the City's contractor at an additional cost to the residence. Except for tree trimmings, yard waste, or bulky items such as furniture or appliances, it shall be unlawful for any garbage or refuse to be placed out for collection that is not contained within a container issued by the City's contractor or accompanied by a special tag that can be purchased from City Hall. Any garbage or refuse accompanied by a special tag will only be picked up if placed in a plastic bag sized 33 gallons or less. Additional or overflow recyclables may be placed in a cardboard box or plastic waste container that is clearly marked "Recycling". 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, during the week following Christmas Day and Independence Day, residents may place up to six (6) extra bags, not to exceed 35 gallons in capacity or 45 lbs.(per bag) in weight, of refuse, for pickup as part of the regular refuse collection. All yard waste must be set out either in a separate plastic waste container that is clearly marked "Yard Waste", biodegradable paper bags, or in bundles not exceeding four feet (4') in length and eighteen inches (18") in diameter and tied with biodegradable twine or string only, not to exceed 65 lbs in weight. Residents are limited to a combined total of six (6) bags or bundles per week for the months of March through August, and twelve (12) bags or bundles per week for the months of September through November. During the two weeks following Christmas Day, residents may place up to two (2) Christmas trees out as part of the yard waste program. Christmas trees must be cut in half. 
    Exceptions to using the contractor's containers may be granted to senior citizens or physically disabled individuals. These individuals are responsible for contacting City staff to receive exemption. Senior citizens and physically disabled individuals are limited to four (4) 13-gallon plastic bags per collection day. Such exceptions require nonetheless that said 13-gallon plastic bags shall be stored in an enclosed structure on the premises except on the date for collection. 
    All plastic refuse bags used under this ordinance and placed on the curb shall be securely closed and sealed. 
    Containers for commercial wastes shall be equipped with tight fitting lids and shall be of such size and construction as shall be suitable for the type of refuse generated by the establishment as shall be determined by the sanitation officer. Refuse and/or wastes placed in an improper container shall not be collected. 
Sec. 16-113. - Location of containers. 
    All refuse and waste containers shall be stored upon private property; provided that on the scheduled day for refuse and waste collection refuse and waste may temporarily be stored on public property next to streets along the parking; however, in no event shall such waste containers block or obstruct a sidewalk. The permanent storage of refuse and waste containers is prohibited in front yards of residences. A front yard shall be defined as that space extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof other than steps, unenclosed balconies and unenclosed porches; provided that on the designated refuse collection day the occupant may temporarily store refuse next to the street curb line in front of the occupants dwelling. That in the event the occupant does not desire to temporarily store refuse at the street curb line for collection purposes the occupant may, temporarily for collection purposes, store refuse at some other location on his or her property easily accessible, and may be charged for the collection of refuse at a point other than the curb line. Commercial and industrial refuse containers shall be located generally at the rear of the occupants' premises near the improved alley; however other locations for storage and collection may be approved by the sanitation officer. The collection of commercial refuse shall not occur before 6:00 a.m. and shall not occur later than 7:00 p.m. on scheduled collection days. 
    Occupants of any premises in the City which have refuse to be collected shall provide or cause to be kept or provided suitable receptacles for the deposit and collection of refuse at a place readily accessible for removal and emptying at hours and days specified by the sanitation officer, and all containers shall be kept and located in such a manner as to not to create a nuisance to other citizens or create an obstruction to persons using public streets and alleys. All containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner by the person or persons in possession of the premises which said container or containers serve. 
Sec. 16-114. - Burying and burning. 
    Refuse and wastes may be placed in the same storage container, but all refuse shall be drained and wrapped before placing said refuse in the container as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any refuse and/or wastes as herein defined on public or private property without first having obtained a permit from the sanitation officer. No refuse or other wastes described herein as refuse shall be burned at any time except in an incinerator or other appliance constructed specifically for such purposes and approved by the Leavenworth County Fire District #1, and equipped with a flue, chimney, or smokestack which will carry the smoke and odors therefrom above surrounding rooftops. 
Sec. 16-115. - Fires on public and private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kindle or maintain any bonfire or any rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any public sidewalk, street, alley, road or other public ground except in authorized fireplaces in park locations, unless permission from the Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1 shall have first been obtained. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, rubbish fire or trash fire nor permit any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private property within the established fire limits of the City except in an incinerator property and safely constructed within a structure and approved by the Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1. No person shall kindle or maintain nor permit to be kindled or maintained outside the established fire limits and within the City any bonfire, rubbish fire or trash fire unless such fire shall be contained in an incinerator constructed and located in accordance with requirements of the Leavenworth County Fire District No. 1. 
Sec. 16-116. - Charges for collection and disposal. 
    The City in providing the service of collecting and disposing of all refuse and wastes accumulated within the City for the purpose of preventing unsanitary, unsightly, hazardous, unhealthful and dangerous conditions caused by the accumulation of garbage and trash shall from time to time by ordinance establish and collect a service charge or fee to defray the cost and maintenance of service and administration thereof, and to pay to any person contracting with the City for the collection and disposal of refuse, the fees and charges provided by the contract for the collections and disposal thereof. Such service charges and fees shall be computed, based and charged to the owners or occupants of dwelling units or commercial establishments as nearly as practicable upon the basis of volume or time expended in the collection and disposal and administration thereof. 
Sec. 16-117. - Collection and billing. 
    All fees and charges provided by ordinance shall be collected by the Finance Department of the City, and such charges shall be sent to all owners or occupants of premises serviced by the City's contract for collection of solid waste on or about the first of each month for the services rendered in the preceding month. All charges shall be due by the 25th of the month. All charges not paid in full by the 25th of the month shall incur a penalty charge of 10 percent of the amount outstanding. Any statement not paid within 60 days of the 25th of the month for the preceding month's service shall be held delinquent and may be forwarded to a third party collection agency or may constitute a lien upon the real estate served by the service. The Governing Body annually at the first regular meeting in August, or at other times as they shall determine, shall, by ordinance, levy and assess the charges and/or penalties, against each lot or parcel of ground served as a special assessment, which shall constitute a lien upon the property for the amount of such delinquent fees. A certified copy of the ordinance shall be filed with the County Clerk for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created shall attach upon recordation of the office of the County Clerk of a certified copy of the ordinance. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary County ad valorem property taxes are collected and be subject to the same penalties and same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the collection, levy and enforcement of County ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. The Finance Director may forward delinquent accounts to an approved third party collection agency in lieu of levying and assessing the charges and/or penalties against each lot or parcel of ground served as a special assessment. All delinquent accounts forwarded for collection will be subject to a collection fee not to exceed 38% of the delinquent balance. 
Sec. 16-118. - Termination, notice and hearing. 
A.  A delinquency and termination notice shall be issued by the Finance Director within 10 days after the delinquency occurs and mailed to the customer (and a copy also mailed to the occupants of the premises served if the occupant is not the customer) at the last known address as shown on the records of the City. The customer and occupants shall be responsible for advising the Finance Director of current addresses. The notice shall indicate: 
1.  The amount due, plus penalty and interest, 
2.  The type of service and the date on which such service will be terminated if the amount due is not paid (to be 15 days from the date of notice), 
3.  The customer's right to a hearing before an officer designated by the City, designating the officer and the place of such hearing, if requested, and 
4.  That such hearing must be requested in writing, filed with the Finance Director, at least three working days (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded) before the date for termination. Upon receipt of a request for such hearing, the Finance Director shall immediately advise the customer of the date and time of the hearing. All requests for a hearing must be made within 60 days of any rate increase. 
B.  The customer, and the City, may present such evidence as is pertinent to the issue, may be represented by counsel, may examine and cross-examine witnesses, but formal rules of evidence shall not be followed. 
C.  If the officer before whom the hearing is held shall find service should not be terminated, he or she shall so order and advise the director of utilities. If the officer finds service should be terminated, he or she shall so order and service shall be terminated three days from the date of this order, and the customer shall be notified in person, posting notice on the premises or by mail, unless such order is made at the hearing in the presence of the customer. Extension of the termination date, up to 10 days from the order, may be granted by the hearing officer for good cause shown. 
D.  Hearings may be conducted by any of the following officers: the Finance Director or their designee, two or more councilmembers designated by the Mayor, or such other hearing officer as may be appointed by the mayor. 
Sec. 16-119. - Unlawful to collect or haul refuse or wastes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or haul over City streets in the City any refuse or wastes unless such person shall have a contract with the City, provided that this section shall not apply to departments of the City government of the City, provided further that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a person from hauling or disposing of his or her own refuse accumulated at his or her residence, in such a manner as not to endanger the public health or safety, not to create a nuisance to the inhabitants of the City and not to litter the streets and alleys of the City and after having obtained a permit from the City sanitation officer to so haul and dispose of his or her own trash. 
Sec. 16-120. - Disposition of refuse and wastes. 
    All solid waste shall be disposed of at a site approved by the City and holding a valid permit (after June 30, 1976) from the State Board of Health. Such disposal site shall be operated in a manner consistent with regulations adopted by the Governing Body of the City, and standards fixed by the state and federal government. 
Sec. 16-121. - Permit and application required. 
    No person, whether acting individually or privately for himself, herself, or his or her business, and no person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of refuse of wastes within the corporate limits of the City, without first obtaining a permit from the City. A permit issued to a person, firm or corporation shall cover all employees of said person, firm, or corporation. Each applicant for a permit shall file an application with the City Clerk on forms to be approved by the sanitation officer. Such application shall show: 
A.  The number of vehicles to be operated; 
B.  The make, model and identification number of each vehicle; 
C.  The precise location of processing or disposal facilities; 
D.  Boundaries of the collection area; and 
E.  Such other information as the sanitation officer may require. 
Sec. 16-122. - Nontransferability of permit. 
    All permits issued as provided in this article are nontransferable; provided however, that one vehicle may be substituted for another by filing the description and identification number with the City Clerk; and provided further that additional vehicles may be added by filing a property application, insurance and permit fee. 
Sec. 16-123. - Permit fee, insurance and term. 
    Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the Governing Body and a copy of their US KDOT certification for each vehicle. All application fees shall be refunded if the application or a permit is denied. 
A.  No permit shall be issued to any person as provided in Section 16-120 until the applicants shall have filed certificates of insurance written by a company licensed to do business in Kansas providing public liability insurance covering all operations and all vehicles operated by applicant. Such policies shall provide not less than $100,000.00 for any injury to or death of any one person and $300,000.00 for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and with property coverage of not less than $25,000.00 for any one accident. The certificate of insurance shall provide that it cannot be canceled until 10 days after written notice of such cancellation has been filed with the City Clerk. 
B.  Businesses desiring a permit to haul only their own refuse and wastes from their own residence or business may apply for waiver of the insurance requirements provided herein, and the City Clerk may issue a waiver of the insurance requirement upon applicant signing a sworn affidavit that said applicant will be engaged only in the collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of the refuse of his or her business. 
    All permits issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. A permit may be renewed for a period of one year upon payment of the annual license fee and a filing of a certificate of insurance. 
Sec. 16-124. - Display and revocation of permit. 
    All vehicles operating under a permit issued under this article shall display the permit number on each side of the vehicle in a color which contrasts with the color of the vehicle. Such number shall be clearly legible and shall be not less than three inches in height. 
    A permit issued under this article may be revoked for the violation of any terms of this article or regulations of the sanitation officer; provided, however, that no permit shall be revoked until the holder of such permit has been given notice in writing of the violation and given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the provisions of this article or regulations issued by the sanitation officer. 
Sec. 16-125. - Collection equipment. 
    All refuse and wastes shall be collected and transported in a watertight vehicle or container and shall be fully enclosed or securely covered. 
    All vehicles, and containers used for collecting and transporting said refuse shall be maintained in a safe, clean, sanitary condition and shall be operated in such a manner as to prevent spillage or leaking therefrom. The Lansing Police Department and its authorized officers are hereby authorized to enforce any violations concerning collection equipment. 
Sec. 16-126. - Ownership of refuse. 
    Ownership of refuse and waste materials, when placed in the containers by the occupants or owners of premises upon which refuse accumulated, shall be vested in the City, and shall thereafter be subject to the exclusive control of the City, its employees or contractors. 
Sec. 16-127. - Construction and demolition operation. 
    Nothing elsewhere contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting construction contractors, tree surgeons, roofers, and other private contractors, whose operations result in the accumulation of refuse, from hauling and disposing of accumulations of trash and rubbish resulting from their own operations, provided they shall at all times comply with the regulations and provisions of this article. 
Sec. 16-128. - Unusual situations. 
    In situations which are not contemplated or considered by the terms and conditions of this article, the sanitation officer shall have the power and the authority to grant special rights and privileges on a temporary basis for the collection, hauling and disposal of trash and garbage where such special privileges are required in order to maintain the health and sanitation of the City and its inhabitants or such right and privilege is required to avoid the creation of a public nuisance. 
Sec. 16-129. - Cleanliness of streets, alley and public place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, deposit or allow to accumulate, leave or cause to be thrown, placed, deposited or left upon any sidewalk, gutter, street, alley, thoroughfare, park, other public grounds, or any City-owned property, any garbage, trash, cast-off machinery, abandoned automobile bodies, tires, junk, filth, dirt, or letter of any kind except by depositing the same in containers provided specifically for such purposes. 
Sec. 16-130. - Prohibited practices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Deposit refuse and/or waste in any container other than that owned or leased by him or her under his or her control without written consent of such owner and/or with the intent of avoiding payment of charges for collecting, transporting, and disposing of said refuse and/or wastes. 
B.  Interfere in any manner with employees of the City or its contractor in the collection of refuse and/or wastes. 
C.  Dispose of refuse and/or wastes in an unapproved site. 
D.  Allow refuse, household residential wastes, industrial wastes or commercial wastes to accumulate creating a nuisance, as defined herein. 
E.  Store refuse and/or waste in an unapproved container. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any City approved disposal site for the purpose of scavenging or removing any refuse and/or waste or portion of refuse and/or waste deposited at any of said sites; provided this shall not apply to any salvaging operation approved by the sanitation officer. 
G.  Handle refuse and/or waste in any manner to create a nuisance. 
Sec. 16-131. - Residential refuse collection; service charge. 
A.  A monthly service assessment of $16.69 for each residential unit. 
B.  Senior citizens age 65 or older, who are responsible for bill payment, shall be eligible to pay a reduced monthly service assessment of $13.69. 
C.  Residents desiring an additional container from the City's contractor shall be assessed an additional monthly service charge of $5.00 per container. 
Sec. 16-132. - Additional rules and regulations, penalty. 
    Additional rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms and provisions of the article may be promulgated and enforced by any authorized City officers with the prior approval of the Governing Body of the City. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this code and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,500.00, and each day of failure to comply with such provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS 

Sec. 16-201. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L) as established in the 19th edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Commercial waste treatment facility shall mean a facility serving and owned by an industrial or commercial enterprise or group, or a combination thereof, for the purpose of treating primarily domestic sewage by physical, chemical, or biological methods and includes slaughter houses with an average slaughter rate of 50 animals or less per week. 
    Director shall mean the Wastewater Utility Director of the City of Lansing, or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Domestic sewage shall mean any waste originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom, and laundry sources, including waste from food preparation, dish washing, garbage-grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial waste treatment facility shall mean a facility serving an industrial or commercial enterprise group, or a combination thereof, for the purpose of treating sewage or process-generated wastewater other than domestic sewage by physical, chemical, or biological means or by combination of those methods. Industrial waste treatment facility includes municipally-owned electricity generating facilities and water treatment plants. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Infiltration shall mean the water entering a sewer pipe, including service connections, from the ground. Defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls are a few of the common locations where infiltration may occur. 
    Inflow shall mean the water discharged into a sanitary sewer collection system and service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, around manhole covers or through holes in covers, cross connections from storm and combined sewer systems, catch basins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, institution, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory; May is permissive. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or if quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Surcharge shall mean a charge applicable to users of the POTW. Any user who is found to discharge waste having a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) that exceeds three hundred mg/L and/or suspended solids that exceed three hundred mg/L will be subject to a surcharge. Surcharges shall be calculated according to the formula in Ordinance No. 834. 
    Suspended solids TSS shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic shall mean a substance which causes a deleterious or poisoned condition in biological organisms utilized for wastewater treatment, human beings, fish, wildlife, or any other living organisms, plant or animal. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Sec. 16-202. - Prohibitions, violations and penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City of Lansing, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City of Lansing, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Lansing, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City of Lansing, any sewage or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
D.  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City of Lansing and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
E.  No person shall intentionally discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
F.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Director of Public Works and/or Wastewater Utility Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Director of Public Works and/or Wastewater Utility Director. 
G.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
2.  Cleaning, stripping or paint solvents. 
3.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1 as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
4.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
5.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, disposable dishes, cups, and milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
H.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Wastewater Utility Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
1.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) F (65 C). 
2.  Any water or wastes containing fats, wax grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) F (0 and 65 C). 
3.  Any sewage grinder pumps garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director. 
4.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
5.  Any waters or wastes containing Arsenic, Cadmium, Chromium, Copper, Lead, Mercury, Molybdenum, Nickel, Potassium, Selenium, Silver, Zinc, PCBs, Nitrogen, and Phosphorous, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such substance received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Director for such materials. The Director may set limitations based upon water quality of the receiving stream, treatment plant efficiency, inhibition of treatment plant processes and impact of sludge processing land application and groundwater impacts. 
All industrial and commercial facilities using silver in manufacturing or as part of a process operation, including but not limited to the development and/or printing of photographic pictures or x-rays, precious metal plating, or any operation where silver is reasonably expected to be found in the facilities wastewater, shall not discharge silver bearing wastewater to the public sewer without first treating the wastewater to remove the silver or subjecting the wastewater to a silver recovery process. 
6.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
7.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 
8.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 10.5. 
9.  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, paint pigments, and tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
10.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
11.  Any waters or wastes having (1) a 5-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (2) containing more than 300 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (3) having an average daily flow greater than 2 percent of the average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the Director. Where necessary in the opinion of the Director, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight, or (2) reduce the suspended solids to 300 parts per million by weight, or, (3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Director and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
12.  Any waste considered toxic and or hazardous and/or defined as toxic or hazardous by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment and/or the Environmental Protection Agency and/or having toxic effects on the wastewater treatment processes and/or land application of wastewater sludge's and the receiving ground waters at the wastewater sludge application sites. 
Any user which discharges any toxic pollutant which causes an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with the substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such increased cost. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the Director and approved by the City Council. 
I.  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 4 of this article, and which in the judgment of the Director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the Director may: 
1.  Reject the wastes; 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
4.  Require any user which discharges any toxic pollutant or other substance which causes an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or waste sludge land application from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singularly or by interaction with the substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the works, to pay for such increased cost of operation or remediation of treatment plant or land application sites. The charges associated with the cost recovery to such user shall be determined by the Wastewater Utility Director. 
If the Wastewater Utility Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
J.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Wastewater Utility Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Wastewater Utility Director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
K.  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
L.  When required by the Director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
M.  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. 
N.  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern. 
Sec. 16-203. - Private sewage disposal system. 
A.  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 16-202D., the building sewer shall be connected to a domestic wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions set forth in the latest Leavenworth County Sanitary Code 
B.  Before commencement of construction of a domestic sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit issued by the Leavenworth County Director of Planning or authorized agent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Leavenworth County Planning and Zoning Department, which shall be supplemented by all information as deemed necessary by the Leavenworth County Director of Planning and City of Lansing Wastewater Utility Director. A domestic sewage impact fee shall be paid to the City of Lansing as set forth in Section 16-204J.1., in addition to all fees required by the County Planning and Zoning Department. 
C.  A permit for a domestic sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Leavenworth County Director of Planning or authorized agent, and the Lansing City Inspector. They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any state of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Director of Planning or authorized agent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
D.  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a domestic sewage disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Leavenworth County Sanitary Code. 
E.  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 16-203D., a direct connection shall be made, within ninety (90) days, to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material approved by the Director. 
F.  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City of Lansing. 
G.  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Leavenworth County Health Officer. 
Sec. 16-204. - Conditions of construction. 
A.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Wastewater Utility Director. 
B.  Connection to a public sewer shall require a building sewer permit. The owner or his agent desiring to make a connection shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed. 
C.  All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
D.  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
E.  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and tested by the Director, to meet all requirements of this ordinance. 
F.  The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer; and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench; shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
G.  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer in accordance with the most recently adopted plumbing code. 
H.  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
I.  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner in accordance with the latest City of Lansing public works technical specifications. In addition, a proper permit from public works is required prior to any work to be performed within any City-owned or public right of way. 
J.  Connection Fees: All fees contemplated under this section shall be in accordance with the latest fee schedule adopted by the Governing Body. 
1.  A sewage impact fee of $400.00 shall be charged for each installation of any domestic sewage disposal system, and any commercial or industrial waste treatment facility within the area of jurisdiction of the City of Lansing, Kansas. Said fee shall be collected before any work is commenced. 
Sec. 16-205. - Further prohibitions. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
B.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Wastewater Utility Director and/or the Public Works Director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
C.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
2.  Cleaning, stripping or paint solvents 
3.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1 as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
4.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
5.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, disposable dishes, cups, and milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
6.  Any waste considered toxic and or hazardous and/or defined as toxic or hazardous by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment and/or the Environmental Protection Agency and/or having toxic effects on the wastewater treatment processes and/or land application of wastewater sludges and the receiving ground waters at the wastewater sludge application sites. 
7.  Any user which discharges any toxic pollutant which causes an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with the substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such increased cost. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the Wastewater Utility Director and approved by the City Council. 
D.  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 4 of this article, and which in the judgment of the Director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the Director may: 
1.  Reject the wastes, 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, 
4.  Require any user which discharges any toxic pollutant or other substance which causes an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or waste sludge land application from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singularly or by interaction with the substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the works, to pay for such increased cost of operation or remediation of treatment plant or land application sites. The charges associated with the cost recovery to such user shall be determined by the Wastewater Utility Director. 
If the Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
E.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
F.  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
G.  When required by the Director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
H.  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. 
I.  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern. 
Sec. 16-206. - Access. 
A.  The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The Director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
B.  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this article the Director or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be harmless for injury or death to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Section 16-205H. 
C.  The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
Sec. 16-207. - User charge rates. 
A.  The rates set out in Section 16-207E. shall be applied to each residential customer receiving sewage service for the purpose of operation, maintenance, replacement, revenue bond retirement, general improvement, modification and billing for the City of Lansing sewage collection and treatment system and shall be based on the average of metered water use for the months of December, January, February, and March. The rate so determined shall be applied to the subsequent twelve month period and shall be revised annually. New service customers with no historical water use record shall pay the base charge until a water use history is established. 
B.  The rates set out in subsection E. shall be applied to each commercial customer receiving sewage service for the purpose of operation and maintenance, revenue bond retirement, and billing for the City of Lansing sewage collection and treatment system and the billing shall be for actual water use each month. 
C.  The City of Lansing shall conduct an "in-house" review of the user charge system at least every two years and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation, maintenance, and replacement costs among users. An independent review shall be conducted at least every five years. 
D.  The City of Lansing shall establish an account designated for the specific purpose of insuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works (equipment replacement account). Deposits to this account shall be made at least annually from the operation, maintenance, and replacement revenue in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). At such time as an adequate reserve is established in the account, the City may elect to modify this annual deposit, after consultation with the Kansas Department of Health and Environment. 
E.  The residential and commercial user charge rates shall be in accordance with the latest fee schedule adopted by the Governing Body. 
Sec. 16-208. - Capacity utilization. 
    The City of Lansing and the Lansing Correctional Facility shall enter into negotiations to determine an acceptable solution set by agreement approved by the Governing Body if the Lansing Correctional Facility generates sewage flows, over an extended period of time, in excess of its purchased treatment capacity. 
Sec. 16-209. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be served by the City with notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
B.  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 16-209A., shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each 24-hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
C.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. 
D.  Monthly Charges. Charges for sewer service shall be made each month of the calendar year. All bills are due on or before the close of business on the twenty-fifth day of the month following the month for which charges are made. The billing date shall be the 1st day of each month. Past due bills shall accrue a late charge of ten percent a month. 
E.  Delinquency and Hearing. On a quarterly basis, the Finance Director shall compile a list of all customers who are at least two (2) months delinquent in their sewer bill payments. The Finance Director shall prepare a delinquency notice for each delinquent account, and mail such notice to the customer (and the property owner, if known and different from the customer) at the address shown in the records of the City. Property owners who rent or lease to customers of the City's sewer utility shall be responsible for advising the Finance Director of their current addresses in writing. The notice shall indicate: (1) the amount due, plus accumulated late charges; (2) the customer's right to a hearing before an officer designated by the City, if requested; and (3) that such hearing shall be requested in writing, filed with the Finance Director within five (5) working days after the mailing date of the delinquency notice. Upon receiving a request for such hearing the Finance Director shall advise the applicant of the date and time of the hearing. At the hearing, the customer and the City may present such evidence as is pertinent to the issue, may be represented by counsel, may examine and cross-examine witnesses, but formal rules of evidence shall not be followed. If the hearing officer determines that there is a delinquency, he may impose a delinquency charge in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) Hearings may be conducted by any officer appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Lien. In the event that charges for sewer service are not paid, the Finance Director shall prepare an ordinance annually by the first council meeting in August listing delinquent accounts and property descriptions. Upon adoption by the City council and publication, this ordinance shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied. There shall be a $50.00 penalty assessed against any delinquent account certified to the Leavenworth County Clerk for assessment to the property tax rolls. The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to file a sworn statement showing such delinquency in the office of the County Clerk of Leavenworth County, Kansas. 
    The filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charges for such service. The Finance Director may forward delinquent accounts to an approved third party collection agency in lieu of levying and assessing the charges and/or penalties against each lot or parcel of ground served as a special assessment. All delinquent accounts forwarded for collection will be subject to a collection fee not to exceed 38% of the delinquent balance. 
    Person Responsible for Payment. The rates and charges herein established shall be collected from the customers of the City of Lansing, Kansas sewer utility system. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 16-301. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article the following words shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Outside Sewer Connection shall mean any sewer connection for premises located outside the City limits that discharges into, or connects with sewers that discharge into the sewers of the City. 
B.  Inside Sewer Connection shall mean any sewer connection for premises located inside the City limits that discharges water or connects with sewers that discharge into the sewers of the City. 
Sec. 16-302. - Permit required. 
    No person shall make a sewer connection without first obtaining a permit therefore. The permit required by this section shall be issued by the Building Inspector. All applications for permits required by this section shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector and shall contain a legal description of the premises for which such connection is to be made. 
Sec. 16-303. - Number per building. 
    Only one (1) permit required by this article shall be issued for each building. 
Sec. 16-304. - Same-Fee. 
    No permit required by Section 16-302 of this article shall be issued until there has been paid to the City the appropriate fee. 
Sec. 16-305. - Out of City connection. 
    Acceptance of sewerage from areas outside the City will be made only in cases where approval has been granted by the City Council and: 
A.  In conformance with laws governing County benefit districts; or 
B.  Where the entire cost of sewers serving industrial establishments or subdivisions is paid by individuals, corporations, or others; or 
C.  Where isolated property borders existing City sewers and where the isolated property owner makes payment to the City for the sewer connection in accordance with Section 16-204 of this article. 
Sec. 16-306. - Same-Construction standards. 
    All sewers and appurtenances, including house connections, shall be constructed in accordance with designs, sizes, materials, plans, specifications and construction supervision approved by the City. 
Note- See Plumbing Code, Section 5-601 et seq. 
Sec. 16-307. - Same-Inspections. 
    All building and sewer lines for which a permit has been issued for an outside sewer connection shall be subject to the inspection of the Building Inspector at any time and shall likewise be subject to the same inspection as buildings within the City. The applicant under each permit shall pay for such inspection as provided by the building ordinances of the City. 
Sec. 16-308. - Same-Ownership. 
    Sewer lines constructed in areas outside the City which contribute to the City sewerage system shall become the property of the City when, and if, the areas in which the lines are located are annexed to the City and the City's ownership and responsibility therefore shall be on the same basis as if the lines were originally constructed within the City. 
    The City will not, however, accept responsibility for the indebtedness incurred in the original construction of the sewer lines except to the extent required by law. 
Sec. 16-309. - Sewer connections required. 
    All persons and property owners owning buildings within the City which are within two hundred (200) feet of the property line shall make such connections with the sewer system of the City as may be necessary in the judgment of the health officer for the protection of the health of the public, for the purpose of disposing of all substances from any such building affecting the public health, which may be lawfully and properly disposed of by means of such sewer. The costs of all connections with the sewerage disposal system of the City shall be borne by the consumer. 
Sec. 16-310. - Same-Failure to comply. 
    If any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to so connect any building with the sewer system of the City as provided for in Section 16-309 of this article for more than ten (10) days after being notified in writing by the health officer to do so, the Councilmembers shall cause such premises and buildings to be connected with the sewer system. The Councilmembers are hereby authorized to advertise for bids for the construction and making of sewer connections pursuant to the preceding Section, to contract therefore with the lowest responsible bidder or bidders, to cause such premises to be connected with the sewer system, and to assess the costs and expenses thereof against the property and premises so connected. Such assessment shall be made in the same manner as other special assessments are made. 
Sec. 16-311. - Service charge; nonpayment. 
    In the event of the failure to pay sewer connection service charges when due, the City shall have the right to disconnect the sewer service connection until all back charges and penalties are paid. 
    The penalties for late payment of sewer connection service charge shall be the same as the penalty for failure to pay for sewer service when due. 
Sec. 16-312. - Same-When connection discontinued. 
    In the event sewer service is discontinued for sixty (60) days for failure to pay sewer connection service charge, or in the event the user of such sewer connection is not a sewer utility patron and is in default of payment for such service for sixty (60) days, then the City may dig up and plug such sewer connection. Service in such case shall be restored only upon payment of the cost of disconnecting such sewer plus twenty-five percent (25%) of such cost for penalty and any accrued delinquency charges. 
    The sewer connection service charge shall apply to all outside sewer connections now in use, as well as those hereafter made. 
Sec. 16-313. - Disposition of connections. 
    All funds collected for permits and for sewer services under this article and other ordinances shall be deposited with the Finance Director and credited to the general fund. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 16-401. - Director's responsibilities. 
    The admission to the sanitary sewer collection system of any wastes having any of the following shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director: 
A.  A BOD demand of greater than three hundred (300) mg/L; or 
B.  A suspended solid greater than three hundred (300) mg/L; or 
C.  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 16-202 of this article; or 
D.  Having an average flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average sewage flow of the City. 
Sec. 16-402. - User's responsibilities. 
    The owner shall provide at his or her own expense and shall maintain in satisfactory and effective operation such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
A.  Reduce the BOD to three hundred (300) mg/L, or 
B.  Reduce or remove objectionable characteristics or constituents to acceptable levels, or 
C.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waste. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information shall be reviewed by the Director and the state regulatory agency. Any user's treatment facility shall conform to all local and state requirements and regulations. If the waste discharge is not amenable to treatment or may have a deleterious effect on the POTW or receiving waters or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitutes a public nuisance, the Director may refuse to allow the waste into the sanitary sewer collection system. 
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOL DISCHARGE REGULATION 

Sec. 16-501. - Applicability and enforcement. 
    For additional specific information regarding the discharge of swimming pools and other related water features see Chapter 8, Article 5. 
Chapter 17 - ZONING AND PLANNING 
ARTICLE I. - ZONING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 17-101. - Zoning regulations incorporated. 
    There are hereby incorporated by reference as if set out fully herein, the zoning regulations adopted by the Governing Body of the City of Lansing, Kansas, as prepared by Bucher, Willis and Ratliff, consulting engineers, and Lansing City officials, and consisting of Ordinance Nos. 389, and 735, and entitled, "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lansing, Kansas." No fewer than three copies of the zoning regulations marked "Official Copy of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lansing, 2003" and to which there shall be a published copy of this section attached, shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. 
Sec. 17-102. - District map. 
    There is further herein incorporated by reference, and adopted, an official map defining the boundaries of zones and showing the district boundaries and the classification of such districts, which map shall be marked "Official Copy as Incorporated by the Lansing City Code" and shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 17-201. - Regulations incorporated. 
    There are hereby incorporated by reference, as if set out fully herein, certain regulations governing the subdivision of land located within the City of Lansing, Kansas and certain surrounding areas as described therein, as adopted by the Governing Body of the City of Lansing, Kansas, and prepared by Bucher, Willis, and Ratliff, consulting engineers, and Lansing City officials and consisting of Ordinance Nos. 389, 409, 410, 411, 417, 418, 502, 503, 504, 506, 548, 578, and 579. 
    No fewer than three copies of the subdivision regulations marked "Official Copy as adopted by Ordinance No. _____: and to which there shall be a published copy of this section attached, shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 17-301. - Statutory authorization. 
A.  The following floodplain management regulations as written were approved in draft form by the Chief Engineer of the Division of Water Resources of the Kansas Department of Agriculture on August 26, 2014. 
1.  The legislature of the State of Kansas has, in K.S.A. 12-741, et seq., and specifically in K.S.A. 12-766, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Governing Body of Lansing, Kansas, does ordain as follows: 
a.  The special flood hazard areas of the City of Lansing, Kansas are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  These flood losses are caused by 1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated flood plain causing increases in flood heights and velocities, 2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
c.  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that is the basis of this ordinance uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps. 
(i)  Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations, which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this article is representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this article. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administration's FIS. 
(ii)  Calculation of water surface profiles that are based upon a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood. 
(iii)  Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(iv)  Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no development is permitted which would cause any increase in flood height. 
(v)  Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood. 
Sec. 17-302. - Purpose; objectives. 
A.  It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses described in Section 17-301; to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) and K.A.R. 5-44-4 by applying the provisions of this ordinance to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities. 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction. 
3.  Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard. 
4.  Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
5.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage. 
6.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
B.  The objectives of this article are to: 
1.  Protect human life and health. 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood plains. 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas and 
7.  Insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
Sec. 17-303. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood. See "base flood." 
    Accessory structure means the same as "appurtenant structure." 
    Actuarial rates. See "risk premium rates." 
    Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
    Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Agricultural commodities means agricultural products and livestock. 
    Agricultural structure means any structure used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities. 
    Appeal means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See "structure." 
    Chief engineer means the chief engineer of the division of water resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture. 
    Chief Executive Officer or Chief Elected Official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community. 
    Compensatory storage means an artificially excavated, hydrologically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural storage capacity when encroachments are placed within the floodplain. 
    Community means any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Development does not include: 
A.  Maintenance of existing buildings or facilities, such as re-roofing, re-siding, or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in the building footprint, ground, or road surface elevation; 
B.  Gardening, tilling, plowing, or similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, terracing of land, or construction of levees; or 
C.  Erection of a storage shed, accessory building, fence, or playground equipment that: 
1.  Has a footprint of less than 80 square feet; 
2.  Is not located in a floodway or within 10 feet of a property line, and 
3.  Is properly anchored to withstand surface water flows. 
    Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Eligible community or participating community means a community for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of inland waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined above in item (1). 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards. 
    Flood fringe means the area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones. 
    Flood hazard map means the document adopted by the governing body showing the limits of: (1) the floodplain; (2) the floodway; (3) streets; (4) stream channel; and (5) other geographic features. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Floodplain or Floodprone Area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on Federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is (a) listed individually in the national register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this ordinance. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Market value or fair market value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    Natural grade means surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by human activity such as, but not limited to, grading, terracing, or filling. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
    (NFIP) means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Participating community also known as an "eligible community," means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance. 
    Permit means a signed document from a designated community official authorizing development in a floodplain, including all necessary supporting documentation such as: (1) the site plan; (2) an elevation certificate; and (3) any other necessary or applicable approvals or authorizations from local, state or federal authorities. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including Federal, State, and local governments and agencies. 
    Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the SFHA and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently able to be towed by a light-duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
    Risk premium rates means those rates established by the Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations, which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard." 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A, AO, AE, or AH. 
    Start of construction includes substantial-improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial-improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State Coordinating Agency means the Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a continuous 10 year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 20 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvements means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 40 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement; or any addition to a building that occurs outside the footprint of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". When the combined total of improvements or repairs made to the structure in the previous 10 years equals or exceeds 40 percent of the structure's market value, that structure is considered a substantial improvement. 
    Temporary structure means a structure permitted in a district for a period not to exceed 180 days and is required to be removed upon the expiration of the permit period. Temporary structures may include recreational vehicles, temporary construction offices, or temporary business facilities used until permanent facilities can be constructed, but at no time shall it include manufactured homes used as residences. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain. 
Sec. 17-304. - Application of the article. 
    This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Lansing, Kansas identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones, AE, AO, and AH Zones, on the Index Map dated July 16, 2015, of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this article, no development , and no fill or excavation shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the Lansing, Kansas, City Council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in Sections 17-312-17-314. 
Sec. 17-305. - Flood insurance study incorporated. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) through a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Lansing, Kansas," revised July 16, 2015, (or as amended) with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps as numbered and unnumbered A Zones, AE, AO, and AH Zones, and within the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in Section 17-311 of this article. In all areas covered by this article no development and no fill or excavation shall be permitted except upon a permit to develop granted by the City or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare and health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in Sections 17-312-17-314. 
Sec. 17-306. - Scope of the article. 
A.  No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
B.  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
C.  In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under the Kansas statutes. 
D.  The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Lansing, Kansas, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
E.  If any section; clause; provision; or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby. 
Sec. 17-307. - Floodplain administrator. 
    The Director of Public Works is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 17-308. - Same-Duties. 
    Duties of the enforcement officer shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
B.  Review all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
C.  Notify adjacent communities and the Division of Water Resources, Kansas State Board of Agriculture, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
D.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
E.  Require verification by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures that are on any ownership tract, or on a tract that is adjacent to a tract that lies within or partially within the mapped area of special flood hazard. 
F.  Require verification by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. 
G.  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the enforcement officer shall obtain certification from a Kansas registered professional engineer or architect. 
H.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the enforcement officer shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
I.  Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
J.  Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications. 
K.  When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular non-residential structure, the floodplain administrator shall require certification from a Kansas registered professional engineer or architect. 
L.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17-305, then the enforcement officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 17-311. 
M.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the Director of Public Works and shall be open for public inspection. 
Sec. 17-309. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
A.  The boundaries of the floodway and floodway fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the enforcement official shall make the necessary interpretation, taking into consideration any technical data developed by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer and provided by the applicant. The enforcement official shall base his determination on what is in his/her opinion the best current available data. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the board of zoning appeals will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her case to the board and to submit his or her own technical evidence, if he or she so desires. 
B.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
C.  No development within known flood hazard areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
Sec. 17-310. - Permit; application. 
A.  No person, firm, or corporation shall initiate any development on an ownership tract, or is on an ownership tract that is adjacent to a tract, that lies within or partially within the mapped area of special flood hazard for substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for floodplain development. 
B.  A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
C.  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the enforcement officer on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, excavation, storage of materials; drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed structure or work. 
2.  The use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
3.  Generation of the 500-year flood elevation when development involves a critical facility. 
4.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures and relationship to base flood elevation. 
5.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure shall be floodproofed. 
6.  Signature by the permittee or his or her authorized agent (who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority). 
7.  Such other information as reasonably may be required by the enforcement officer. 
8.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
9.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit. 
10.  Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement. 
11.  Specify whether the development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway. 
12.  Provide engineering analysis to determine if there is any impact on the regulatory flood elevations anywhere in the community as a result of the development. 
13.  Volumetric calculations demonstrating compensatory storage have been provided, if included in flood elevation analysis. 
14.  The above plans and specifications must be certified by a Kansas licensed engineer or land surveyor if the proposed development is in, near or adjacent to regulatory flood districts. 
D.  A fee as determined by the Lansing City Council may be charged for a floodplain development permit. 
Sec. 17-311. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
    The mapped flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this article are hereby divided into two following districts: a floodway overlay district (FW) and a floodway fringe overly district (FF) identified in the Flood Insurance Study (and accompanying map(s)). Within these districts all uses not meeting the standards of this article and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited. These zones shall be consistent with the numbered and unnumbered A Zones, AE, AO, and AH Zones, as identified on the official FIRM and identified in the Flood Insurance Study provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Sec. 17-312. - Standards for the floodway overlay district and the floodway fringe overlay district. 
A.  No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements and other improvements including the placement of manufactured homes within any numbered and unnumbered A Zones, AE, AO, and AH Zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. 
B.  All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 1% chance (100-year) flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The unnumbered A Zones shall be subject to all development provisions of this article. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available the community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state or other sources. 
C.  Any development, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other types of encroachment, is prohibited within a floodway. 
D.  Compensatory Storage Required for Earthwork involving fill. Fill within the area of special flood hazard shall result in no net loss of natural floodplain storage. The volume of the loss of floodwater storage due to filling in the special flood hazard area shall be off-set by providing an equal volume of flood storage by excavation or other compensatory measures at or adjacent to the development site. This compensatory storage requirement does not apply to small temporary structures (such as above ground swimming pools) where such projects are located on small lots with existing buildings and where the site does not have sufficient space to provide compensatory storage. 
E.  All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require: 
1.  Design of anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination. 
3.  Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  All utility and sanitary facilities are elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
5.  No development, including landfill, may be permitted within any numbered or unnumbered A zones and AE zones on the City's FIRM unless the applicant for the land use has demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood at any point within the community, as certified by a Kansas Licensed Professional Engineer. 
6.  For All New Construction: A residential or a non-residential building, including manufactured housing, shall be constructed on a foundation that meets one or more of the following requirements: 
a.  The lowest floor, including basement, of the building or building addition, shall be at or above the base flood elevation. 
b.  When fill is used for the building pad, it shall be placed in layers no greater than 1 foot deep before compacting and should extend beyond the foundation walls at a slope no greater than 3:1. When fill is used, the top layer shall be above the BFE. 
c.  No fill shall be placed within 10 feet of the property line. The prohibition of fill within 10 feet of a property line can be waived by a structural engineer's certification that an alternative method will protect the building from damage due to erosion, scour, and other hydrological forces. 
d.  Fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties. 
7.  Storage of material and equipment. 
a.  Storage of materials or equipment that, in the time of flooding, could become buoyant and pose an obstruction to flow in the identified floodway areas, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
b.  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the areas within the time available after flood warning. 
8.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development including manufactured home parks or subdivisions be required to assure that 
a.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
c.  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  All proposals for development including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivision include the base flood elevation data. 
e.  All proposals for development must comply with the City's Stormwater Detention requirements. 
9.  Agricultural Structures: Structures used solely for agricultural purposes in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock, may be constructed at-grade and wet-flood proofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; there is no permanent retail, wholesale, or manufacturing use included in the structure; a variance has been granted from the floodplain management requirements of this ordinance; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
10.  Accessory Structures: Structures used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than 400 square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet-flood proofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this ordinance; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
11.  Critical Facilities: 
a.  All new or substantially improved critical nonresidential facilities including, but not limited, to governmental buildings, police stations, fire stations, hospitals, orphanages, penal institutions, communication centers, water and sewer pumping stations, water and sewer treatment facilities, transportation maintenance facilities, places of public assembly, emergency aviation facilities, and schools shall be elevated at least 3 feet above the .2 percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 500-year flood level. 
Critical facilities are those which: are critical to the community's public health and safety; are essential to the orderly functioning of a community; store, or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials; or house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. 
Examples of critical facilities include: jails or other detention facilities, hospitals, schools, police stations, fire and emergency services stations, nursing homes, water plants, wastewater treatment facilities, and fuel storage facilities. 
Critical facilities shall be elevated at least 3 feet above the 500-year flood elevation or to the highest known historical flood elevation (if records are available), whichever is greater. If no data exists establishing a 500-year flood elevation or the highest known historical flood elevation, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates 500-year flood elevation data. 
Critical facilities shall only be constructed in the 500-year floodplain if they are placed on engineered fill and/or if the lowest floor (including basement) is at least 1 foot above the 500-year flood elevation. A critical facility shall have at least one access drive or road constructed to connect to land higher than the 500-year flood elevation and this drive or road shall be capable of supporting a 4,000 pound vehicle. 
The top of the drive or road shall be at least 3 feet above the 500-year flood elevation. 
A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in Section 17-308. 
No critical facilities shall be constructed in any designated floodway. 
12.  Hazardous Materials: All hazardous material storage and handling sites shall be located out of the special flood hazard area. 
13.  Cumulative Improvement: A structure may be improved within the building footprint (remodeled) without conforming to current requirements for elevation so long as the cumulative value of all work done within the last five calendar years does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the structure's current market value. If the cumulative value of the improvement exceeds forty (40) percent of the structure's current market value, the structure must be brought into compliance with Article IV, Section B(1) which requires elevation of residential structures to three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or the elevation/floodproofing of non-residential structures to three (3) feet above the base flood elevation. Any addition to a building that occurs outside the footprint of the building is subject to current requirements for elevation. 
14.  Recreational vehicles: Recreational vehicles may be placed on sites within unnumbered A zones on the community's FIRM or FHBM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or 
c.  Meet the permitting, elevating, and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this ordinance. 
* A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
Sec. 17-313. - Floodway fringe overlay district (including AO and AH Zone). 
A.  Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in Section 17-313 shall be permitted in the floodway fringe overlay district. No use shall be permitted in the district unless the standards of Section 17-312 are met. 
B.  Standards for the Floodway Fringe Overlay District. 
1.  Require new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basements elevated to at least three feet above the base flood (100-year flood) elevation, as certified by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in Section 17-308. 
2.  All electrical wiring, heating, ventilation, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be located at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation. All outdoor electrical meters shall be installed at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation. 
3.  Require new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures to have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated to at least three feet above the base flood (100-year flood) elevation or together with the attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood proofed to at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation so that all areas of the building (including mechanical and utility equipment) below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in Section 17-308. Each new residential site shall have direct access to a walkway, driveway, or street whose surface elevation is at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation and such escape route shall lead directly out of the floodplain area. 
4.  Require, for all new construction, or substantial improvement, that fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement, and that areas subject to flooding shall be limited to 400 square feet and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect and meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  The structure must provide one square inch of venting for every square foot of enclosed area; 
b.  The structure must provide at least two vents located on different sides of the structure, with one being located on the upstream side of the structure, if possible; 
c.  The bottom of required vents must be no higher than one foot above grade; 
d.  The required vents must be freely open with no human interventions required and be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
e.  These flood vent opening requirements must be certified by a Kansas Licensed Engineer or Architect. 
f.  The area below the base flood elevation must be unfinished and constructed of flood-resistant materials the same as are defined by FEMA. Sheetrock or drywall used for fire protection is permitted in unfinished areas; 
g.  All ductwork, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems, electrical and hot water heaters included as part of the structure must be elevated a minimum of 3' above the base flood elevation; 
h.  All of the above required features must be shown on the plan submitted for the floodplain development permit (and, if applicable, the building permit); 
i.  An elevation certificate must document the venting features included in a structure and be filed with the floodplain administrator before the structure is occupied. 
5.  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
6.  Within AH zones adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
7.  Manufactured (Mobile) Homes. 
a.  All manufactured (mobile) homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured (mobile) homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frames ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met: 
(i)  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional tie per side at intermediate locations and manufactured (mobile) homes less than 50 feet long require one additional tie per side; 
(ii)  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side; 
(iii)  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
(iv)  Any additions to the manufactured home are similarly anchored. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are to placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park within all unnumbered and numbered A zones, AE and AH zones, on the community's FIRM and not subject to the provisions of [subsection] 7.c. of this ordinance, be elevated so the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation (BFE) and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of [subsection] 7.a. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer. 
c.  In an existing mobile home park or subdivision or whenever a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, the replacement manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation (BFE) and securely attached to the adequately anchored permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement as certified by a Kansas licensed architect or engineer. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer. 
8.  Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17-305 are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO Zones: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as three feet above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer. 
b.  All new construction located in the area behind a flood levee shall be elevated a minimum of 3 feet above the lowest adjacent grade. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
(i)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as three feet above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM as certified by a Kansas licensed land surveyor or Kansas licensed professional engineer; or 
(ii)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification shall be provided by a Kansas licensed engineer or licensed architect to the official as set forth in Section 17-308. 
d.  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
e.  All new construction located in the area behind a flood levee shall be elevated a minimum of 3 feet above the lowest adjacent grade. 
Sec. 17-314. - Floodway over district. 
A.  Permitted uses. Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the floodway district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance. Any development, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other types of encroachment is prohibited within a floodway. 
Sec. 17-315. - Variances procedures. 
A.  The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
B.  The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the enforcement officer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
C.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
D.  In passing upon such applications, the board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and, 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
12.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (1-4 above) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
E.  Conditions for approving variances for agricultural structures. Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in subsections A.-D. of this ordinance. 
    In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed: 
1.  All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the floodplain management regulations of this ordinance shall demonstrate that the varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the agricultural structure. Residential structures, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures. 
2.  Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
3.  For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with Section 17-312E.3. of this ordinance. 
4.  The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with Section 17-312E.1. of this ordinance. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
5.  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with Section 17-312E.4. of this ordinance. 
6.  The agricultural structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with Section 17-313B.4. of this ordinance. 
7.  The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of Section 17-312 of this ordinance. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood. 
8.  Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage. 
9.  No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the agricultural structures. 
10.  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that: (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this ordinance. 
11.  Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and a registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
F.  Conditions for approving variances for accessory structures. Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in subsections A.-D. of this ordinance. 
    In order to minimize flood damages during the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed: 
1.  Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
2.  For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with Section 17-312E.3. of this ordinance. 
3.  The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with Section 17-312E.1. of this ordinance. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
4.  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with Section 17-312E.4. of this ordinance. 
5.  The accessory structures must meet all NFIP opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section 17-313B.4. of this ordinance. 
6.  The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of Section 17-312 of this ordinance. No variances may be issued for accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood. 
7.  Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage. 
8.  No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures. 
9.  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this ordinance. 
10.  Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
G.  Conditions for approving variances for temporary structures. Any variance granted for a temporary structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in subsections D. and E. of this section. 
1.  A temporary structure may be considered for location within the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year floodplain only when all of the following criteria are met: 
a.  Use of the temporary structure is unique to the land to be developed and cannot be located outside of the floodplain nor meet the NFIP design standards; 
b.  Denial of the temporary structure permit will create an undue hardship on the property owner; 
c.  Community has adopted up-to-date NFIP and building regulations to direct placement and removal of the temporary structure; and, 
d.  Community has sufficient staff to monitor the placement, use, and removal of the temporary structure throughout the duration of the permit. 
2.  Once all of the above conditions are met, an application for a special use permit must be made to the Lansing City Council. The Lansing City Council shall consider all applications for special use permits for a temporary structure based on the following criteria: 
a.  The placement of any temporary structure within the special flood hazard areas as shown on the community's adopted FEMA/NFIP map shall require an approved special use permit. The special use permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 180 days. 
b.  Special use permits applications, for a temporary structure to be located in special flood hazard areas, shall conform to the standard public hearing process prior to any community action on the permit request. 
c.  An emergency plan for the removal of the temporary structure that includes specific removal criteria and time frames from the agency or firm responsible for providing the manpower, equipment, and the relocation and disconnection of all utilities shall be required as part of the special use permit application for the placement of any temporary structure. 
d.  On or before the expiration of the end of the 180 day special use permit period, the temporary structure shall be removed from the site. All utilities, including water, sewer, communication, and electrical services shall be disconnected. 
e.  To ensure the continuous mobility of the temporary structure for the duration of the permit, the temporary structure shall retain its wheels and tires, licenses, and towing appurtenance on the structures at all times. 
f.  Under emergency flooding conditions, the temporary structure shall be removed immediately or as directed by the community and as specified in the emergency removal plan. 
g.  Location of any temporary structure within the regulatory floodway requires the provision of a "no-rise" certificate by a registered professional engineer. 
h.  Violation of or non-compliance with any of the stated conditions of the special use permit during the term thereof, shall make the permit subject to revocation by resolution of the Governing Body of the community. Issuance of permit revocation notice shall be made to the landowner, the occupant of the land, and to the general public. 
i.  Any deviation from the approved site plan shall be deemed a violation of the special use permit approval and the uses allowed shall automatically be revoked. The subsequent use of the land shall be as it was prior to the special permit approval. In event of any violation, all permitted special uses shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and shall be illegal, non-conforming uses and shall be summarily removed and abated. 
j.  If the temporary structure is to be returned to its previously occupied site, the process for issuing a special use permit must be repeated in full. Any subsequent permit shall be valid for 180 days only. 
3.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
H.  Conditions for variances: 
1.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
3.  Variances shall only be issued upon (A) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (B) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (C) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
4.  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that: (a) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (b) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this ordinance. 
5.  The enforcement officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
Sec. 17-316. - Nonconforming use. 
A.  A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this article but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No such use or substantial improvement of that use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which increases its non-conformity. 
2.  Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as non-conforming uses. 
3.  If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any future use of the building shall conform to this ordinance. 
4.  If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 40 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this article. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination. 
Sec. 17-317. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the official City newspaper. The regulations of this article are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Sec. 17-318. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Governing Body or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Sec. 17-319. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural cases, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside floodway and floodway fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City or any office or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
APPENDIX A - 2005 KANSAS FOOD CODE AMENDMENTS 
Kansas Regulations
Agency 28 Department of Health and Environment
Article 36-Food Service Establishments, Food Vending Machine Companies and Lodging Establishments 
28-36-101. Definitions. 
    Chapter one of the 2005 "Food Code," published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is adopted by reference, subject to the following additions, deletions, and substitutions: 
(a)  (1)  Wherever the word "PERMIT" appears in this chapter, the word shall be deleted and shall be replaced by "LICENSE," and wherever the phrase "PERMIT HOLDER" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the word "LICENSEE." 
(2)  Wherever the parenthetical phrase "(Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food)" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted. 
(3)  In subpart 1-201.10(B) under "additive," the definition of "food additive" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition in K.S.A. 65-656, and amendments thereto. 
(4)  In subpart 1-201.10(B) under "additive," the definition of "color additive" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition in K.S.A. 65-656, and amendments thereto. 
(5)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), the definition of "adulterated" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition of "food deemed adulterated" in K.S.A. 65-664, and amendments thereto. 
(6)  In the definition of "aw," the symbol "aw" at the end of the definition shall be changed to read "aw". 
(7)  The following definition of "commissary" shall be added after the definition of "comminuted": 
"Commissary" means a catering establishment, restaurant, or similar place that is necessary for the safe operation of a MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or PUSHCART in which food, containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, or stored. 
(8)  In subpart 1-201.10(B) in the definition of "disclosure," the words "for consumers" shall be added after the word "identifies." 
(9)  (A)  In subpart 1-201.10(B) under "food establishment" in paragraph (2)(a), the word "and" shall be deleted. 
(B)  Under "food establishment" in paragraph (2)(b), the period after "FOOD" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by a semicolon. 
(C)  Under "food establishment" in paragraph (2), the following paragraphs shall be added after paragraph (b): 
"(c) A 'food service establishment' as defined in K.S.A. 36-501, and amendments thereto; 
"(d) A 'food vending machine' defined in K.S.A. 36-501, and amendments thereto; and 
"(e) A 'retail food store' means any establishment or section of an establishment where food and food products are offered to the consumer and intended for off-premises consumption. The term includes delicatessens that offer prepared food in bulk quantities only. The term does not include establishments which handle only prepackaged non-potentially hazardous foods, roadside markets that offer only fresh fruits and fresh vegetables for sale, food service establishments, or food and beverage vending machines." 
(D)  Under "food establishment" in paragraph (3)(f), insert the word "only" after the words "offers FOOD," replace the number "6" with "4," and delete the words "the number of guests served does not exceed 18." 
(10)  In subpart 1-201.10(B) in paragraph (1) of the definition of "food processing plant," the words "and does not provide food directly to the consumer" shall be added after the words "FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS." 
(11)  The following definition of "mobile food establishment" shall be added after the definition of "mg/L": 
"Mobile food establishment" means a self-contained FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that is mounted on axles and wheels, is designed to be readily moveable, and remains at one physical address for not more than 17 consecutive days. 
(12)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), the definition of "person" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition of "person" in K.S.A. 36-501, and amendments thereto. 
(13)  The following definition of "pushcart" shall be added after the definition of "public water supply system": 
"Pushcart" means a manually propelled vehicle limited to serving non-potentially hazardous foods or POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS that require only limited preparation or prepackaged food maintained at proper temperatures. 
(14)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), the definition of "person in charge" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the following: "'Person in charge' means at the time of inspection, any individual or employee present in a food establishment who is responsible for the operation. If no designated individual or employee is the person in charge, then any employee present is the person in charge." 
(15)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), in the definition of "potentially hazardous food," the following changes shall be made: 
(A)  In paragraph (1), the parenthetical abbreviation "(TCS)" shall be deleted. 
(B)  In paragraph (2), the designation of paragraph (a) shall be deleted, and this paragraph shall become part of paragraph (2). The words "raw cut tomatoes" shall be added after the words "cut melons." 
(C)  Paragraph (b) shall be deleted, including tables A and B. 
(D)  The text in paragraph (3)(c) shall be deleted and replaced with the following: "A FOOD with an aw value of 0.85 or less;". 
(E)  The text in paragraph (d) and all of paragraphs (d)(i), (ii), and (iii) shall be deleted and replaced with the following: "A FOOD with a pH level of 4.6 or below when measured at 24C (75F)." 
(16)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), the definition of "public water system" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition of "public water supply system" in K.S.A. 65-162a, and amendments thereto. 
(17)  In subpart 1-201.10(B) under "ready-to-eat food" in paragraph (2)(b), the words "that are washed as specified under  3-302.15" shall be deleted. 
(18)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), the definition of "refuse" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition of "solid waste" as defined in K.S.A. 65-3402, and amendments thereto. 
(19)  In subpart 1-201.10(B) in the definition of "regulatory authority," the word "local" and the words "or federal" shall be deleted. 
(20)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), the definition of "sewage" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition in K.S.A. 65-164, and amendments thereto. 
(21)  In subpart 1-201.10(B), the definition of "vending machine" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the definition of "food vending machine" in K.S.A. 36-501, and amendments thereto. 
(22)  In subpart 1-201.10 in the definition of "vending machine location," the word "Food" shall be inserted before the word "Vending." 
(b)  As used in this article, the superscript "*" that follows the title of a section shall designate the requirements in that section as being of critical importance, unless otherwise specified within that section as follows: 
(1)  The superscript "N" shall designate a requirement as being of noncritical importance. 
(2)  The superscript "S" may designate a requirement as being of noncritical importance. The term "swing" is used to describe this type of requirement. 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13, 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
28-36-102. Management and personnel. 
    Chapter two of the 2005 "Food Code," published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is adopted by reference, with the following additions, deletions, and substitutions: 
(a)  Wherever the phrase "PERMIT HOLDER" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the word "LICENSEE." 
(b)  Wherever the parenthetical phrase "(TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD)" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted. 
(c)  (1)  In the first sentence of subpart 2-102.11, the words "of foodbome illness" shall be added between the words "RISKS" and "inherent." 
(2)  Subpart 2-102.11(A) shall be deleted. 
(3)  Subpart 2-102.11(B) shall be redesignated as "(A)," and the words "OR APPROVED" shall be inserted after "ACCREDITED." 
(4)  (A)  Subpart 2-102.11(C) shall be redesignated as "(B)." 
(B)  In subpart 2-102.11(C)(8)(b), the word "Bare" shall be added before the word "Hand." 
(C)  In subpart 2.102.11. paragraph (C)(9) shall be delete and replaced by the following paragraph: 
"Describing FOODS identified as MAJOR FOOD ALLERGENS that could cause an allergic reaction in a sensitive individual." 
(d)  In subpart 2-102.20 at the end of the sentence, "(B)" shall be deleted and replaced by "(A)." 
(e)  In subpart 2-103.11(E), the word "UNADULTERED" shall be deleted and replaced by the word "unadulterated." 
(f)  In subpart 2-201, the title "Responsibilities of Permit Holder, Person in Charge, Food Employees, and Conditional Employees" shall be deleted and replaced by the title "Responsibilities regarding diseases or medical conditions." 
(g)  (1)  In subpart 2-201.11(A)(4) and (A)(5), the word "CONFIRMED" shall be deleted and replaced by "FOODBORNE." 
(2)  In subpart 2-201.11(C)(2), the word "as" between the words "serves" and "a" shall be deleted. 
(h)  (1)  In subpart 2-201.13(I)(4)(c), the words "immune to" shall be deleted and replaced by the words "protected against." 
(2)  In subpart 2-201.13(I)(4)(d)-(f), the number "30" shall be deleted and replaced by the number "50." 
(i)  In subpart 2-301.12(B)(3), the phrase "10 to 15 seconds" shall be deleted and replaced by "20 seconds." 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13, 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
28-36-103. Food. 
    Chapter three of the 2005 "Food Code," published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is adopted by reference, with the following additions, deletions, and substitutions: 
(a)  Wherever the phrase "PERMIT HOLDER" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the word "LICENSEE." 
(b)  Wherever the parenthetical phrase "(TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD)" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted. 
(c)  Subpart 3-301.11(D) shall be deleted. 
(d)  (1)  Subpart 3-302.11(A)(3) through (8) shall be deleted and replaced with the following: 
"(3) Storing damaged, spoiled, or recalled FOOD being held in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT as specified under  6-404.11; 
"(B) FOOD can be protected from cross contamination by using one or more of the following methods: 
"(1) Except as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.15(B)(2) and in  (C) of this section, storing the FOOD in packages, covered containers, or wrappings; 
"(2) Cleaning HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINERS of FOOD of visible soil before opening; 
"(3) Protecting FOOD containers that are received packaged together in a case or overwrap from cuts when the case or overwrap is opened; and 
"(4) Separating fruits and vegetables, before they are washed as specified under  3-302.15 from READY-TO-EAT FOOD." 
(2)  In subpart 3-302.11, the existing paragraph "(B)" shall be redesignated as "(C)." 
(e)  In subpart 3-305.13, "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(f)  In subpart 3-306.12(B), "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(g)  In subpart 3-40311(A), (B), and (C), the words "before service" shall be added at the end of each paragraph. 
(h)  In subpart 3-501.16(A)(2)(b)(ii), the phrase "Within 5 years of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY'S adoption of this code" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by "on or before September 1, 2009." 
(i)  In subpart 3-501.17(A)(2)(b), the words "Within 5 years of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY'S adoption of this code" shall be deleted and replaced by the words "On or before September 1, 2009." 
(j)  In subpart 3-501.19, paragraphs (C)(1) through (5) shall be deleted and replaced with the following: 
"Variance shall be obtained from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY as specified in  3-502.11 as amended by K.A.R. 28-36-103(k)." 
(k)  In subpart 3-502.11, the text in paragraph (F) shall be deleted and replaced with the following: 
"Using time as a public health control as specified under  3-501.19." 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13, 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
28-36-104. Equipment, utensils, and linens. 
    Chapter four of the 2005 "Food Code," published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is adopted by reference, with the following additions, deletions, and substitutions: 
(a)  Wherever the phrase "PERMIT HOLDER" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted and replaced by the word "LICENSEE." 
(b)  (1)  In subpart 4-204.14, the word "Food" shall be inserted before the word "Vending" in the title. 
(2)  In subpart 4-204.14, the word "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(c)  In subpart 4-204.16, the words "for human consumption" shall be added to the end of the sentence. 
(d)  (1)  In subpart 4-204.19, the word "Food" shall be inserted before the word "Vending" in the title. 
(2)  In subpart 4-204.19, the word "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(e)  In subpart 4-204.110(B)(1), the words "as specified under  8-103.11" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by "by the regulatory authority." 
(f)  (1)  In subpart 4-204.111, the word "Food" shall be inserted before the word "Vending" in the title. 
(2)  In subpart 4-204.111(B)(1) and (2), the word "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(g)  (1)  In subpart 4-204.121, the word "Food" shall be inserted before the word "Vending" in the title. 
(2)  In subpart 4-204.121(A) and (B), the word "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(h)  (1)  In subpart 4-204.123, the word "Food" shall be inserted before the word "Vending" in the title. 
(2)  In subpart 4-204.123(A) and (B), the word "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(i)  In subpart 4-301.11, the symbol"*" shall be added after the word "Capacities." in the title, and an """ shall be added after the phrase "Chapter 3." 
(j)  (1)  In subpart 4-301.12, the title "Manual Warewashing, Sink Compartment Requirements." shall be deleted and replaced with "Warewashing Equipment Requirements.*" 
(2)  In subpart 4-301.12 (A), the phrase "and  (F)" shall be added before the words "of this section." 
(3)  In subpart 4-301.12 (D), the words "by the regulatory authority" shall be added after the word "APPROVED." 
(4)  In subpart 4-301.12, the following paragraph shall be added after paragraph (E): 
"(F)  Manual warewashing sinks are not required if a mechanical warewashing machine is properly used, operated, and maintained and the machine is large enough for washing, rinsing and SANITIZING the largest EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS." 
(k)  In subpart 4-603.16(A)(1), the word "or" shall be added at the end of the paragraph. 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13, 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
28-36-105. Water, plumbing, and waste. 
    Chapter five of the 2005 "Food Code," published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is adopted by reference, with the following additions, deletions, and substitutions: 
(a)  Wherever the word "SYSTEM" appears in this chapter, the word "SUPPLY" shall be inserted before the word "SYSTEM." 
(b)  Wherever the phrase "according to LAW" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted and shall be replaced by "according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto." 
(c)  In subpart 5-103.12, the symbol "*" shall be added after the title "Pressure." 
(d)  In subpart 5-202.12(C), the phrase "15 seconds" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the phrase "20 seconds." 
(e)  (1)  In subpart 5-203.11(A), the phrase " (B) and (C)" shall be deleted and replaced by " (B)." 
(2)  Subpart 5-203.11(C) shall be deleted. 
(f)  (1)  In subpart 5-203.12, the words "and Urinals" in the title shall be deleted. 
(2)  In subpart 5-203.12, the two sentences shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the following: "Toilet facilities shall be installed according to applicable state and local requirements or as approved by the regulatory authority. Toilet facilities shall be convemently located and shall be accessible to employees and patrons at all times, except that food service establishments that have no seating arrangements shall not be required to provide patron access to toilet facilities. Separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex in all new, newly constructed, or extensively remodeled facilities that offer food consumption arrangement for 20 or more persons on the premises." 
(g)  In subpart 5-401.11(A), the words "with a minimum capacity of a 20-gallon tank" shall be added after the word "tank." 
(h)  (1)  In subpart 5-501.14, the word "Food" shall be inserted before the word "Vending Machines" in the title. 
(2)  In subpart 5-501.14, "FOOD" shall be inserted before the word "VENDING." 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13, 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
28-36-106. Physical facilities. 
    Chapter six of the 2005 "food code," published by the U.S. department of health and human services, is adopted by reference with the following additions, deletions, and substitutions: 
(a)  Wherever the phrase "PERMIT HOLDER" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted and replaced by the word "LICENSEE." 
(b)  (1)  In subpart 6-202.15, the symbol "*" shall be added after the word "Protected." in the title. 
(2)  In subpart 6-202.15, an "s" shall be added at the end of each these paragraphs: (A)(1), (2), and (3) and (D)(1), (2), and (3). 
(c)  In subpart 6-302.10, the words "and urinals" shall be deleted. 
(d)  (1)  In subpart 6-501.111, the word "minimize" shall be deleted and replaced by the word "eliminate." 
(2)  In subpart 6-501.111(A), (B), and (D), the "N" shall be deleted and replaced with "s." 
(e)  In subpart 6-501.112, the symbol "*" shall be added after the word "Pests." in the title. 
(f)  In subpart 6-501.115, paragraphs (B)(4)(a), (b), and (c) shall be deleted, and the designation for paragraph "(5)" shall be deleted and replaced by "(4)." 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13. 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
28-36-107. Poisonous or toxic materials. 
    Chapter seven of the 2005 "Food Code," published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is adopted by reference. 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13, 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
28-36-108. Compliance and enforcement. 
    Chapter eight of the 2005 "Food Code," published by the U.S. Department Of Health and Human Services, is adopted by reference, with the following additions, deletions, and substitutions: 
(a)  Wherever the phrase "PERMIT HOLDER" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the word "LICENSEE." 
(b)  Wherever the parenthetical phrase "(TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD)" appears in this chapter, the phrase shall be deleted. 
(c)  Wherever the word "PERMIT" appears in this chapter, the word shall be deleted and replaced by the word "LICENSE." 
(d)  (1)  In subpart 8-201.11(C), the phrase "as specified under  8-302.14 (C)" shall be deleted, and "; or" shall replace the period after "Code." 
(2)  In subpart 8-201.11, the following new paragraph shall be added after paragraph (C): 
"(D) Approval of plans by the regulatory authority shall not negate the liability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of these regulations." 
(e)  Wherever the phrase "according to LAW" appears in this chapter, except in subpart 8-501.40, the phrase shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the phrase "according to K.S.A. 36-501 et seq., and amendments thereto." 
(f)  Subparts 8-203.10, 8-302.11, 8-302.14, 8-303.20 and 8-401.10 shall be deleted. 
(g)  In subpart 8-302.13(A), the phrase "or a representative thereof" shall be added after the phrase "legal ownership." 
(h)  In subpart 8-304.11(H), the phrase "and 5 years pass after the REGULATORY AUTHORITY adopts this Code" shall be deleted and shall be replaced by "or by September 1, 2009." 
(i)  Wherever the words "PERMIT HOLDER'S" appears in this chapter, the words shall be deleted and shall be replaced by "LICENSEE'S." 
(j)  In subpart 8-304.20, the paragraph shall end with a period added after the words "operation to another," and the rest of the paragraph shall be deleted. 
(k)  In subpart 8-401.20, the phrase "Within the parameters specified in  8401.10" shall be deleted. 
(l)  In subpart 8-402.20, paragraph (A)(3) shall be deleted. 
(m)  Subpart 8-402.40 shall be deleted. 
(n)  In subpart 8-403.10(A), the phrase "and mailing" shall be deleted, and the phrase "as specified under paragraph 8-302.14(C)" shall be deleted. 
(o)  Subpart 8-501.10 shall be deleted. 
(p)  (1)  In subpart 8-501.20(A), the words "to specific areas and tasks in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that present no risk of transmitting the disease" shall be added after the words "CONDTIONAL EMPLOYEE." 
(2)  In subpart 8-501.20(B), the words "from a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT" shall be added after "CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE." 
(3)  In subpart 8-501.20, paragraph (C) shall be deleted and shall be replaced by the following: "(C) Immediate closing of the food establishment, until the regulatory authority determines that no further danger of disease transmission exists." 
(q)  In subpart 8-501.30, the phrase "as specified in  8-501.10" shall be deleted. 
(Authorized by K.S.A. 36-507; implementing K.S.A. 2006 Supp. 36-503 and K.S.A. 36-507; effective Aug. 13 1999; amended Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
28-36-109. Mobile food establishments, pushcarts, and temporary food establishments. 
    In addition to meeting the requirements of K.A.R. 28-36-101 through K.A.R. 28-36-108, each licensee of a mobile food establishment or a pushcart and each operator of a temporary food establishment shall meet the department's requirements in"chapter 9: mobile food establishments, pushcarts, and temporary food establishments," dated June 2007 and hereby adopted by reference. 
(Authorized by and implementing K.S.A. 36-507; effective Nov. 30, 2007.) 
  
(LAST REVIEWED AND UPDATED JULY 2008) 
APPENDIX B - 2005 KANSAS FOOD CODE 
Preface 
    The Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) is pleased to announce the publication of the 2005 Kansas Food Code. The Kansas Food Code is based largely upon the United States Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) 2005 Model Food Code. 
    The Secretary's food Code Review Committee was made up of state and local health department officials, academia, consumers, professional groups, industry representatives and other interested parties such as the Kansas Restaurant and Hospitality Association and the Kansas Food Dealers Association. Many individuals devoted considerable time and effort in addressing concerns and developing recommendations that are now reflected in this newly adopted food code. It is only through the dedicated efforts and contributions of these experienced professionals that a scientifically sound, well- focused and up to date code is possible. The results of their combined efforts are food safety regulations that are based upon the most current science and the best strategies to ensure a continued safe food supply for Kansas citizens. 
    These food safety regulations govern licensed food service establishments, retail food stores and food vending companies. The provisions of the Kansas Food Code provide a system of pro-active preventive safeguards designed to minimize the hazards that lead to foodborne illness thus ensuring safe food and acceptable levels of sanitation in food establishments. 
    The Food Code presents requirements by principle rather than by subject. 
    For example, equipment requirements are presented under headings such as Materials, Design and Construction, Numbers and Capacities, Location and Installation, and Maintenance and Operation rather than by refrigerators, sinks, and thermometers. Where there are special requirements for certain equipment, the requirement is delineated under the appropriate principle (e.g., Design and Construction) and listed separately in the index. 
    Portions of some sections are written in italics. These provisions are not requirements, but are provided to convey relevant information about specific exceptions and alternative means for compliance. Italics are pursuant to a preceding provision that states a requirement, to which the italics offer an exception or another possibility. Italicized sections usually involve the words "except for," "may," "need not" or "does not apply." 
    Requirements contained in the Food Code are presented as being in one of 3 categories of importance: critical; "swing" (i.e., those that may or may not be critical depending on the circumstances); and noncritical. An asterisk* after a tagline (which is the language immediately following a section number that introduces the subject of the section) indicates that all of the provisions within that section are critical unless otherwise indicated, follows: 
Any provisions that are "swing" items are followed by the bold, superscripted letter S and any provisions that are noncritical are followed by the bold, superscripted letter N . 
Any unmarked provisions within a section that has an asterisked tagline are critical. All provisions following a tagline that is not marked with an asterisk are noncritical. 
Chapter 1 - Purpose and Definitions 
Parts 
1-1 TITLE, INTENT, SCOPE 
1-2 DEFINTIONS 
_____
1-1 TITLE, INTENT, SCOPE 
Subparts 
1-101 Title 
1-102 Intent 
1-103 Scope 
_____
  
Title 1-101.10 Food Code. These provisions shall be known as the Food Code, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." Intent 1-102.10 Food Safety, Illness Prevention, and Honest Presentation. The purpose of this Code is to safeguard public health and provide to CONSUMERS FOOD that is safe, unADULTERATED, and honestly presented. Scope 1-103.10 Statement. This Code establishes definitions; sets standards for management and personnel, FOOD operations, and EQUIPMENT and facilities; and provides for FOOD ESTABLISHMENT plan review, LICENSE issuance, inspection, EMPLOYEE RESTRICTION, and LICENSE suspension.  
_____
1-2 - DEFINITIONS 
Subpart 
1-201 Applicability and Terms Defined 
_____
  
Applicability and Terms Defined 1-201.10 Statement of Application and Listing of Terms. (A) The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and application of this Code. (B) Terms Defined. As used in this Code, each of the terms listed in  1-201.10(B) shall have the meaning stated below.   Accredited Program. (1) "Accredited program" means a food protection manager certification program that has been evaluated and listed by an accrediting agency as conforming to national standards for organizations that certify individuals. (2) "Accredited program" refers to the certification process and is a designation based upon an independent evaluation of factors such as the sponsor's mission; organizational structure; staff resources; revenue sources; policies; public information regarding program scope, eligibility requirements, re-certification, discipline and grievance procedures; and test development and administration. (3) "Accredited program" does not refer to training functions or educational programs. Additive. (1) "Food additive" has the meaning stated in K.S.A. 65-656, and amendments thereto. (2) "Color additive" has the meaning stated in K.S.A. 65-656, and amendments thereto. "Adulterated" has the meaning of "food deemed adulterated" in K.S.A. 65-664, and amendments thereto. "Approved" means acceptable to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY based on a determination of conformity with principles, practices, and generally recognized standards that protect public health. Asymptomatic. (1) "Asymptomatic" means without obvious symptoms; not showing or producing indications of a disease or other medical condition, such as an individual infected with a pathogen but not exhibiting or producing any signs or symptoms of vomiting, diarrhea, or jaundice. (2) Asymptomatic includes not showing symptoms because symptoms have resolved or subsided, or because symptoms never manifested. "a w " means water activity which is a measure of the free moisture in a FOOD, is the quotient of the water vapor pressure of the substance divided by the vapor pressure of pure water at the same temperature, and is indicated by the symbol a w . "Balut" means an embryo inside a fertile EGG that has been incubated for a period sufficient for the embryo to reach a specific stage of development after which it is removed from incubation before hatching. "Beverage" means a liquid for drinking, including water. "Bottled drinking water" means water that is SEALED in bottles, packages, or other containers and offered for sale for human consumption, including bottled mineral water. "Casing" means a tubular container for sausage products made of either natural or artificial (synthetic) material. "Certification number" means a unique combination of letters and numbers assigned by a SHELLFISH CONTROL AUTHORITY to a MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH dealer according to the provisions of the National Shellfish Sanitation Program. "CFR" means CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS. Citations in this Code to the CFR refer sequentially to the Title, Part, and Section numbers, such as 40 CFR 180.194 refers to Title 40, Part 180, Section 194. CIP. (1) "CIP" means cleaned in place by the circulation or flowing by mechanical means through a piping system of a detergent solution, water rinse, and SANITIZING solution onto or over EQUIPMENT surfaces that require cleaning, such as the method used, in part, to clean and SANITIZE a frozen dessert machine. (2) "CIP"does not include the cleaning of EQUIPMENT such as band saws, slicers, or mixers that are subjected to in-place manual cleaning without the use of a CIP system. "Commingle" means: (1) To combine SHELLSTOCK harvested on different days or from different growing areas as identified on the tag or label, or (2) To combine SHUCKED SHELLFISH from containers with different container codes or different shucking dates. Comminuted. (1) "Comminuted" means reduced in size by methods including chopping, flaking, grinding, or mincing. (2) "Comminuted" includes FISH or MEAT products that are reduced in size and restructured or reformulated such as gefilte FISH, gyros, ground beef, and sausage; and a mixture of 2 or more types of MEAT that have been reduced in size and combined, such as sausages made from 2 or more MEATS. "Commissary" means a catering establishment, restaurant, or similar place that is necessary for the safe operation of a MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or PUSHCART in which food, containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, or stored. "Conditional employee" means a potential FOOD EMPLOYEE to whom a job offer is made, conditional on responses to subsequent medical questions or examinations designed to identify potential FOOD EMPLOYEES who may be suffering from a disease that can be transmitted through FOOD and done in compliance with Title 1 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. "Confirmed disease outbreak" means a FOODBORNE DISEASE OUTBREAK in which laboratory analysis of appropriate specimens identifies a causative agent and epidemiological analysis implicates the FOOD as the source of the illness. "Consumer" means a PERSON who is a member of the public, takes possession of FOOD, is not functioning in the capacity of an operator of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or FOOD PROCESSING PLANT, and does not offer the FOOD for resale. "Corrosion-resistant material" means a material that maintains acceptable surface cleanability characteristics under prolonged influence of the FOOD to be contacted, the normal use of cleaning compounds and SANITIZING solutions, and other conditions of the use environment. "Counter-mounted equipment" means EQUIPMENT that is not portable and is designed to be mounted off the floor on a table, counter, or shelf. "Critical control point" means a point or procedure in a specific FOOD system where loss of control may result in an unacceptable health RISK. Critical Item. (1) "Critical item" means a provision of this Code, that, if in noncompliance, is more likely than other violations to contribute to FOOD contamination, illness, or environmental health HAZARD. (2) "Critical item" is an item that is denoted in this Code with an asterisk*. "Critical limit" means the maximum or minimum value to which a physical, biological, or chemical parameter must be controlled at a CRITICAL CONTROL POINT to minimize the RISK that the identified FOOD safety HAZARD may occur. "Disclosure" means a written statement that clearly identifies for consumers the animal-derived FOODS which are, or can be ordered, raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens, or items that contain an ingredient that is raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens. Drinking Water. (1) "Drinking water" means water that meets criteria as specified in 40 CFR 141 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations. (2) "Drinking water" is traditionally known as "potable water." (3) "Drinking water" includes the term "water" except where the term used connotes that the water is not potable, such as "boiler water," "mop water," "rainwater," "wastewater," and "nondrinking" water.` "Dry storage area" means a room or area designated for the storage of PACKAGED or containerized bulk FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS and dry goods such as SINGLE-SERVICE items. Easily Cleanable. (1) "Easily cleanable" means a characteristic of a surface that: (a) Allows effective removal of soil by normal cleaning methods; (b) Is dependent on the material, design, construction, and installation of the surface; and (c) Varies with the likelihood of the surface's role in introducing pathogenic or toxigenic agents or other contaminants into FOOD based on the surface's APPROVED placement, purpose, and use. (2) "Easily cleanable" includes a tiered application of the criteria that qualify the surface as EASILY CLEANABLE as specified in Subparagraph (1) of this definition to different situations in which varying degrees of cleanability are required such as: (a) The appropriateness of stainless steel for a FOOD preparation surface as opposed to the lack of need for stainless steel to be used for floors or for tables used for CONSUMER dining; or (b) The need for a different degree of cleanability for a utilitarian attachment or accessory in the kitchen as opposed to a decorative attachment or accessory in the CONSUMER dining area. "Easily movable" means: (1) Portable; mounted on casters, gliders, or rollers; or provided with a mechanical means to safely tilt a unit of EQUIPMENT for cleaning; and (2) Having no utility connection, a utility connection that disconnects quickly, or a flexible utility connection line of sufficient length to allow the EQUIPMENT to be moved for cleaning of the EQUIPMENT and adjacent area. Egg. (1) "Egg" means the shell EGG of avian species such as chicken, duck, goose, guinea, quail, RATITES or turkey. (2) "Egg" does not include: (a) A BALUT; (b) The egg of reptile species such as alligator; or (c) An EGG PRODUCT. Egg Product. (1) "Egg Product" means all, or a portion of, the contents found inside EGGS separated from the shell and pasteurized in a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT, with or without added ingredients, intended for human consumption, such as dried, frozen or liquid eggs. (2) "Egg Product" does not include FOOD which contains EGGS only in a relatively small proportion such as cake mixes. "Employee" means the LICENSEE, PERSON IN CHARGE, FOOD EMPLOYEE, PERSON having supervisory or management duties, PERSON on the payroll, family member, volunteer, PERSON performing work under contractual agreement, or other PERSON working in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. "Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli" (EHEC) means E. coli which cause hemorrhagic colitis, meaning bleeding enterically or bleeding from the intestine. The term is typically used in association with E. coli that have the capacity to produce Shiga toxins and to cause attaching and effacing lesions in the intestine. EHEC is a subset of STEC, whose members produce additional virulence factors. Infections with EHEC may be asymptomatic but are classically associated with bloody diarrhea (hemorrhagic colitis) and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). Examples of serotypes of EHEC include: E. coli O157:H7; E. coli O157:NM; E. coli O26:H11; E. coli O145:NM; E. coli O103:H2; or E. coli O111:NM. Also see SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING E. COLI . "EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Equipment. (1) "Equipment" means an article that is used in the operation of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT such as a freezer, grinder, hood, ice maker, MEAT block, mixer, oven, reach-in refrigerator, scale, sink, slicer, stove, table, TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE for ambient air, VENDING MACHINE, or WAREWASHING machine. (2) "Equipment" does not include apparatuses used for handling or storing large quantities of PACKAGED FOODS that are received from a supplier in a cased or overwrapped lot, such as hand trucks, forklifts, dollies, pallets, racks, and skids. "Exclude" means to prevent a PERSON from working as an EMPLOYEE in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or entering a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT as an EMPLOYEE. "FDA" means the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Fish. (1) "Fish" means fresh or saltwater finfish, crustaceans and other forms of aquatic life (including alligator, frog, aquatic turtle, jellyfish, sea cucumber, and sea urchin and the roe of such animals) other than birds or mammals, and all mollusks, if such animal life is intended for human consumption. (2) "Fish" includes an edible human FOOD product derived in whole or in part from FISH, including FISH that have been processed in any manner. "Food" means a raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, BEVERAGE, or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption, or chewing gum. "Foodborne disease outbreak" means the occurrence of two or more cases of a similar illness resulting from the ingestion of a common FOOD. "Food-contact surface" means: (1) A surface of EQUIPMENT or a UTENSIL with which FOOD normally comes into contact; or (2) A surface of EQUIPMENT or a UTENSIL from which FOOD may drain, drip, or splash: (a) Into a FOOD, or (b) Onto a surface normally in contact with FOOD. "Food employee" means an individual working with unPACKAGED FOOD, FOOD EQUIPMENT or UTENSILS, or FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES. Food Establishment. (1) "Food establishment" means an operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides FOOD for human consumption: (a) Such as a restaurant; satellite or catered feeding location; catering operation if the operation provides FOOD directly to a CONSUMER or to a conveyance used to transport people; market; vending location; conveyance used to transport people; institution; or FOOD bank; and (b) That relinquishes possession of FOOD to a CONSUMER directly, or indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common carriers. (2) "Food establishment" includes: (a) An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY; (b) An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off the PREMISES; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the FOOD; (c) A 'food service establishment' as defined in K.S.A. 65-601, and amendments thereto; (d) A 'food vending machine' defined in K.S.A. 36-501, and amendments thereto. (e) A 'retail food store' means any establishment or section of an establishment where food and food products are offered to the consumer and intended for off-premises consumption. The term includes delicatessens that offer prepared food in bulk quantities only. The term does not include establishments which handle only prepackaged non-potentially hazardous foods, roadside markets that offer only fresh fruits and fresh vegetables for sale, food service establishments, or food and beverage vending machines." (3) "Food establishment" does not include: (a) An establishment that offers only prePACKAGED FOODS that are not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS (TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY) FOODS; (b) A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; (c) A FOOD PROCESSING PLANT; (d) A kitchen in a private home if only FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS (TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY) FOOD, is prepared for sale or service at a function such as a religious or charitable organization's bake sale if allowed by LAW and if the CONSUMER is informed by a clearly visible placard at the sales or service location that the FOOD is prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to regulation and inspection by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY; (e) An area where FOOD that is prepared as specified in Subparagraph (3)(d) of this definition is sold or offered for human consumption; (f) A kitchen in a private home, such as a small family day-care provider; or a bed-and-breakfast operation that prepares and offers FOOD only to guests if the home is owner occupied, the number of available guest bedrooms does not exceed 4, breakfast is the only meal offered, and THE CONSUMER is informed by statements contained in published advertisements, mailed brochures, and placards posted at the registration area that the FOOD is prepared in a kitchen that is not regulated and inspected by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY; or (g) A private home that receives catered or home-delivered FOOD. Food Processing Plant. (1) "Food processing plant" means a commercial operation that manufactures, packages, labels, or stores FOOD for human consumption, and provides FOOD for sale or distribution to other business entities such as FOOD PROCESSING PLANTS or FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS and does not provide food directly to the consumer. (2) "Food processing plant" does not include a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Game Animal. (1) "Game animal" means an animal, the products of which are FOOD, that is not classified as livestock, sheep, swine, goat, horse, mule, or other equine in 9 CFR 301.2 Definitions, or as Poultry, or FISH. (2) "Game animal" includes mammals such as reindeer, elk, deer, antelope, water buffalo, bison, rabbit, squirrel, opossum, raccoon, nutria, or muskrat, and nonaquatic reptiles such as land snakes. (3) "Game animal" does not include RATITES. "General use pesticide" means a pesticide that is not classified by EPA for restricted use as specified in 40 CFR 152.175 Pesticides classified for restriced use. "Grade A standards" means the requirements of the United States Public Health Service/FDA "Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance" with which certain fluid and dry milk and milk products comply. "HACCP plan" means a written document that delineates the formal procedures for following the HAZARD Analysis and CRITICAL CONTROL POINT principles developed by The National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods. Handwashing Sink. (1) "Handwashing sink" means a lavatory, a basin or vessel for washing, a wash basin, or a PLUMBING FIXTURE especially placed for use in personal hygiene and designed for the washing of the hands. (2) "Handwashing sink" includes an automatic handwashing facility. "Hazard" means a biological, chemical, or physical property that may cause an unacceptable CONSUMER health RISK. "Health practitioner" means a physician licensed to practice medicine, or if allowed by LAW, a nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or similar medical professional. "Hermetically sealed container" means a container that is designed and intended to be secure against the entry of microorganisms and, in the case of low acid canned FOODS, to maintain the commercial sterility of its contents after processing. "Highly susceptible population" means PERSONS who are more likely than other people in the general population to experience foodborne disease because they are: (1) Immunocompromised; preschool age children, or older adults; and (2) Obtaining FOOD at a facility that provides services such as custodial care, health care, or assisted living, such as a child or adult day care center, kidney dialysis center, hospital or nursing home, or nutritional or socialization services such as a senior center. "Imminent health hazard" means a significant threat or danger to health that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury based on: (1) The number of potential injuries, and (2) The nature, severity, and duration of the anticipated injury. "Injected" means manipulating a MEAT so that infectious or toxigenic microorganisms may be introduced from its surface to its interior through tenderizing with deep penetration or injecting the MEAT such as by processes which may be referred to as "injecting," "pinning," or "stitch pumping.@ Juice. (1) "Juice" means the aqueous liquid expressed or extracted from one or more fruits or vegetables, pures of the edible portions of one or more fruits or vegetables, or any concentrates of such liquid or pure. (2) "Juice" does not include, for purposes of HACCP, liquids, pures, or concentrates that are not used as BEVERAGES or ingredients of BEVERAGES. "Kitchenware" means FOOD preparation and storage UTENSILS. "Law" means applicable local, state, and federal statutes, regulations, and ordinances. "License" means the document issued by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY that authorizes a PERSON to operate a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. "Licensee" means the entity that: (1) Is legally responsible for the operation of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT such as the owner, the owner's agent, or other PERSON; and (2) Possesses a valid LICENSE to operate a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. "Linens" means fabric items such as cloth hampers, cloth napkins, table cloths, wiping cloths, and work garments including cloth gloves. Major Food Allergen. (1) "Major food allergen" means: (a) Milk, EGG, fish (such as bass, flounder, cod, and including crustacean shellfish such as crab, lobster, or shrimp), tree nuts (such as almonds, pecans, or walnuts), wheat, peanuts, and soybeans; or (b) A FOOD ingredient that contains protein derived from a FOOD, as specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this definition. (2) "Major food allergen" does not include: (a) Any highly refined oil derived from a FOOD specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this definition and any ingredient derived from such highly refined oil; or (b) Any ingredient that is exempt under the petition or notification process specified in the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-282). "Meat" means the flesh of animals used as FOOD including the dressed flesh of cattle, swine, sheep, or goats and other edible animals, except FISH, POULTRY, and wild GAME ANIMALS as specified under Subparagraphs 3-201.17(A)(3) and (4). "mg/L" means milligrams per liter, which is the metric equivalent of parts per million (ppm). "Mobile food establishment" means a self-contained FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that is mounted on axles and wheels, is designed to be readily moveable, and remains at one physical address for not more than 17 consecutive days. "Molluscan shellfish" means any edible species of fresh or frozen oysters, clams, mussels, and scallops or edible portions thereof, except when the scallop product consists only of the shucked adductor muscle. Packaged. (1) "Packaged" means bottled, canned, cartoned, securely bagged, or securely wrapped, whether PACKAGED in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT. (2) "Packaged" does not include a wrapper, carry-out box, or other nondurable container used to containerize FOOD with the purpose of facilitating FOOD protection during service and receipt of the FOOD by the CONSUMER. "Person " has the meaning stated in K.S.A. 36-501, and amendments thereto. "Person in charge" means at the time of inspection, any individual or employee present in a food establishment who is responsible for the operation. If no designated individual or employee is the person in charge, then any employee present is the person in charge. Personal Care Items. (1) "Personal care items" means items or substances that may be poisonous, toxic, or a source of contamination and are used to maintain or enhance a PERSON'S health, hygiene, or appearance. (2) "Personal care items" include items such as medicines; first aid supplies; and other items such as cosmetics, and toiletries such as toothpaste and mouthwash. "pH" means the symbol for the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration, which is a measure of the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a solution. Values between 0 and 7 indicate acidity and values between 7 and 14 indicate alkalinity. The value for pure distilled water is 7, which is considered neutral. "Physical facilities" means the structure and interior surfaces of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT including accessories such as soap and towel dispensers and attachments such as light fixtures and heating or air conditioning system vents. "Plumbing fixture" means a receptacle or device that: (1) Is permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the PREMISES and demands a supply of water from the system; or (2) Discharges used water, waste materials, or SEWAGE directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the PREMISES. "Plumbing system" means the water supply and distribution pipes; PLUMBING FIXTURES and traps; soil, waste, and vent pipes; sanitary and storm sewers and building drains, including their respective connections, devices, and appurtenances within the PREMISES; and water-treating EQUIPMENT. "Poisonous or toxic materials" means substances that are not intended for ingestion and are included in 4 categories: (1) Cleaners and SANITIZERS, which include cleaning and SANITIZING agents and agents such as caustics, acids, drying agents, polishes, and other chemicals; (2) Pesticides, except SANITIZERS, which include substances such as insecticides and rodenticides; (3) Substances necessary for the operation and maintenance of the establishment such as nonfood grade lubricants and PERSONAL CARE ITEMS that may be deleterious to health; and (4) Substances that are not necessary for the operation and maintenance of the establishment and are on the PREMISES for retail sale, such as petroleum products and paints. Potentially Hazardous Food. (1) "Potentially hazardous food" means a FOOD that requires time/temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation. (2) "Potentially hazardous food" includes: An animal FOOD that is raw or heat-treated; a plant FOOD that is heat-treated or consists of raw seed sprouts, cut melons, raw cut tomatoes or garlic-in-oil mixtures that are not modified in a way that results in mixtures that do not support pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation; and (3) "Potentially hazardous food " does not include: (a) An air-cooled hard-boiled EGG with shell intact, or an EGG with shell intact that is not hard-boiled, but has been pasteurized to destroy all viable salmonellae; (b) A FOOD in an unopened HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER that is commercially processed to achieve and maintain commercial sterility under conditions of non-refrigerated storage and distribution; (c) A FOOD with an aW value of 0.85 or less; (d) A FOOD with a pH level of 4.6 or below when measured at 24C (75F). (e) A FOOD that does not support the growth or toxin formation of pathogenic microorganisms in accordance with one of the Subparagraphs (3)(a) - (3)(d) of this definition even though the FOOD may contain a pathogenic microorganism or chemical or physical contaminant at a level sufficient to cause illness or injury. "Poultry" means: (1) Any domesticated bird (chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, RATITES, or squabs), whether live or dead, as defined in 9 CFR 381.1 Poultry Products Inspection Regulations Definitions, Poultry; and (2) Any migratory waterfowl or game bird, pheasant, partridge, quail, grouse, or pigeon, whether live or dead, as defined in 9 CFR 362.1 Voluntary Poultry Inspection Regulations, Definitions. "Premises" means: (1) The PHYSICAL FACILITY, its contents, and the contiguous land or property under the control of the LICENSEE; or (2) The PHYSICAL FACILITY, its contents, and the land or property not described in Subparagraph (1) of this definition if its facilities and contents are under the control of the LICENSEE and may impact FOOD ESTABLISHMENT personnel, facilities, or operations, and a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT is only one component of a larger operation such as a health care facility, hotel, motel, school, recreational camp, or prison. "Primal cut" means a basic major cut into which carcasses and sides of MEAT are separated, such as a beef round, pork loin, lamb flank, or veal breast. "Public water system" has the meaning of "public water supply system" in K.S.A. 65-162, and amendments thereto. "Pushcart" means a manually propelled vehicle limited to serving non-potentially hazardous foods or POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS that require only limited preparation or prepackaged food maintained at proper temperatures. "Ratite" means a flightless bird such as an emu, ostrich, or rhea. Ready-to-Eat Food. (1) "Ready-to-eat food" means FOOD that: (a) Is in a form that is edible without additional preparation to achieve FOOD safety, as specified under one of the following:  3-401.11(A) or (B),  3-401.12, or  3-402.11, or as specified in  3-401.11(C); or (b) Is a raw or partially cooked animal FOOD and the consumer is advised as specified in Subparagraphs 3-401.11(D)(1) and (2); or (c) Is prepared in accordance with a variance that is granted as specified in Subparagraphs 3-401.11(D) and (3); and (d) May receive additional preparation for palatability or aesthetic, epicurean, gastronomic, or culinary purposes. (2) "Ready-to-eat food" includes: (a) Raw animal FOOD that is cooked as specified under  3-401.11 or 3-401.12, or frozen as specified under  3-402.11; (b) Raw fruits and vegetables; (c) Fruits and vegetables that are cooked for hot holding, as specified under  3-401.13; (d) All POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is cooked to the temperature and time required for the specific FOOD under Subpart 3-401 and cooled as specified under  3-501.14; (e) Plant FOOD for which further washing, cooking, or other processing is not required for FOOD safety, and from which rinds, peels, husks, or shells, if naturally present are removed; (f) Substances derived from plants such as spices, seasonings, and sugar; (g) A bakery item such as bread, cakes, pies, fillings, or icing for which further cooking is not required for FOOD safety; (h) The following products that are produced in accordance with USDA guidelines and that have received a lethality treatment for pathogens: dry, fermented sausages, such as dry salami or pepperoni; salt-cured MEAT and POULTRY products, such as prosciutto ham, country cured ham, and Parma ham; and dried MEAT and POULTRY products, such as jerky or beef sticks; and (i) FOODS manufactured as specified in 21 CFR Part 113, Thermally Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in Hermetically Sealed Containers. Reduced Oxygen Packaging. (1) "Reduced oxygen packaging" means: (a) The reduction of the amount of oxygen in a PACKAGE by removing oxygen; displacing oxygen and replacing it with another gas or combination of gases; or otherwise controlling the oxygen content to a level below that normally found in the atmosphere (approximately 21% at sea level); and (b) A process as specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this definition that involves a FOOD for which the HAZARDS Clostridium botulinum or Listeria monocytogenes require control in the final PACKAGED form. (2) "Reduced oxygen packaging" includes: (a) Vacuum PACKAGING, in which air is removed from a PACKAGE of FOOD and the PACKAGE is HERMETICALLY SEALED so that a vacuum remains inside the PACKAGE; (b) Modified atmosphere PACKAGING, in which the atmosphere of a PACKAGE of FOOD is modified so that its composition is different from air but the atmosphere may change over time due to the permeability of the PACKAGING material or the respiration of the FOOD. Modified atmosphere PACKAGING includes reduction in the proportion of oxygen, total replacement of oxygen, or an increase in the proportion of other gases such as carbon dioxide or nitrogen; (c) Controlled atmosphere PACKAGING, in which the atmosphere of a PACKAGE of FOOD is modified so that until the PACKAGE is opened, its composition is different from air, and continuous control of that atmosphere is maintained, such as by using oxygen scavengers or a combination of total replacement of oxygen, nonrespiring FOOD, and impermeable PACKAGING material; (d) Cook chill PACKAGING, in which cooked FOOD is hot filled into impermeable bags which have the air expelled and are then sealed or crimped closed. The bagged FOOD is rapidly chilled and refrigerated at temperatures that inhibit the growth of psychotrophic pathogens; or (e) Sous vide PACKAGING, in which raw or partially cooked FOOD is placed in a hermetically sealed, impermeable bag, cooked in the bag, rapidly chilled, and refrigerated at temperatures that inhibit the growth of psychotrophic pathogens. "Refuse" has the meaning of "solid waste" in K.S.A. 65-3402, and amendments thereto. "Regulatory authority" means the state enforcement body or authorized representative having jurisdiction over the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. "Reminder" means a written statement concerning the health RISK of consuming animal FOODS raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens. "Re-service" means the transfer of FOOD that is unused and returned by a CONSUMER after being served or sold and in the possession of the CONSUMER, to another PERSON. "Restrict" means to limit the activities of a FOOD EMPLOYEE so that there is no RISK of transmitting a disease that is transmissible through FOOD and the FOOD EMPLOYEE does not work with exposed FOOD, clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, or unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE or SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. "Restricted egg" means any check, dirty EGG, incubator reject, inedible, leaker, or loss as defined in 9 CFR 590. "Restricted use pesticide" means a pesticide product that contains the active ingredients specified in 40 CFR 152.175 Pesticides classified for restricted use, and that is limited to use by or under the direct supervision of a certified applicator. "Risk" means the likelihood that an adverse health effect will occur within a population as a result of a HAZARD in a FOOD. "Safe material" means: (1) An article manufactured from or composed of materials that may not reasonably be expected to result, directly or indirectly, in their becoming a component or otherwise affecting the characteristics of any FOOD; (2) An additive that is used as specified in ' 409 or 706 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; or (3) Other materials that are not ADDITIVES and that are used in conformity with applicable regulations of the Food and Drug Administration. "Sanitization" means the application of cumulative heat or chemicals on cleaned FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES that, when evaluated for efficacy, is sufficient to yield a reduction of 5 logs, which is equal to a 99.999% reduction, of representative disease microorganisms of public health importance. "Sealed" means free of cracks or other openings that allow the entry or passage of moisture. "Service animal" means an animal such as a guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability. "Servicing area" means an operating base location to which a mobile FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or transportation vehicle returns regularly for such things as vehicle and equipment cleaning, discharging liquid or solid wastes, refilling water tanks and ice bins, and boarding FOOD. "Sewage" has the meaning stated in K.S.A. 65-164, and amendments thereto. "Shellfish control authority" means a state, federal, foreign, tribal, or other government entity legally responsible for administering a program that includes certification of MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH harvesters and dealers for interstate commerce. "Shellstock" means raw, in-shell MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH. "Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli" (STEC) means any E. coli capable of producing Shiga toxins (also called verocytotoxins or "Shiga-like" toxins). Examples of serotypes of STEC include both O157 and non-O157 E. coli . Also see ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC ESCHERICHIA COLI . "Shucked shellfish" means MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH that have one or both shells removed. "Single-service articles" means TABLEWARE, carry-out UTENSILS, and other items such as bags, containers, placemats, stirrers, straws, toothpicks, and wrappers that are designed and constructed for one time, one PERSON use after which they are intended for discard. Single-Use Articles. (1) "Single-use articles" means UTENSILS and bulk FOOD containers designed and constructed to be used once and discarded. (2) "Single-use articles" includes items such as wax paper, butcher paper, plastic wrap, formed aluminum FOOD containers, jars, plastic tubs or buckets, bread wrappers, pickle barrels, ketchup bottles, and number 10 cans which do not meet the materials, durability, strength, and cleanability specifications under '' 4-101.11, 4-201.11, and 4-202.11 for multiuse UTENSILS. "Slacking" means the process of moderating the temperature of a FOOD such as allowing a FOOD to gradually increase from a temperature of -23C (-10) to -4C (25) in preparation for deep-fat frying or to facilitate even heat penetration during the cooking of previously block-frozen FOOD such as shrimp. "Smooth" means: (1) A FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE having a surface free of pits and inclusions with a cleanability equal to or exceeding that of (100 grit) number 3 stainless steel; (2) A nonFOOD-CONTACT SURFACE of EQUIPMENT having a surface equal to that of commercial grade hot-rolled steel free of visible scale; and (3) A floor, wall, or ceiling having an even or level surface with no roughness or projections that render it difficult to clean. "Tableware" means eating, drinking, and serving UTENSILS for table use such as flatware including forks, knives, and spoons; hollowware including bowls, cups, serving dishes, and tumblers; and plates. "Temperature measuring device" means a thermometer, thermocouple, thermistor, or other device that indicates the temperature of FOOD, air, or water. "Temporary food establishment" means a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. "USDA" means the U.S. Department of Agriculture. "Utensil" means a FOOD-CONTACT implement or container used in the storage, preparation, transportation, dispensing, sale, or service of FOOD, such as KITCHENWARE or TABLEWARE that is multiuse, SINGLE-SERVICE, or SINGLE-USE; gloves used in contact with FOOD; temperature sensing probes of FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES; and probe-type price or identification tags used in contact with FOOD. "Variance" means a written document issued by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY that authorizes a modification or waiver of one or more requirements of this Code if, in the opinion of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, a health HAZARD or nuisance will not result from the modification or waiver. "Vending machine" has the meaning of "food vending machine" in K.S.A. 36-501, and amendments thereto. "Vending machine location" means the room, enclosure, space, or area where one or more FOOD VENDING MACHINES are installed and operated and includes the storage areas and areas on the PREMISES that are used to service and maintain the FOOD VENDING MACHINES. "Warewashing" means the cleaning and SANITIZING of UTENSILS and FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT. "Whole-muscle, intact beef" means whole muscle beef that is not injected, mechanically tenderized, reconstructed, or scored and marinated, from which beef steaks may be cut. As used in this article, the superscript "*" that follows the title of a section shall designate the requirements in that section as being of critical importance, unless otherwise specified within that section as follows: (1) The superscript " N " shall designate a requirement as being of noncritical importance. (2) The superscript " S " may designate a requirement as being of noncritical importance. The term "swing" is used to describe this type of requirement.  
Chapter 2 - Management and Personnel 
Parts 
2-1 SUPERVISION 
2-2 EMPLOYEE HEALTH 
2-3 PERSONAL CLEANLINESS 
2-4 HYGIENIC PRACTICES 
_____
2-1 SUPERVISION 
Subparts 
2-101 Responsibility 
2-102 Knowledge 
2-103 Duties 
_____
  
Responsibility 2-101.11 Assignment.* The LICENSEE shall be the PERSON IN CHARGE or shall designate a PERSON IN CHARGE and shall ensure that a PERSON IN CHARGE is present at the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT during all hours of operation. Knowledge 2-102.11 Demonstration.* Based on the RISKS of foodborne illness inherent to the FOOD operation, during inspections and upon request the PERSON IN CHARGE shall demonstrate to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY knowledge of foodborne disease prevention, application of the HAZARD Analysis and CRITICAL CONTROL POINT principles, and the requirements of this Code. The PERSON IN CHARGE shall demonstrate this knowledge by: (A) Being a certified FOOD protection manager who has shown proficiency of required information through passing a test that is part of an ACCREDITED OR APPROVED PROGRAM; or (B) Responding correctly to the inspector's questions as they relate to the specific FOOD operation. The areas of knowledge include: (1) Describing the relationship between the prevention of foodborne disease and the personal hygiene of a FOOD EMPLOYEE; (2) Explaining the responsibility of the PERSON IN CHARGE for preventing the transmission of foodborne disease by a FOOD EMPLOYEE who has a disease or medical condition that may cause foodborne disease; (3) Describing the symptoms associated with the diseases that are transmissible through FOOD; (4) Explaining the significance of the relationship between maintaining the time and temperature of POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD and the prevention of foodborne illness; (5) Explaining the HAZARDS involved in the consumption of raw or undercooked MEAT, POULTRY, EGGS, and FISH; (6) Stating the required FOOD temperatures and times for safe cooking of POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD including MEAT, POULTRY, EGGS, and FISH; (7) Stating the required temperatures and times for the safe refrigerated storage, hot holding, cooling, and reheating of POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD; (8) Describing the relationship between the prevention of foodborne illness and the management and control of the following: (a) Cross contamination, (b) Bare hand contact with READY-TO-EAT FOODS, (c) Handwashing, and (d) Maintaining the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT in a clean condition and in good repair; (9) Describing FOODS identified as MAJOR FOOD ALLERGENS that could cause an allergic reaction in a sensitive individual. (10) Explaining the relationship between FOOD safety and providing EQUIPMENT that is: (a) Sufficient in number and capacity, and (b) Properly designed, constructed, located, installed, operated, maintained, and cleaned; (11) Explaining correct procedures for cleaning and SANITIZING UTENSILS and FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT; (12) Identifying the source of water used and measures taken to ensure that it remains protected from contamination such as providing protection from backflow and precluding the creation of cross connections; (13) Identifying POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and the procedures necessary to ensure that they are safely stored, dispensed, used, and disposed of according to LAW; (14) Identifying CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS in the operation from purchasing through sale or service that when not controlled may contribute to the transmission of foodborne illness and explaining steps taken to ensure that the points are controlled in accordance with the requirements of this Code; (15) Explaining the details of how the PERSON IN CHARGE and FOOD EMPLOYEES comply with the HACCP PLAN if a plan is required by the LAW, this Code, or an agreement between the REGULATORY AUTHORITY and the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; (16) Explaining the responsibilities, rights, and authorities assigned by this Code to the: (a) FOOD EMPLOYEE, (b) CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE, (c) PERSON IN CHARGE, (d) REGULATORY AUTHORITY; and (17) Explaining how the PERSON IN CHARGE, FOOD EMPLOYEES, and CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEES comply with reporting responsibilities and EXCLUSION or RESTRICTION of FOOD EMPLOYEES. 2-102.20 Food Protection Manager Certification. A PERSON IN CHARGE who demonstrates knowledge by being a FOOD protection manager that is certified by a FOOD protection manager certification program that is evaluated and listed by a Conference for Food Protection-recognized accrediting agency as conforming to the Conference for Food Protection Standards for Accreditation of Food Protection Manager Certification Programs is deemed to comply with  2-102.11(A). Duties 2-103.11 Person in Charge. The PERSON IN CHARGE shall ensure that: (A) FOOD ESTABLISHMENT operations are not conducted in a private home or in a room used as living or sleeping quarters as specified under '6-202.111; (B) PERSONS unnecessary to the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT operation are not allowed in the FOOD preparation, FOOD storage, or WAREWASHING areas, except that brief visits and tours may be authorized by the PERSON IN CHARGE if steps are taken to ensure that exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES are protected from contamination; (C) EMPLOYEES and other PERSONS such as delivery and maintenance PERSONS and pesticide applicators entering the FOOD preparation, FOOD storage, and WAREWASHING areas comply with this Code; (D) EMPLOYEES are effectively cleaning their hands, by routinely monitoring the EMPLOYEES' handwashing; (E) EMPLOYEES are visibly observing FOODS as they are received to determine that they are from APPROVED sources, delivered at the required temperatures, protected from contamination, unadulterated, and accurately presented, by routinely monitoring the EMPLOYEES' observations and periodically evaluating FOODS upon their receipt; (F) EMPLOYEES are properly cooking POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD, being particularly careful in cooking those FOODS known to cause severe foodborne illness and death, such as EGGS and COMMINUTED MEATS, through daily oversight of the EMPLOYEES' routine monitoring of the cooking temperatures using appropriate temperature measuring devices properly scaled and calibrated as specified under  4-203.11 and  4-502.11(B); (G) EMPLOYEES are using proper methods to rapidly cool POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS that are not held hot or are not for consumption within 4 hours, through daily oversight of the EMPLOYEES' routine monitoring of FOOD temperatures during cooling; (H) CONSUMERS who order raw or partially cooked READY-TO-EAT FOODS of animal origin are informed as specified under  3-603.11 that the FOOD is not cooked sufficiently to ensure its safety; (I) EMPLOYEES are properly SANITIZING cleaned multiuse EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS before they are reused, through routine monitoring of solution temperature and exposure time for hot water SANITIZING, and chemical concentration, pH, temperature, and exposure time for chemical SANITIZING; (J) CONSUMERS are notified that clean TABLEWARE is to be used when they return to self-service areas such as salad bars and buffets as specified under  3-304.16; (K) Except when APPROVAL is obtained from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY as specified in  3-301.11(D), EMPLOYEES are preventing cross-contamination of READY-TO-EAT FOOD with bare hands by properly using suitable UTENSILS such as deli tissue, spatulas, tongs, single-use gloves, or dispensing EQUIPMENT; (L) EMPLOYEES are properly trained in FOOD safety as it relates to their assigned duties; and (M) FOOD EMPLOYEES and CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEES are informed of their responsibility to report in accordance with LAW, to the PERSON IN CHARGE, information about their health and activities as they relate to diseases that are transmissible through FOOD, as specified under  2-201.11(A).  
_____
2-2 - EMPLOYEE HEALTH 
Subpart 
2-201 Responsibilities and Reporting Symptoms and Diagnosis 
_____
  
Responsibilities and Reporting Symptoms and Diagnosis 2-201.11 Responsibility of Licensee, Person in Charge, and Conditional Employees.* (A) The LICENSEE shall require FOOD EMPLOYEES and CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEES to report to the PERSON IN CHARGE information about their health and activities as they relate to diseases that are transmissible through FOOD. A FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE shall report the information in a manner that allows the PERSON IN CHARGE to reduce the RISK of foodborne disease transmission, including providing necessary additional information, such as the date of onset of symptoms and an illness, or of a diagnosis without symptoms, if the FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE: reportable symptoms (1) Has any of the following symptoms: (a) Vomiting, (b) Diarrhea, (c) Jaundice, (d) Sore throat with fever, or (e) A lesion containing pus such as a boil or infected wound that is open or draining and is: (i) On the hands or wrists, unless an impermeable cover such as a finger cot or stall protects the lesion and a SINGLE-USE glove is worn over the impermeable cover, (ii) On exposed portions of the arms, unless the lesion is protected by an impermeable cover, or (iii) On other parts of the body, unless the lesion is covered by a dry, durable, tight-fitting bandage; reportable
diagnosis (2) Has an illness diagnosed by a HEALTH PRACTITIONER due to: (a) Norovirus, (b) Hepatitis A virus, (c) Shigella spp., (d) ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING ESCHERICHIA COLI, or (e) Salmonella Typhi; reportable
past illness (3) Had a previous illness, diagnosed by a HEALTH PRACTITIONER, within the past 3 months due to Salmonella Typhi, without having received antibiotic therapy, as determined by a HEALTH PRACTITIONER; reportable
history of exposure (4) Has been exposed to, or is the suspected source of, a FOODBORNE DISEASE OUTBREAK, because the FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE consumed or prepared FOOD implicated in the outbreak, or consumed FOOD at an event prepared by a PERSON who is infected or ill with: (a) Norovirus within the past 48 hours of the last exposure, (b) ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING ESCHERICHIA COLI, or Shigella spp. within the past 3 days of the last exposure, (c) Salmonella Typhi within the past 14 days of the last exposure, or (d) Hepatitis A virus within the past 30 days of the last exposure; or reportable
history of exposure (5) Has been exposed by attending or working in a setting where there is a FOODBORNE DISEASE OUTBREAK, or living in the same household as, and has knowledge about, an individual who works or attends a setting where there is a FOODBORNE DISEASE OUTBREAK, or living in the same household as, and has knowledge about, an individual diagnosed with an illness caused by: (a) Norovirus within the past 48 hours of the last exposure, (b) ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING ESCHERICHIA COLI, or Shigella spp. within the past 3 days of the last exposure, (c) Salmonella Typhi within the past 14 days of the last exposure, or (d) Hepatitis A virus within the past 30 days of the last exposure. responsibility of
person in charge to
notify the regulatory
authority (B) The PERSON IN CHARGE shall notify the REGULATORY AUTHORITY when a FOOD EMPLOYEE is: (1) Jaundiced, or (2) Diagnosed with an illness due to a pathogen as specified under Subparagraphs (A)(2)(a)-(e) of this section. responsibility of the
person in charge to
prohibit a conditional
employee from
becoming a food
employee (C) The PERSON IN CHARGE shall ensure that a CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE: (1) Who exhibits or reports a symptom, or who reports a diagnosed illness as specified under Subparagraphs (A)(1)-(3) of this section, is prohibited from becoming a FOOD EMPLOYEE until the CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE meets the criteria for the specific symptoms or diagnosed illness as specified under  2-201.13; and (2) Who will work as a FOOD EMPLOYEE in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that serves a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION and reports a history of exposure as specified under Subparagraphs (A)(4)-(5), is prohibited from becoming a FOOD EMPLOYEE until the CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE meets the criteria as specified under  2-201.13(I). responsibility of the person in charge to exclude or restrict (D) The PERSON IN CHARGE shall ensure that a FOOD EMPLOYEE who exhibits or reports a symptom, or who reports a diagnosed illness or a history of exposure as specified under Subparagraphs (A)(1)-(5) of this section is: (1) EXCLUDED as specified under  2-201.12 (A)-(C), and Subparagraphs (D)(1), (E)(1), (F)(1), or (G)(1) and in compliance with the provisions specified under  2-201.13(A)-(G); or (2) RESTRICTED as specified under Subparagraphs 2-201.12 (D)(2), (E)(2), (F)(2), (G)(2), or  2-201.12(H) or (I) and in compliance with the provisions specified under  2-201.13(D)-(I). responsibility of food employees and conditional employees to report (E) A FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE shall report to the PERSON IN CHARGE the information as specified under  (A) of this section. responsibility of food employees to comply (F) A FOOD EMPLOYEE shall: (1) Comply with an EXCLUSION as specified under  2-201.12(A) - (C) and Subparagraphs 2-201.12(D)(1), (E)(1), (F)(1), or (G)(1) and with the provisions specified under  2-201.13(A)-(G); or (2) Comply with a RESTRICTION as specified under Subparagraphs 2-201.12(D)(2), (E)(2), (F)(2), (G)(2), or  2-201.12 (H) or (I) and comply with the provisions specified under  2-201.13(D)-(I). conditions of exclusion and restriction 2-201.12 Exclusions and Restrictions.* The PERSON IN CHARGE shall EXCLUDE or RESTRICT a FOOD EMPLOYEE from a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT in accordance with the following: symptomatic with vomiting or diarrhea (A) Except when the symptom is from a noninfectious condition, EXCLUDE a FOOD EMPLOYEE if the FOOD EMPLOYEE is: (1) Symptomatic with vomiting or diarrhea; or (2) Symptomatic with vomiting or diarrhea and diagnosed with an infection from Norovirus, Shigella spp., or ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING E. COLI. jaundiced or diagnosed with hepatitis A infection (B) EXCLUDE a FOOD EMPLOYEE who is: (1) Jaundiced and the onset of jaundice occurred within the last 7 calendar days, unless the FOOD EMPLOYEE provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER specifying that the jaundice is not caused by hepatitis A virus or other fecal-orally transmitted infection; (2) Diagnosed with an infection from hepatitis A virus within 14 calendar days from the onset of any illness symptoms, or within 7 calendar days of the onset of jaundice; or (3) Diagnosed with an infection from hepatitis A virus without developing symptoms. diagnosed or reported previous infection due to S. Typhi (C) EXCLUDE a FOOD EMPLOYEE who is diagnosed with an infection from Salmonella Typhi, or reports a previous infection with Salmonella Typhi within the past 3 months as specified under Subparagraph 2-201.11(A)(3). diagnosed with an asymptomatic infection from Norovirus (D) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE is diagnosed with an infection from Norovirus and is ASYMPTOMATIC: (1) EXCLUDE the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION; or (2) RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT not serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION. diagnosed with Shigella spp. infection and asymptomatic (E) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE is diagnosed with an infection from Shigella spp. and is ASYMPTOMATIC: (1) EXCLUDE the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION; or (2) RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT not serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION. diagnosed with EHEC or STEC and asymptomatic (F) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE is diagnosed with an infection from ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING E. COLI, and is ASYMPTOMATIC: (1) EXCLUDE the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION; or (2) RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT not serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION. symptomatic with sore throat with fever (G) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE is ill with symptoms of acute onset of sore throat with fever: (1) EXCLUDE the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION; or (2) RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT not serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION. symptomatic with uncovered infected wound or pustular boil (H) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE is infected with a skin lesion containing pus such as a boil or infected wound that is open or draining and not properly covered as specified under Subparagraph 2-201.11(A)(1)(e), RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE. exposed to foodborne pathogen and works in food establishment serving HSP (I) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE is exposed to a foodborne pathogen as specified under Subparagraphs 2-201.11(A)(4) or (5), RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE who works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION. Managing Exclusions and Restrictions 2-201.13 Removal, Adjustment, or Retention of Exclusions and Restrictions. The PERSON IN CHARGE may remove, adjust, or retain the EXCLUSION or RESTRICTION of a FOOD EMPLOYEE according to the following conditions: (A) Except when a FOOD EMPLOYEE is diagnosed with an infection from hepatitis A virus or Salmonella Typhi: removing exclusion for food employee who was symptomatic and not diagnosed (1) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was EXCLUDED as specified under Subparagraph 2-201.12(A)(1) if the FOOD EMPLOYEE: (a) Is ASYMPTOMATIC for at least 24 hours; or (b) Provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER that states the symptom is from a noninfectious condition. Norovirus diagnosis (2) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE was diagnosed with an infection from Norovirus and EXCLUDED as specified under Subparagraph 2-201.12(A)(2): adjusting exclusion for food employee who was symptomatic and is now asymptomatic (a) RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE, who is ASYMPTOMATIC for at least 24 hours and works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT not serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION, until the conditions for reinstatement as specified under Subparagraphs (D)(1) or (2) of this section are met; or retaining exclusion for food employee who was asymptomatic and is now asymptomatic and works in food establishment serving HSP (b) Retain the EXCLUSION for the FOOD EMPLOYEE, who is ASYMPTOMATIC for at least 24 hours and works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that serves a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION, until the conditions for reinstatement as specified under Subparagraphs (D)(1) or (2) of this section are met. Shigella spp. diagnosis (3) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE was diagnosed with an infection from Shigella spp. and EXCLUDED as specified under Subparagraph 2-201.12(A)(2): adjusting exclusion for food employee who was symptomatic and is now asymptomatic (a) RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE, who is ASYMPTOMATIC for at least 24 hours and works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT not serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION, until the conditions for reinstatement as specified under Subparagraphs (E)(1) or (2) of this section are met; or retaining exclusion for food employee who was asymptomatic and is now asymptomatic (b) Retain the EXCLUSION for the FOOD EMPLOYEE, who is ASYMPTOMATIC for at least 24 hours and works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that serves a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION, until the conditions for reinstatement as specified under Subparagraphs (E)(1) or (2) , or (E)(1) and (3)(a) of this section are met. EHEC or STEC diagnosis (4) If a FOOD EMPLOYEE was diagnosed with an infection from ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING ESCHERICHIA COLI and EXCLUDED as specified under Subparagraph 2-201.12(A)(2): adjusting exclusion for food employee who was symptomatic and is now asymptomatic (a) RESTRICT the FOOD EMPLOYEE, who is ASYMPTOMATIC for at least 24 hours and works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT not serving a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION, until the conditions for reinstatement as specified under Subparagraphs (F)(1) or (2) of this section are met; or retaining exclusion for food employee who was symptomatic and is now asymptomatic and works in food establishment serving HSP (b) Retain the EXCLUSION for the FOOD EMPLOYEE, who is ASYMPTOMATIC for at least 24 hours and works in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that serves a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION, until the conditions for reinstatement as specified under Subparagraphs (F)(1) or (2) are met. hepatitis A virus or jaundice diagnosis - removing exclusions (B) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was EXCLUDED as specified under  2-201.12(B) if the PERSON IN CHARGE obtains APPROVAL from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY and one of the following conditions is met; (1) The FOOD EMPLOYEE has been jaundiced for more than 7 calendar days; (2) The anicteric FOOD EMPLOYEE has been symptomatic with symptoms other than jaundice for more than 14 calendar days; or (3) The FOOD EMPLOYEE provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER stating that the FOOD EMPLOYEE is free of a hepatitis A virus infection. S. Typhi diagnosis - removing exclusions (C) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was EXCLUDED as specified under  2-201.12(C) if: (1) The PERSON IN CHARGE obtains APPROVAL from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY; and (2) The FOOD EMPLOYEE provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER that states the FOOD EMPLOYEE is free from S. Typhi infection. Norovirus diagnosis - removing exclusion or restriction (D) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was EXCLUDED as specified under Subparagraphs 2-201.12(A)(2) or (D)(1) who was RESTRICTED under Subparagraph 2-201.12(D)(2) if the PERSON IN CHARGE obtains APPROVAL from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY and one of the following conditions is met: (1) The EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED FOOD EMPLOYEE provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER stating that the FOOD EMPLOYEE is free of a Norovirus infection; (2) The FOOD EMPLOYEE was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED after symptoms of vomiting or diarrhea resolved, and more than 48 hours have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE became ASYMPTOMATIC; or (3) The FOOD EMPLOYEE was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED and did not develop symptoms and more than 48 hours have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE was diagnosed. Shigella spp. diagnosis - removing exclusion or restriction (E) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was EXCLUDED as specified under Subparagraphs 2-201.12(A)(2) or (E)(1) or who was RESTRICTED under Subparagraph 2-201.12(E)(2) if the PERSON IN CHARGE obtains APPROVAL from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY and one of the following conditions is met: (1) The EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED FOOD EMPLOYEE provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER stating that the FOOD EMPLOYEE is free of a Shigella spp. infection based on test results showing 2 consecutive negative stool specimen cultures that are taken: (a) Not earlier than 48 hours after discontinuance of antibiotics, and (b) At least 24 hours apart; (2) The FOOD EMPLOYEE was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED after symptoms of vomiting or diarrhea resolved, and more than 7 calendar days have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE became ASYMPTOMATIC; or (3) The FOOD EMPLOYEE was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED and did not develop symptoms and more than 7 calendar days have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE was diagnosed. EHEC or STEC diagnosis - removing exclusion or restriction (F) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED as specified under Subparagraphs 2-201.12(A)(2) or (F)(1) or who was RESTRICTED under Subparagraph2-201.12(F)(2) if the PERSON IN CHARGE obtains APPROVAL from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY and one of the following conditions is met: (1) The EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED FOOD EMPLOYEE provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER stating that the FOOD EMPLOYEE is free of an infection from ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING ESCHERICHIA COLI based on test results that show 2 consecutive negative stool specimen cultures that are taken: (a) Not earlier than 48 hours after discontinuance of antibiotics; and (b) At least 24 hours apart; (2) The FOOD EMPLOYEE was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED after symptoms of vomiting or diarrhea resolved and more than 7 calendar days have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE became ASYMPTOMATIC; or (3) The FOOD EMPLOYEE was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED and did not develop symptomsand more than 7 days have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE was diagnosed. sore throat with fever - removing exclusion or restriction (G) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was EXCLUDED or RESTRICTED as specified under Subparagraphs 2-201.12(G)(1) or (2) if the FOOD EMPLOYEE provides to the PERSON IN CHARGE written medical documentation from a HEALTH PRACTITIONER stating that the FOOD EMPLOYEE meets one of the following conditions: (1) Has received antibiotic therapy for Streptococcus pyogenes infection for more than 24 hours; (2) Has at least one negative throat specimen culture for Streptococcus pyogenes infection; or (3) Is otherwise determined by a HEALTH PRACTITIONER to be free of a Streptococcus pyogenes infection. uncovered infected wound or pustular boil - removing restriction (H) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was RESTRICTED as specified under  2-201.12(H) if the skin, infected wound, cut, or pustular boil is properly covered with one of the following: (1) An impermeable cover such as a finger cot or stall and a single-use glove over the impermeable cover if the infected wound or pustular boil is on the hand, finger, or wrist; (2) An impermeable cover on the arm if the infected wound or pustular boil is on the arm; or (3) A dry, durable, tight-fitting bandage if the infected wound or pustular boil is on another part of the body. exposure to foodborne pathogen and works in food establishment serving HSP - removing restriction (I) Reinstate a FOOD EMPLOYEE who was RESTRICTED as specified under  2-201.12(I) and was exposed to one of the following pathogens as specified under Subparagraph2-201.11(A)(4) or (5): Norovirus (1) Norovirus and one of the following conditions is met: (a) More than 48 hours have passed since the last day the FOOD EMPLOYEE was potentially exposed; or (b) More than 48 hours have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE'S household contact became ASYMPTOMATIC. Shigella spp., EHEC, or STEC (2) Shigella spp. or ENTEROHEMORRHAGIC or SHIGA TOXIN- PRODUCING ESCHERICHIA COLI and one of the following conditions is met: (a) More than 3 calendar days have passed since the last day the FOOD EMPLOYEE was potentially exposed; or (b) More than 3 calendar days have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE'S household contact became ASYMPTOMATIC. S. Typhi (3) S. Typhi and one of the following conditions is met: (a) More than 14 calendar days have passed since the last day the FOOD EMPLOYEE was potentially exposed; or (b) More than 14 calendar days have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE'S household contact became ASYMPTOMATIC. hepatitis A (4) Hepatitis A virus and one of the following conditions is met: (a) The FOOD EMPLOYEE is immune to hepatitis A virus infection because of a prior illness from hepatitis A; (b) The FOOD EMPLOYEE is immune to hepatitis A virus infection because of vaccination against hepatitis A; (c) The FOOD EMPLOYEE is protected against to hepatitis A virus infection because of IgG administration; (d) More than 50 calendar days have passed since the last day the FOOD EMPLOYEE was potentially exposed; (e) More than 50 calendar days have passed since the FOOD EMPLOYEE'S household contact became jaundiced; or (f) The FOOD EMPLOYEE does not use an alternative procedure that allows bare hand contact with READY- TO-EAT FOOD until at least 50 days after the potential exposure, as specified in Subparagraphs (I)(4)(d) and (e) of this section, and the FOOD EMPLOYEE receives additional training about: (i) Hepatitis A symptoms and preventing the transmission of infection, (ii) Proper handwashing procedures, and (iii) Protecting READY-TO-EAT FOOD from contamination introduced by bare hand contact.  
_____
2-3 - PERSONAL CLEANLINESS 
Subparts 
2-301 Hands and Arms 
2-302 Fingernails 
2-303 Jewelry 
2-304 Outer Clothing 
_____ 
Hands and Arms 2-301.11 Clean Condition.* FOOD EMPLOYEES shall keep their hands and exposed portions of their arms clean. 2-301.12 Cleaning Procedure.* (A) Except as specified in  (D) of this section, FOOD EMPLOYEES shall clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms, including surrogate prosthetic devices for hands or arms for at least 20 seconds, using a cleaning compound in a HANDWASHING SINK that is equipped as specified under  5-202.12 and Subpart 6-301. (B) FOOD EMPLOYEES shall use the following cleaning procedure in the order stated to clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms, including surrogate prosthetic devices for hands and arms: (1) Rinse under clean, running warm water; (2) Apply an amount of cleaning compound recommended by the cleaning compound manufacturer; (3) Rub together vigorously for at least 20 seconds while: (a) Paying particular attention to removing soil from underneath the fingernails during the cleaning procedure, and (b) Creating friction on the surfaces of the hands and arms or surrogate prosthetic devices for hands and arms, finger tips, and areas between the fingers; (4) Thoroughly rinse under clean, running warm water; and (5) Immediately follow the cleaning procedure with thorough drying using a method as specified under  6-301.12. (C) TO avoid recontaminating their hands or surrogate prosthetic devices, FOOD EMPLOYEES may use disposable paper towels or similar clean barriers when touching surfaces such as manually operated faucet handles on a HANDWASHING SINK or the handle of a restroom door. (D) If APPROVED and capable of removing the types of soils encountered in the FOOD operations involved, an automatic handwashing facility may be used by FOOD EMPLOYEES to clean their hands or surrogate prosthetic devices. 2-301.13 Special Handwash Procedures.* Reserved. 2-301.14 When to Wash.* FOOD EMPLOYEES shall clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms as specified under ' 2-301.12 immediately before engaging in FOOD preparation including working with exposed FOOD, clean EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS, and unwrapped SINGLE- SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES and: (A) After touching bare human body parts other than clean hands and clean, exposed portions of arms; (B) After using the toilet room; (C) After caring for or handling SERVICE ANIMALS or aquatic animals as specified in & 2-403.11(B); (D) Except as specified in & 2-401.11(B), after coughing, sneezing, using a handkerchief or disposable tissue, using tobacco, eating, or drinking; (E) After handling soiled EQUIPMENT or UTENSILS; (F) During FOOD preparation, as often as necessary to remove soil and contamination and to prevent cross contamination when changing tasks; (G) When switching between working with raw FOOD and working with READY-TO-EAT FOOD; (H) Before donning gloves for working with FOOD; and (I) After engaging in other activities that contaminate the hands. 2-301.15 Where to Wash. FOOD EMPLOYEES shall clean their hands in a HANDWASHING SINK or APPROVED automatic handwashing facility and may not clean their hands in a sink used for FOOD preparation or WAREWASHING, or in a service sink or a curbed cleaning facility used for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. 2-301.16 Hand Antiseptics. (A) A hand antiseptic used as a topical application, a hand antiseptic solution used as a hand dip, or a hand antiseptic soap shall: (1) Comply with one of the following: (a) Be an APPROVED drug that is listed in the FDA publication Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations as an APPROVED drug based on safety and effectiveness; or (b) Have active antimicrobial ingredients that are listed in the FDA monograph for OTC Health-Care Antiseptic Drug Products as an antiseptic handwash, and (2) Comply with one of the following: (a) Have components that are exempted from the requirement of being listed in federal FOOD ADDITIVE regulations as specified in 21 CFR 170.39 - Threshold of regulation for substances used in food-contact articles; or (b) Comply with and be listed in: (i) 21 CFR 178 - Indirect Food Additives: Adjuvants, Production Aids, and Sanitizers as regulated for use as a FOOD ADDITIVE with conditions of safe use, or (ii) 21 CFR 182 - Substances Generally Recognized as Safe, 21 CFR 184 - Direct Food Substances Affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe, or 21 CFR 186 - Indirect Food Substances Affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe for use in contact with food, and (3) Be applied only to hands that are cleaned as specified under ' 2-301.12. (B) If a hand antiseptic or a hand antiseptic solution used as a hand dip does not meet the criteria specified under Subparagraph (A)(2) of this section, use shall be: (1) Followed by thorough hand rinsing in clean water before hand contact with FOOD or by the use of gloves; or (2) Limited to situations that involve no direct contact with FOOD by the bare hands. (C) A hand antiseptic solution used as a hand dip shall be maintained clean and at a strength equivalent to at least 100 MG/L chlorine. Fingernails 2-302.11 Maintenance. (A) FOOD EMPLOYEES shall keep their fingernails trimmed, filed, and maintained so the edges and surfaces are cleanable and not rough. (B) Unless wearing intact gloves in good repair, a FOOD EMPLOYEE may not wear fingernail polish or artificial fingernails when working with exposed FOOD. Jewelry 2-303.11 Prohibition. Except for a plain ring such as a wedding band, while preparing FOOD, FOOD EMPLOYEES may not wear jewelry including medical information jewelry on their arms and hands. Outer Clothing 2-304.11 Clean Condition. FOOD EMPLOYEES shall wear clean outer clothing to prevent contamination of FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES.  
_____
2-4 - HYGIENIC PRACTICES 
Subparts 
2-401 Food Contamination Prevention 
2-402 Hair Restraints 
2-403 Animals 
_____ 
Food Contamination Prevention 2-401.11 Eating, Drinking, or Using Tobacco.* (A) Except as specified in & (B) of this section, an EMPLOYEE shall eat, drink, or use any form of tobacco only in designated areas where the contamination of exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES; or other items needing protection can not result. (B) A FOOD EMPLOYEE may drink from a closed BEVERAGE container if the container is handled to prevent contamination of: (1) The EMPLOYEE'S hands; (2) The container; and (3) Exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. 2-401.12 Discharges from the Eyes, Nose, and Mouth.* FOOD EMPLOYEES experiencing persistent sneezing, coughing, or a runny nose that causes discharges from the eyes, nose, or mouth may not work with exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; or unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE or SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. Hair Restraints 2-402.11 Effectiveness. (A) Except as provided in & (B) of this section, FOOD EMPLOYEES shall wear hair restraints such as hats, hair coverings or nets, beard restraints, and clothing that covers body hair, that are designed and worn to effectively keep their hair from contacting exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. (B) This section does not apply to FOOD EMPLOYEES such as counter staff who only serve BEVERAGES and wrapped or PACKAGED FOODS, hostesses, and wait staff if they present a minimal RISK of contaminating exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. Animals 2-403.11 Handling Prohibition.* (A) Except as specified in & (B) of this section, FOOD EMPLOYEES may not care for or handle animals that may be present such as patrol dogs, SERVICE ANIMALS, or pets that are allowed as specified in Subparagraphs 6-501.115(B)(2)-(5). (B) FOOD EMPLOYEES with SERVICE ANIMALS may handle or care for their SERVICE ANIMALS and FOOD EMPLOYEES may handle or care for FISH in aquariums or MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH or crustacea in display tanks if they wash their hands as specified under ' 2-301.12 and & 2-301.14(C).  
Chapter 3 - FOOD 
3-1 CHARACTERISTICS 
3-2 SOURCES, SPECIFICATIONS, AND ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND RECORDS 
3-3 PROTECTION FROM CONTAMINATION AFTER RECEIVING 
3-4 DESTRUCTION OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN 
3-5 LIMITATION OF GROWTH OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN 
3-6 FOOD IDENTITY, PRESENTATION, AND ON-PREMISES LABELING 
3-7 CONTAMINATED FOOD 
3-8 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATIONS 
_____
3-1 - CHARACTERISTICS 
Subparts 
3-101 Condition 
_____ 
Condition 3-101.11 Safe, Unadulterated, and Honestly Presented.* FOOD shall be safe, unADULTERATED, and, as specified under  3-601.12, honestly presented.  
_____
3-2 - SOURCES, SPECIFICATIONS, AND ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND RECORDS 
Subparts 
3-201 Sources 
3-202 Specifications for Receiving 
3-203 Original Containers and Records 
_____ 
Sources 3-201.11 Compliance with Food Law.* (A) FOOD shall be obtained from sources that comply with LAW. (B) FOOD prepared in a private home may not be used or offered for human consumption in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. (C) PACKAGED FOOD shall be labeled as specified in LAW, including 21 CFR 101 FOOD Labeling, 9 CFR 317 Labeling, Marking Devices, and Containers, and 9 CFR 381 Subpart N Labeling and Containers, and as specified under  3-202.17 and 3-202.18. (D) Fish, other than MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH, that are intended for consumption in their raw form and allowed as specified in Subparagraph 3-401.11(C)(1) may be offered for sale or service if they are obtained from a supplier that freezes the FISH as specified under  3-402.11; or frozen on the PREMISES as specified under  3-402.11 and records are retained as specified under  3-402.12. (E) WHOLE-MUSCLE, INTACT BEEF steaks that are intended for consumption in an undercooked form without a CONSUMER advisory as specified in  3-401.11(C) shall be: (1) Obtained from a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT that, upon request by the purchaser, packages the steaks and labels them, to indicate that the steaks meet the definition of WHOLE-MUSCLE, INTACT BEEF, or (2) Deemed acceptable by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY based on other evidence, such as written buyer specifications or invoices, that indicates that the steaks meet the definition of WHOLE-MUSCLE, INTACT BEEF, and (3) If individually cut in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: (a) Cut from WHOLE-MUSCLE INTACT BEEF that is labeled by a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT as specified in Subparagraph (E)(1) of this section or identified as specified in Subparagraph (E)(2) of this section, (b) Prepared so they remain intact, and (c) If PACKAGED for undercooking in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, labeled as specified in Subparagraph (E)(1) of this section or identified as specified in (E)(2) of this section. (F) MEAT and POULTRY that is not a READY-TO-EAT FOOD and is in a PACKAGED form when it is offered for sale or otherwise offered for consumption, shall be labeled to include safe handling instructions as specified in LAW, including 9 CFR 317.2(l) and 9 CFR 381.125(b). (G) EGGS that have not been specifically treated to destroy all viable Salmonellae shall be labeled to include safe handling instructions as specified in LAW, including 21 CFR 101.17(h). 3-201.12 Food in a Hermetically Sealed Container.* FOOD in a HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER shall be obtained from a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT that is regulated by the FOOD regulatory agency that has jurisdiction over the plant. 3-201.13 Fluid Milk and Milk Products.* Fluid milk and milk products shall be obtained from sources that comply with GRADE A STANDARDS as specified in LAW. 3-201.14 Fish.* (A) FISH that are received for sale or service shall be: (1) Commercially and legally caught or harvested; or (2) APPROVED for sale or service. (B) MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH that are recreationally caught may not be received for sale or service. 3-201.15 Molluscan Shellfish.* (A) MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH shall be obtained from sources according to LAW and the requirements specified in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for the Control of Molluscan Shellfish. (B) MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH received in interstate commerce shall be from sources that are listed in the Interstate Certified Shellfish Shippers List. 3-201.16 Wild Mushrooms.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, mushroom species picked in the wild shall be obtained from sources where each mushroom is individually inspected and found to be safe by an APPROVED mushroom identification expert. (B) This section does not apply to: (1) Cultivated wild mushroom species that are grown, harvested, and processed in an operation that is regulated by the FOOD regulatory agency that has jurisdiction over the operation; or (2) Wild mushroom species if they are in packaged form and are the product of a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT that is regulated by the FOOD regulatory agency that has jurisdiction over the plant. 3-201.17 Game Animals.* (A) If GAME ANIMALS are received for sale or service they shall be: (1) Commercially raised for FOOD and: (a) Raised, slaughtered, and processed under a voluntary inspection program that is conducted by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction, or (b) Under a routine inspection program conducted by a regulatory agency other than the agency that has animal health jurisdiction, and (c) Raised, slaughtered, and processed according to: (i) LAWS governing MEAT and POULTRY as determined by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program, and (ii) Requirements which are developed by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program with consideration of factors such as the need for antemortem and postmortem examination by an APPROVED veterinarian or veterinarian's designee; (2) Under a voluntary inspection program administered by the USDA for game animals such as exotic animals (reindeer, elk, deer, antelope, water buffalo, or bison) that are "inspected and APPROVED" in accordance with 9 CFR 352 Exotic animals; voluntary inspection or rabbits that are "inspected and certified" in accordance with 9 CFR 354 voluntary inspection of rabbits and edible products thereof; (3) As allowed by LAW, for wild GAME ANIMALS that are live-caught: (a) Under a routine inspection program conducted by a regulatory agency such as the agency that has animal health jurisdiction, and (b) Slaughtered and processed according to: (i) LAWS governing MEAT and POULTRY as determined by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program, and (ii) Requirements which are developed by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program with consideration of factors such as the need for antemortem and postmortem examination by an APPROVED veterinarian or veterinarian's designee; or (4) As allowed by LAW, for field-dressed wild GAME ANIMALS under a routine inspection program that ensures the animals: (a) Receive a postmortem examination by an APPROVED veterinarian or veterinarian's designee, or (b) Are field-dressed and transported according to requirements specified by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program, and (c) Are processed according to LAWS governing MEAT and POULTRY as determined by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program. (B) A GAME ANIMAL may not be received for sale or service if it is a species of wildlife that is listed in 50 CFR 17 Endangered and threatened wildlife and plants. Specifications for Receiving 3-202.11 Temperature.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, refrigerated, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall be at a temperature of 5C (41) or below when received. (B) If a temperature other than 5C (41F) for a POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD is specified in LAW governing its distribution, such as LAWS governing milk and MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH, the FOOD may be received at the specified temperature. (C) Raw EGGS shall be received in refrigerated equipment that maintains an ambient air temperature of 7C (45) or less. (D) POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is cooked to a temperature and for a time specified under  3-401.11-3-401.13 and received hot shall be at a temperature of 57C (135) or above. (E) A FOOD that is labeled frozen and shipped frozen by a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT shall be received frozen. (F) Upon receipt, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall be free of evidence of previous temperature abuse. 3-202.12 Additives.* FOOD may not contain unAPPROVED FOOD ADDITIVES or ADDITIVES that exceed amounts specified in 21 CFR 170-180 relating to FOOD ADDITIVES, generally recognized as safe or prior sanctioned substances that exceed amounts specified in 21 CFR 181-186, substances that exceed amounts specified in 9 CFR Subpart C Section 424.21(b) Food ingredients and sources of radiation, or pesticide residues that exceed provisions specified in 40 CFR 180 Tolerances for pesticides chemicals in food, and exceptions. 3-202.13 Eggs.* EGGS shall be received clean and sound and may not exceed the restricted EGG tolerances for U.S. Consumer Grade B as specified in United States Standards, Grades, and Weight Classes for Shell Eggs, AMS 56.200 et seq., administered by the Agricultural Marketing Service of USDA. 3-202.14 Eggs and Milk Products, Pasteurized.* (A) EGG PRODUCTS shall be obtained pasteurized. (B) Fluid and dry milk and milk products shall: (1) Be obtained pasteurized; and (2) Comply with GRADE A STANDARDS as specified in LAW. (C) Frozen milk products, such as ice cream, shall be obtained pasteurized as specified in 21 CFR 135 - Frozen desserts. (D) Cheese shall be obtained pasteurized unless alternative procedures to pasteurization are specified in the CFR, such as 21 CFR 133 - Cheeses and related cheese products, for curing certain cheese varieties. 3-202.15 Package Integrity.* FOOD packages shall be in good condition and protect the integrity of the contents so that the FOOD is not exposed to ADULTERATION or potential contaminants. 3-202.16 Ice.* Ice for use as a FOOD or a cooling medium shall be made from DRINKING WATER. 3-202.17 Shucked Shellfish, Packaging and Identification. (A) Raw SHUCKED SHELLFISH shall be obtained in nonreturnable packages which bear a legible label that identifies the: (1) Name, address, and CERTIFICATION NUMBER of the shucker-packer or repacker of the MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH; and (2) The "sell by" date for packages with a capacity of less than 1.89 L (one-half gallon) or the date shucked for packages with a capacity of 1.89 L (one-half gallon) or more. (B) A package of raw SHUCKED SHELLFISH that does not bear a label or which bears a label which does not contain all the information as specified under  (A) of this section shall be subject to a hold order, as allowed by LAW, or seizure and destruction in accordance with 21 CFR Subpart D - Specific Administrative Decisions Regarding Interstate Shipments, Section 1240.60(d) Molluscan shellfish. 3-202.18 Shellstock Identification.* (A) SHELLSTOCK shall be obtained in containers bearing legible source identification tags or labels that are affixed by the harvester and each dealer that depurates, ships, or reships the SHELLSTOCK, as specified in the National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for the Control of Molluscan Shellfish, and that list: (1) Except as specified under  (C) of this section, on the harvester's tag or label, the following information in the following order: (a) The harvester's identification number that is assigned by the SHELLFISH CONTROL AUTHORITY, (b) The date of harvesting, (c) The most precise identification of the harvest location or aquaculture site that is practicable based on the system of harvest area designations that is in use by the SHELLFISH CONTROL AUTHORITY and including the abbreviation of the name of the state or country in which the shellfish are harvested, (d) The type and quantity of shellfish, and (e) The following statement in bold, capitalized type: "This tag is required to be attached until container is empty or retagged and thereafter kept on file for 90 days;" and (2) Except as specified in  (D) of this section, on each dealer's tag or label, the following information in the following order: (a) The dealer's name and address, and the CERTIFICATION NUMBER assigned by the SHELLFISH CONTROL AUTHORITY, (b) The original shipper's CERTIFICATION NUMBER including the abbreviation of the name of the state or country in which the shellfish are harvested, (c) The same information as specified for a harvester's tag under Subparagraphs (A)(1)(b)-(d) of this section, and (d) The following statement in bold, capitalized type: "This tag is required to be attached until container is empty and thereafter kept on file for 90 days.@ (B) A container of SHELLSTOCK that does not bear a tag or label or that bears a tag or label that does not contain all the information as specified under  (A) of this section shall be subject to a hold order, as allowed by LAW, or seizure and destruction in accordance with 21 CFR Subpart D - Specific Administrative Decisions Regarding Interstate Shipments, Section 1240.60(d). (C) If a place is provided on the harvester's tag or label for a dealer's name, address, and CERTIFICATION NUMBER, the dealer's information shall be listed first. (D) If the harvester's tag or label is designed to accommodate each dealer's identification as specified under Subparagraphs (A)(2)(a) and (b) of this section, individual dealer tags or labels need not be provided. 3-202.19 Shellstock, Condition. When received by a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, SHELLSTOCK shall be reasonably free of mud, dead shellfish, and shellfish with broken shells. Dead shellfish or SHELLSTOCK with badly broken shells shall be discarded. 3-202.110 Juice Treated. Commercially Processed Pre-PACKAGED JUICE shall: (A) Be obtained from a processor with a HACCP system as specified in 21 CFR Part 120 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control (HACCP) Systems; and (B) Be obtained pasteurized or otherwise treated to attain a 5-log reduction of the most resistant microorganism of public health significance as specified in 21 CFR Part 120.24 Process Controls. 3-203.11 Molluscan Shellfish, Original Container. (A) Except as specified in  (B) - (D) of this section, MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH may not be removed from the container in which they are received other than immediately before sale or preparation for service. Original Containers and Records (B) For display purposes, SHELLSTOCK may be removed from the container in which they are received, displayed on drained ice, or held in a display container, and a quantity specified by a CONSUMER may be removed from the display or display container and provided to the CONSUMER if: (1) The source of the SHELLSTOCK on display is identified as specified under  3-202.18 and recorded as specified under 3-203.12; and (2) The SHELLSTOCK are protected from contamination. (C) SHUCKED SHELLFISH may be removed from the container in which they were received and held in a display container from which individual servings are dispensed upon a CONSUMER'S request if: (1) The labeling information for the shellfish on display as specified under  3-202.17 is retained and correlated to the date when, or dates during which, the shellfish are sold or served; and (2) The shellfish are protected from contamination. (D) SHUCKED SHELLFISH may be removed from the container in which they were received and repacked in CONSUMER self service containers where allowed by LAW if: (1) The labeling information for the shellfish is on each CONSUMER self service container as specified under  3-202.17 and  3-602.11(A) and (B)(1)-(5); (2) The labeling information as specified under  3-202.17 is retained and correlated with the date when, or dates during which, the shellfish are sold or served; (3) The labeling information and dates specified under Subparagraph (D)(2) of this section are maintained for 90 days; and (4) The shellfish are protected from contamination. 3-203.12 Shellstock, Maintaining Identification.* (A) Except as specified under Subparagraph (B)(2) of this section, SHELLSTOCK tags shall remain attached to the container in which the SHELLSTOCK are received until the container is empty. (B) The identity of the source of SHELLSTOCK that are sold or served shall be maintained by retaining SHELLSTOCK tags or labels for 90 calendar days from the dates of harvest: (1) Using an APPROVED record keeping system that keeps the tags or labels in chronological order correlated to the date when, or dates during which, the SHELLSTOCK are sold or served; and (2) If SHELLSTOCK are removed from their tagged or labeled container: (a) Preserving source identification by using a record keeping system as specified under Subparagraph (B)(1) of this section, and (b) Ensuring that SHELLSTOCK from one tagged or labeled container are not COMMINGLED with SHELLSTOCK from another container with different CERTIFICATION NUMBERS; different harvest dates; or different growing areas as identified on the tag or label before being ordered by the CONSUMER.  
_____
3-3 - PROTECTION FROM CONTAMINATION AFTER RECEIVING 
Subparts 
3-301 Preventing Contamination by Employees 
3-302 Preventing Food and Ingredient Contamination 
3-303 Preventing Contamination from Ice Used as Coolant 
3-304 Preventing Contamination from Equipment, Utensils, and Linens 
3-305 Preventing Contamination from the Premises 
3-306 Preventing Contamination by Consumers 
3-307 Preventing Contamination from Other Sources 
_____ 
Preventing Contamination by Employees 3-301.11 Preventing Contamination from Hands.* (A) FOOD EMPLOYEES shall wash their hands as specified under 2-301.12. (B) Except when washing fruits and vegetables as specified under  3-302.15 or as specified in  (D) of this section, FOOD EMPLOYEES may not contact exposed, READY-TO-EAT FOOD with their bare hands and shall use suitable UTENSILS such as deli tissue, spatulas, tongs, single-use gloves, or dispensing EQUIPMENT. (C) FOOD EMPLOYEES shall minimize bare hand and arm contact with exposed FOOD that is not in a READY-TO-EAT form. S 3-301.12 Preventing Contamination When Tasting.* A FOOD EMPLOYEE may not use a UTENSIL more than once to taste FOOD that is to be sold or served. Preventing Food and Ingredient Contamination 3-302.11 Packaged and Unpackaged Food - Separation, Packaging, and Segregation.* (A) FOOD shall be protected from cross contamination by: (1) Separating raw animal FOODS during storage, preparation, holding, and display from: (a) Raw READY-TO-EAT FOOD including other raw animal FOOD such as FISH for sushi or MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH, or other raw READY-TO-EAT FOOD such as fruits and vegetables, and (b) Cooked READY-TO-EAT FOOD; (2) Except when combined as ingredients, separating types of raw animal FOODS from each other such as beef, FISH, lamb, pork, and POULTRY during storage, preparation, holding, and display by: (a) Using separate EQUIPMENT for each type, or (b) Arranging each type of FOOD in EQUIPMENT so that cross contamination of one type with another is prevented, and (c) Preparing each type of FOOD at different times or in separate areas; (3) Storing damaged, spoiled, or recalled FOOD being held in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT as specified under ' 6-404.11; (B) FOOD can be protected from cross contamination by using one or more of the following methods: (1) Except as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.15(B)(2) and in  (C) of this section, storing the FOOD in packages, covered containers, or wrappings; (2) Cleaning HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINERS of FOOD of visible soil before opening; (3) Protecting FOOD containers that are received packaged together in a case or overwrap from cuts when the case or overwrap is opened; and (4) Separating fruits and vegetables, before they are washed as specified under ' 3-302.15 from READY-TO-EAT FOOD. (C) Subparagraph (A)(4) of this section does not apply to: (1) Whole, uncut, raw fruits and vegetables and nuts in the shell, that require peeling or hulling before consumption; (2) PRIMAL CUTS, quarters, or sides of raw MEAT or slab bacon that are hung on clean, SANITIZED hooks or placed on clean, SANITIZED racks; (3) Whole, uncut, processed MEATS such as country hams, and smoked or cured sausages that are placed on clean, SANITIZED racks; (4) FOOD being cooled as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.15(B)(2); or (5) SHELLSTOCK. 3-302.12 Food Storage Containers, Identified with Common Name of Food. Except for containers holding FOOD that can be readily and unmistakably recognized such as dry pasta, working containers holding FOOD or FOOD ingredients that are removed from their original packages for use in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, such as cooking oils, flour, herbs, potato flakes, salt, spices, and sugar shall be identified with the common name of the FOOD. 3-302.13 Pasteurized Eggs, Substitute for Raw Eggs for Certain Recipes.* Pasteurized EGGS or EGG PRODUCTS shall be substituted for raw EGGS in the preparation of FOODS such as Caesar salad, hollandaise or Barnaise sauce, mayonnaise, meringue, eggnog, ice cream, and EGG-fortified BEVERAGES that are not: (A) Cooked as specified under Subparagraphs 3-401.11(A)(1) or (2); or (B) Included in  3-401.11(D). 3-302.14 Protection from Unapproved Additives.* (A) FOOD shall be protected from contamination that may result from the addition of, as specified in  3-202.12: (1) Unsafe or unAPPROVED FOOD or COLOR ADDITIVES; and (2) Unsafe or unAPPROVED levels of APPROVED FOOD and COLOR ADDITIVES. (B) A FOOD EMPLOYEE may not: (1) Apply sulfiting agents to fresh fruits and vegetables intended for raw consumption or to a FOOD considered to be a good source of vitamin B1; or (2) Except for grapes, serve or sell FOOD specified under Subparagraph (B)(1) of this section that is treated with sulfiting agents before receipt by the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. 3-302.15 Washing Fruits and Vegetables. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section and except for whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are intended for washing by the CONSUMER before consumption, raw fruits and vegetables shall be thoroughly washed in water to remove soil and other contaminants before being cut, combined with other ingredients, cooked, served, or offered for human consumption in READY-TO- EAT form. (B) Fruits and vegetables may be washed by using chemicals as specified under  7-204.12. Preventing Contamination from Ice Used as a Coolant 3-303.11 Ice Used as Exterior Coolant, Prohibited as Ingredient. After use as a medium for cooling the exterior surfaces of FOOD such as melons or FISH, PACKAGED FOODS such as canned BEVERAGES, or cooling coils and tubes of EQUIPMENT, ice may not be used as FOOD. 3-303.12 Storage or Display of Food in Contact with Water or Ice. (A) PACKAGED FOOD may not be stored in direct contact with ice or water if the FOOD is subject to the entry of water because of the nature of its packaging, wrapping, or container or its positioning in the ice or water. (B) Except as specified in  (C) and (D) of this section, unPACKAGED FOOD may not be stored in direct contact with undrained ice. (C) Whole, raw fruits or vegetables; cut, raw vegetables such as celery or carrot sticks or cut potatoes; and tofu may be immersed in ice or water. (D) Raw poultry and raw FISH that are received immersed in ice in shipping containers may remain in that condition while in storage awaiting preparation, display, service, or sale. Preventing Contamination from Equipment, Utensils, and Linens 3-304.11 Food Contact with Equipment and Utensils.* FOOD shall only contact surfaces of: (A) EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS that are cleaned as specified under Part 4-6 of this Code and SANITIZED as specified under Part 4-7 of this Code; or (B) SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. 3-304.12 In-Use Utensils, Between-Use Storage. During pauses in FOOD preparation or dispensing, FOOD preparation and dispensing UTENSILS shall be stored: (A) Except as specified under  (B) of this section, in the FOOD with their handles above the top of the FOOD and the container; (B) In FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS with their handles above the top of the FOOD within containers or EQUIPMENT that can be closed, such as bins of sugar, flour, or cinnamon; (C) On a clean portion of the FOOD preparation table or cooking EQUIPMENT only if the in-use UTENSIL and the FOOD- CONTACT surface of the FOOD preparation table or cooking EQUIPMENT are cleaned and SANITIZED at a frequency specified under  4-602.11 and 4-702.11; (D) In running water of sufficient velocity to flush particulates to the drain, if used with moist FOOD such as ice cream or mashed potatoes; (E) In a clean, protected location if the UTENSILS, such as ice scoops, are used only with a FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS; or (F) In a container of water if the water is maintained at a temperature of at least 57C (135) and the container is cleaned at a frequency specified under Subparagraph 4-602.11(D)(7). 3-304.13 Linens and Napkins, Use Limitation. LINENS and napkins may not be used in contact with FOOD unless they are used to line a container for the service of FOODS and the LINENS and napkins are replaced each time the container is refilled for a new CONSUMER. 3-304.14 Wiping Cloths, Use Limitation. (A) Cloths in-use for wiping FOOD spills from TABLEWARE and carry-out containers that occur as FOOD is being served shall be: (1) Maintained dry; and (2) Used for no other purpose. (B) Cloths in-use for wiping counters and other EQUIPMENT surfaces shall be: (1) Held between uses in a chemical sanitizer solution at a concentration specified under  4-501.114; and (2) Laundered daily as specified under  4-802.11(D). (C) Cloths in-use for wiping surfaces in contact with raw animal FOODS shall be kept separate from cloths used for other purposes. (D) Dry wiping cloths and the chemical sanitizing solutions specified in Subparagraph (B)(1) of this section in which wet wiping cloths are held between uses shall be free of FOOD debris and visible soil. (E) Containers of chemical sanitizing solutions specified in Subparagraph (B)(1) of this section in which wet wiping cloths are held between uses shall be stored off the floor and used in a manner that prevents contamination of FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, SINGLE-SERVICE, or SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. (F) SINGLE-USE disposable sanitizer wipes shall be used in accordance with EPA-approved manufacturer's label use instructions. 3-304.15 Gloves, Use Limitation. (A) If used, SINGLE-USE gloves shall be used for only one task such as working with READY-TO-EAT FOOD or with raw animal FOOD, used for no other purpose, and discarded when damaged or soiled, or when interruptions occur in the operation. (B) Except as specified in  (C) of this section, slash-resistant gloves that are used to protect the hands during operations requiring cutting shall be used in direct contact only with FOOD that is subsequently cooked as specified under Part 3-4 such as frozen FOOD or a PRIMAL CUT of MEAT. (C) Slash-resistant gloves may be used with READY-TO-EAT FOOD that will not be subsequently cooked if the slash-resistant gloves have a SMOOTH, durable, and nonabsorbent outer surface; or if the slash-resistant gloves are covered with a SMOOTH, durable, nonabsorbent glove, or a SINGLE-USE glove. (D) Cloth gloves may not be used in direct contact with FOOD unless the FOOD is subsequently cooked as required under Part 3-4 such as frozen FOOD or a PRIMAL CUT of MEAT. 3-304.16 Using Clean Tableware for Second Portions and Refills. (A) Except for refilling a CONSUMER'S drinking cup or container without contact between the pouring UTENSIL and the lip-contact area of the drinking cup or container, FOOD EMPLOYEES may not use TABLEWARE, including SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES, soiled by the CONSUMER, to provide second portions or refills. (B) Except as specified in  (C) of this section, self-service CONSUMERS may not be allowed to use soiled TABLEWARE, including SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES, to obtain additional FOOD from the display and serving EQUIPMENT. (C) Drinking cups and containers may be reused by self-service CONSUMERS if refilling is a contamination-free process as specified under  4-204.13(A), (B), and (D). 3-304.17 Refilling Returnables. (A) A take-home FOOD container returned to a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT may not be refilled at a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT with a POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD. (B) Except as specified in  (C), a take-home FOOD container refilled with FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS shall be cleaned as specified under  4-603.17(B). (C) Personal take-out BEVERAGE containers, such as thermally insulated bottles, nonspill coffee cups, and promotional BEVERAGE glasses, may be refilled by EMPLOYEES or the CONSUMER if refilling is a contamination-free process as specified under  4-204.13(A), (B), and (D). Preventing Contamination from the Premises 3-305.11 Food Storage. (A) Except as specified in  (B) and (C) of this section, FOOD shall be protected from contamination by storing the FOOD: (1) In a clean, dry location; (2) Where it is not exposed to splash, dust, or other contamination; and (3) At least 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor. (B) FOOD in packages and working containers may be stored less than 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor on case lot handling EQUIPMENT as specified under  4-204.122. (C) Pressurized BEVERAGE containers, cased FOOD in waterproof containers such as bottles or cans, and milk containers in plastic crates may be stored on a floor that is clean and not exposed to floor moisture. 3-305.12 Food Storage, Prohibited Areas. FOOD may not be stored: (A) In locker rooms; (B) In toilet rooms; (C) In dressing rooms; (D) In garbage rooms; (E) In mechanical rooms; (F) Under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential drips; (G) Under leaking water lines, including leaking automatic fire sprinkler heads, or under lines on which water has condensed; (H) Under open stairwells; or (I) Under other sources of contamination. 3-305.13 Vended Potentially Hazardous Food Original Container. POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD dispensed through a FOOD VENDING MACHINE shall be in the PACKAGE in which it was placed at the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or FOOD PROCESSING PLANT at which it was prepared. 3-305.14 Food Preparation. During preparation, unPACKAGED FOOD shall be protected from environmental sources of contamination. Preventing Contamination by Consumers 3-306.11 Food Display. Except for nuts in the shell and whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are intended for hulling, peeling, or washing by the CONSUMER before consumption, FOOD on display shall be protected from contamination by the use of PACKAGING; counter, service line, or salad bar FOOD guards; display cases; or other effective means. 3-306.12 Condiments, Protection. (A) Condiments shall be protected from contamination by being kept in dispensers that are designed to provide protection, protected FOOD displays provided with the proper UTENSILS, original containers designed for dispensing, or individual PACKAGES or portions. (B) Condiments at a FOOD VENDING MACHINE LOCATION shall be in individual PACKAGES or provided in dispensers that are filled at an APPROVED location, such as the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that provides FOOD to the FOOD VENDING MACHINE LOCATION, a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT that is regulated by the agency that has jurisdiction over the operation, or a properly equipped facility that is located on the site of the FOOD VENDING MACHINE LOCATION. 3-306.13 Consumer Self-Service Operations.* (A) Raw, unPACKAGED animal FOOD, such as beef, lamb, pork, POULTRY, and FISH may not be offered for CONSUMER self-service. This paragraph does not apply to: (1) CONSUMER self-service of READY-TO-EAT FOODS at buffets or salad bars that serve FOODS such as sushi or raw shellfish; (2) Ready-to-cook individual portions for immediate cooking and consumption on the PREMISES such as CONSUMER-cooked MEATS or CONSUMER-selected ingredients for Mongolian barbecue; or (3) Raw, frozen, shell-on shrimp, or lobster. (B) CONSUMER self-service operations for READY-TO-EAT FOODS shall be provided with suitable UTENSILS or effective dispensing methods that protect the FOOD from contamination. N (C) CONSUMER self-service operations such as buffets and salad bars shall be monitored by FOOD EMPLOYEES trained in safe operating procedures. N 3-306.14 Returned Food and Re-Service of Food.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, after being served or sold and in the possession of a CONSUMER, FOOD that is unused or returned by the CONSUMER may not be offered as FOOD for human consumption. (B) Except as specified under  3-801.11(G), a container of FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS may be RE-SERVED from one CONSUMER to another if: (1) The FOOD is dispensed so that it is protected from contamination and the container is closed between uses, such as a narrow-neck bottle containing catsup, steak sauce, or wine; or (2) The FOOD, such as crackers, salt, or pepper, is in an unopened original PACKAGE and is maintained in sound condition. Preventing Contamination from Other Sources 3-307.11 Miscellaneous Sources of Contamination. FOOD shall be protected from contamination that may result from a factor or source not specified under Subparts 3-301-3-306.  
_____
3-4 - DESTRUCTION OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN 
Subparts 
3-401 Cooking 
3-402 Freezing 
3-403 Reheating 
3-404 Other Methods 
_____ 
Cooking 3-401.11 Raw Animal Foods.* (A) Except as specified under  (B) and in  (C) and (D) of this section, raw animal FOODS such as EGGS, FISH, MEAT, POULTRY, and FOODS containing these raw animal FOODS, shall be cooked to heat all parts of the FOOD to a temperature and for a time that complies with one of the following methods based on the FOOD that is being cooked: (1) 63C (145) or above for 15 seconds for: (a) Raw EGGS that are broken and prepared in response to a CONSUMER'S order and for immediate service, and (b) Except as specified under Subparagraphs (A)(2) and (A)(3) and  (B), and in  (C) of this section, FISH and MEAT including GAME ANIMALS commercially raised for FOOD as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(1) and GAME ANIMALS under a voluntary inspection program as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(2); (2) 68C (155) for 15 seconds or the temperature specified in the following chart that corresponds to the holding time for RATITES and INJECTED MEATS; the following if they are COMMINUTED: FISH, MEAT, GAME ANIMALS commercially raised for FOOD as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(1), and GAME ANIMALS under a voluntary inspection program as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(2); and raw EGGS that are not prepared as specified under Subparagraph (A)(1)(a) of this section:  
  
Minimum Temperature
C (F) Time 63 (145) 3 minutes 66 (150) 1 minute 70 (158) < 1 second (instantaneous)  
; or (3) 74C (165F) or above for 15 seconds for POULTRY, BALUTS, wild GAME ANIMALS as specified under Subparagraphs 3-201.17(A)(3) and (4), stuffed FISH, stuffed MEAT, stuffed pasta, stuffed POULTRY, stuffed RATITES, or stuffing containing FISH, MEAT, POULTRY, or RATITES. (B) Whole MEAT roasts including beef, corned beef, lamb, pork, and cured pork roasts such as ham shall be cooked: (1) In an oven that is preheated to the temperature specified for the roast's weight in the following chart and that is held at that temperature:  
  
Oven Type Oven Temperature Based on Roast Weight Less than 4.5 kg (10 lbs) 4.5 kg (10 lbs) or More Still Dry 177C (350F) or more 121C (250F) or more Convection 163C (325F) or more 121C (250F) or more High Humidity 1 121C (250F) or less 121C (250F) or less 1 Relative humidity greater than 90% for at least 1 hour as measured in the cooking chamber or exit of the oven; or in a moisture-impermeable bag that provides 100% humidity.  
  
; and (2) As specified in the following chart, to heat all parts of the FOOD to a temperature and for the holding time that corresponds to that temperature:  
  
Temperature
C (F) Time 1 in Minutes Temperature
C (F) Time 1 in Seconds 54.4 (130) 112 63.9 (147) 134 55.0 (131) 89 65.0 (149) 85 56.1 (133) 56 66.1 (151) 54 57.2 (135) 36 67.2 (153) 34 57.8 (136) 28 68.3 (155) 22 58.9 (138) 18 69.4 (157) 14 60.0 (140) 12 70.0 (158) 0 61.1 (142) 8 62.2 (144) 5 62.8 (145) 4 1 Holding time may include postoven heat rise.  
  
(C) A raw or undercooked WHOLE-MUSCLE, INTACT BEEF steak may be served or offered for sale in a READY-TO-EAT form if: (1) The FOOD ESTABLISHMENT serves a population that is not a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION, (2) The steak is labeled to indicate that it meets the definition of "WHOLE-MUSCLE, INTACT BEEF" as specified under  3-201.11(E), and (3) The steak is cooked on both the top and bottom to a surface temperature of 63C (145) or above and a cooked color change is achieved on all external surfaces. (D) A raw animal FOOD such as raw EGG, raw FISH, raw-marinated FISH, raw MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH, or steak tartare; or a partially cooked FOOD such as lightly cooked FISH, soft cooked EGGS, or rare MEAT other than WHOLE-MUSCLE, INTACT BEEF steaks as specified in  (C) of this section, may be served or offered for sale upon CONSUMER request or selection in a READY-TO-EAT form if: (1) As specified under  3-801.11(C)(1) and (2), the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT serves a population that is not a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION; and (2) The CONSUMER is informed as specified under  3-603.11 that to ensure its safety, the FOOD should be cooked as specified under  (A) or (B) of this section; or (3) The REGULATORY AUTHORITY grants a VARIANCE from  (A) or (B) of this section as specified in ' 8-103.10 based on a HACCP PLAN that: (a) Is submitted by the LICENSEE and APPROVED as specified under  8-103.11, (b) Documents scientific data or other information showing that a lesser time and temperature regimen results in a safe FOOD, and (c) Verifies that EQUIPMENT and procedures for FOOD preparation and training of FOOD EMPLOYEES at the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT meet the conditions of the VARIANCE. 3-401.12 Microwave Cooking.* Raw animal FOODS cooked in a microwave oven shall be: (A) Rotated or stirred throughout or midway during cooking to compensate for uneven distribution of heat; (B) Covered to retain surface moisture; (C) Heated to a temperature of at least 74C (165) in all parts of the FOOD; and (D) Allowed to stand covered for 2 minutes after cooking to obtain temperature equilibrium. 3-401.13 Plant Food Cooking for Hot Holding. Fruits and vegetables that are cooked for hot holding shall be cooked to a temperature of 57C (135F). Freezing 3-402.11 Parasite Destruction.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, before service or sale in READY-TO-EAT form, raw, raw-marinated, partially cooked, or marinated-partially cooked FISH shall be: (1) Frozen and stored at a temperature of -20C (-4F) or below for a minimum of 168 hours (7 days) in a freezer; (2) Frozen at -35C (-31F) or below until solid and stored at -35C (-31F) or below for a minimum of 15 hours; or (3) Frozen at -35C (-31F) or below until solid and stored at -20C (-4F) or below for a minimum of 24 hours. (B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply to: (1) MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH; (2) Tuna of the species Thunnus alalunga, Thunnus albacares (Yellowfin tuna), Thunnus atlanticus, Thunnus maccoyii (Bluefin tuna, Southern), Thunnus obesus (Bigeye tuna), or Thunnus thynnus (Bluefin tuna, Northern); or (3) Aquacultured FISH, such as salmon, that: (a) If raised in open water, are raised in net-pens, or (b) Are raised in land-based operations such as ponds or tanks, and (c) Are fed formulated feed, such as pellets, that contains no live parasites infective to the aquacultured FISH. 3-402.12 Records, Creation and Retention. (A) Except as specified in  3-402.11(B) and  (B) of this section, if raw, raw-marinated, partially cooked, or marinated-partially cooked FISH are served or sold in READY-TO-EAT form, the PERSON IN CHARGE shall record the freezing temperature and time to which the FISH are subjected and shall retain the records of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT for 90 calendar days beyond the time of service or sale of the FISH. (B) If the FISH are frozen by a supplier, a written agreement or statement from the supplier stipulating that the FISH supplied are frozen to a temperature and for a time specified under  3-402.11 may substitute for the records specified under  (A) of this section. (C) If raw, raw-marinated, partially cooked, or marinated-partially cooked FISH are served or sold in READY-TO-EAT form, and the FISH are raised and fed as specified in Subparagraph 3-402.11(B)(3), a written agreement or statement from the supplier or aquaculturist stipulating that the FISH were raised and fed as specified in Subparagraph 3-402.11(B)(3) shall be obtained by the PERSON IN CHARGE and retained in the records of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT for 90 calendar days beyond the time of service or sale of the FISH. 3-403.10 Preparation for Immediate Service. Cooked and refrigerated FOOD that is prepared for immediate service in response to an individual CONSUMER order, such as a roast beef sandwich au jus, may be served at any temperature. Reheating 3-403.11 Reheating for Hot Holding.* (A) Except as specified under  (B) and (C) and in  (E) of this section, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is cooked, cooled, and reheated for hot holding shall be reheated so that all parts of the FOOD reach a temperature of at least 74C (165F) for 15 seconds before service. (B) Except as specified under  (C) of this section, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD reheated in a microwave oven for hot holding shall be reheated so that all parts of the FOOD reach a temperature of at least 74C (165F) and the FOOD is rotated or stirred, covered, and allowed to stand covered for 2 minutes after reheating before service. (C) READY-TO-EAT FOOD taken from a commercially processed, HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER, or from an intact package from a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT that is inspected by the FOOD REGULATORY AUTHORITY that has jurisdiction over the plant, shall be heated to a temperature of at least 57C (135F) for hot holding before service. (D) Reheating for hot holding as specified under  (A)-(C) of this section shall be done rapidly and the time the FOOD is between the temperature specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2) and the temperatures specified under  (A)-(C) of this section may not exceed 2 hours. (E) Remaining unsliced portions of MEAT roasts that are cooked as specified under  3-401.11(B) may be reheated for hot holding using the oven parameters and minimum time and temperature conditions specified under  3-401.11(B). Other Methods 3-404.11 Treating Juice. JUICE PACKAGED in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be: (A) Treated under a HACCP PLAN as specified in  8-201.12(B)-(E) to attain a 5-log reduction, which is equal to a 99.999% reduction, of the most resistant microorganism of public health significance; or (B) Labeled, if not treated to yield a 5-log reduction of the most resistant microorganism of public health significance: (1) As specified under  3-602.11, and (2) As specified in 21 CFR 101.17(g) Food labeling, warning, notice, and safe handling statements, Juices that have not been specifically processed to prevent, reduce, or eliminate the presence of pathogens with the following, "WARNING: This product has not been pasteurized and, therefore, may contain harmful bacteria that can cause serious illness in children, the elderly, and persons with weakened immune systems."  
  
_____
3-5 - LIMITATION OF GROWTH OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
Subparts 
3-501 Temperature and Time Control 
3-502 Specialized Processing Methods 
_____
  
Temperature and Time Control 3-501.11 Frozen Food. Stored frozen FOODS shall be maintained frozen. 3-501.12 Potentially Hazardous Food, Slacking. Frozen POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is slacked to moderate the temperature shall be held: (A) Under refrigeration that maintains the FOOD temperature at 5C (41) or less, or at 7C (45) or less as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2); or (B) At any temperature if the FOOD remains frozen. 3-501.13 Thawing. Except as specified in  (D) of this section, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall be thawed: (A) Under refrigeration that maintains the FOOD temperature at 5C (41F) or less, or at 7C (45F) or less as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2); or (B) Completely submerged under running water: (1) At a water temperature of 21C (70F) or below, (2) With sufficient water velocity to agitate and float off loose particles in an overflow, and (3) For a period of time that does not allow thawed portions of READY-TO-EAT FOOD to rise above 5C (41F), or 7C (45F) as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2), or (4) For a period of time that does not allow thawed portions of a raw animal FOOD requiring cooking as specified under  3-401.11(A) or (B) to be above 5C (41F), or 7C (45F) as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2), for more than 4 hours including: (a) The time the FOOD is exposed to the running water and the time needed for preparation for cooking, or (b) The time it takes under refrigeration to lower the FOOD temperature to 5C (41F), or 7C (45F) as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2); (C) As part of a cooking process if the FOOD that is frozen is: (1) Cooked as specified under  3-401.11(A) or (B) or 3-401.12, or (2) Thawed in a microwave oven and immediately transferred to conventional cooking EQUIPMENT, with no interruption in the process; or (D) Using any procedure if a portion of frozen READY-TO-EAT FOOD is thawed and prepared for immediate service in response to an individual CONSUMER'S order. 3-501.14 Cooling.* (A) Cooked POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall be cooled: (1) Within 2 hours from 57C (135F) to 21C (70F); and (2) Within a total of 6 hours from 57C (135F) to 5C (41F) or less, or to 7C (45F) or less as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2)(b). (B) POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall be cooled within 4 hours to 5C (41F) or less, or to 7C (45F) as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2)(b) if prepared from ingredients at ambient temperature, such as reconstituted FOODS and canned tuna. (C) Except as specified under  (D) of this section, a POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD received in compliance with LAWS allowing a temperature above 5C (41F) during shipment from the supplier as specified in  3-202.11(B), shall be cooled within 4 hours to 5C (41F) or less, or 7C (45F) or less as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2)(b). (D) Raw EGGS shall be received as specified under  3-202.11(C) and immediately placed in refrigerated EQUIPMENT that maintains an ambient air temperature of 7C (45F) or less. 3-501.15 Cooling Methods. (A) Cooling shall be accomplished in accordance with the time and temperature criteria specified under ' 3-501.14 by using one or more of the following methods based on the type of FOOD being cooled: (1) Placing the FOOD in shallow pans; (2) Separating the FOOD into smaller or thinner portions; (3) Using rapid cooling EQUIPMENT; (4) Stirring the FOOD in a container placed in an ice water bath; (5) Using containers that facilitate heat transfer; (6) Adding ice as an ingredient; or (7) Other effective methods. (B) When placed in cooling or cold holding EQUIPMENT, FOOD containers in which FOOD is being cooled shall be: (1) Arranged in the EQUIPMENT to provide maximum heat transfer through the container walls; and (2) Loosely covered, or uncovered if protected from overhead contamination as specified under Subparagraph 3-305.11(A)(2), during the cooling period to facilitate heat transfer from the surface of the FOOD. 3-501.16 Potentially Hazardous Food, Hot and Cold Holding.* (A) Except during preparation, cooking, or cooling, or when time is used as the public health control as specified under ' 3-501.19, and except as specified under  (B) of this section, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall be maintained: (1) At 57C (135F) or above, except that roasts cooked to a temperature and for a time specified in  3-401.11(B) or reheated as specified in  3-403.11(E) may be held at a temperature of 54C (130F) or above; or (2) At a temperature specified in the following: (a) 5C (41F) or less; or (b) 7C (45F) or between 5C (41F) and 7C (45F) in existing refrigeration EQUIPMENT that is not capable of maintaining the FOOD at 5C (41F) or less if: (i) The EQUIPMENT is in place and in use in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, and (ii) On or before September 1, 2009, the EQUIPMENT is upgraded or replaced to maintain FOOD at a temperature of 5C (41F) or less. (B) EGGS that have not been treated to destroy all viable Salmonellae shall be stored in refrigerated EQUIPMENT that maintains an ambient air temperature of 7C (45F) or less. 3-501.17 Ready-to-Eat, Potentially Hazardous Food, Date Marking.* on-premises preparation 
$ prepare and hold cold (A) Except when PACKAGING FOOD using a REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING method as specified under  3-502.12, and except as specified in  (D) and (E) of this section, refrigerated, READY-TO- EAT, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD prepared and held in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT for more than 24 hours shall be clearly marked to indicate the date or day by which the FOOD shall be consumed on the PREMISES, sold, or discarded, based on the temperature and time combinations specified below. The day of preparation shall be counted as Day 1. (1) 5C (41F) or less for a maximum of 7 days; or (2) 7C (45F) or between 5C (41F) and 7C (45F) for a maximum of 4 days in existing refrigeration EQUIPMENT that is not capable of maintaining the FOOD at 5C (41F) or less if: (a) The EQUIPMENT is in place and in use in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, and (b) On or before September 1, 2009, the EQUIPMENT is upgraded or replaced to maintain FOOD at a temperature of 5C (41F) or less. commercially processed food 
$ open and hold cold (B) Except as specified in  (D) - (F) of this section, refrigerated, READY-TO-EAT, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD prepared and PACKAGED by a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT shall be clearly marked, at the time the original container is opened in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and if the FOOD is held for more than 24 hours, to indicate the date or day by which the FOOD shall be consumed on the PREMISES, sold, or discarded, based on the temperature and time combinations specified in  (A) of this section and: (1) The day the original container is opened in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be counted as Day 1; and (2) The day or date marked by the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT may not exceed a manufacturer's use-by date if the manufacturer determined the use-by date based on FOOD safety. (C) A refrigerated, READY-TO-EAT, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD ingredient or a portion of a refrigerated, READY-TO-EAT, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is subsequently combined with additional ingredients or portions of FOOD shall retain the date marking of the earliest-prepared or first-prepared ingredient. (D) A date marking system that meets the criteria stated in  (A) and (B) of this section may include: (1) Using a method APPROVED by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY for refrigerated, READY-TO-EAT POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is frequently rewrapped, such as lunchmeat or a roast, or for which date marking is impractical, such as soft serve mix or milk in a dispensing machine; (2) Marking the date or day of preparation, with a procedure to discard the FOOD or on before the last date or day by which the FOOD must be consumed on the premises, sold, or discarded as specified under  (A) of this section; (3) Marking the date or day the original container is opened in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, with a procedure to discard the FOOD on or before the last date or day by which the FOOD must be consumed on the premises, sold, or discarded as specified under  (B) of this section; or (4) Using calendar dates, days of the week, color-coded marks, or other effective marking methods, provided that the marking system is disclosed to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY upon request. (E) Paragraphs (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to individual meal portions served or rePACKAGED for sale from a bulk container upon a consumer's request. (F) Paragraph (B) of this section does not apply to the following FOODS prepared and PACKAGED by a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT inspected by a REGULATORY AUTHORITY: (1) Deli salads, such as ham salad, seafood salad, chicken salad, egg salad, pasta salad, potato salad, and macaroni salad, manufactured in accordance with 21 CFR 110 Current good manufacturing practice in manufacturing, packing, or holding human food; (2) Hard cheeses containing not more than 39% moisture as defined in 21 CFR 133 Cheeses and related cheese products, such as cheddar, gruyere, parmesan and reggiano, and romano; (3) Semi-soft cheeses containing more than 39% moisture, but not more than 50% moisture, as defined in 21 CFR 133 Cheeses and related cheese products, such as blue, edam, gorgonzola, gouda, and monterey jack; (4) Cultured dairy products as defined in 21 CFR 131 Milk and cream, such as yogurt, sour cream, and buttermilk; (5) Preserved FISH products, such as pickled herring and dried or salted cod, and other acidified FISH products defined in 21 CFR 114 Acidified foods; (6) Shelf stable, dry fermented sausages, such as pepperoni and Genoa salami that are not labeled "Keep Refrigerated" as specified in 9 CFR 317 Labeling, marking devices, and containers, and which retain the original CASING on the product; and (7) Shelf stable salt-cured products such as prosciutto and Parma (ham) that are not labeled "Keep Refrigerated" as specified in 9 CFR 317 Labeling, marking devices, and containers. 3-501.18 Ready-to-Eat, Potentially Hazardous Food, Disposition.* (A) A FOOD specified in  3-501.17(A) or (B) shall be discarded if it: (1) Exceeds either of the temperature and time combinations specified in  3-501.17(A), except time that the product is frozen; (2) Is in a container or PACKAGE that does not bear a date or day; or (3) Is appropriately marked with a date or day that exceeds a temperature and time combination as specified in  3-501.17(A). (B) Refrigerated, READY-TO-EAT, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD prepared in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and dispensed through a VENDING MACHINE with an automatic shutoff control shall be discarded if it exceeds a temperature and time combination as specified in  3-501.17(A). 3-501.19 Time as a Public Health Control.* (A) Except as specified under  (D) of this section, if time only is used as the public health control for a working supply of POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD before cooking, or for READY-TO-EAT POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is displayed or held for service for immediate consumption: (1) Written procedures shall be prepared in advance, maintained in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and made available to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY upon request that specify: (a) Methods of compliance with Subparagraphs (B)(1)-(3) or (C)(1)-(5) of this section; and (b) Methods of compliance with  3-501.14 for FOOD that is prepared, cooked, and refrigerated before time is used as a public health control. Time - maximum up to 4 hours (B) If time only, rather than time in conjunction with temperature control, up to a maximum of 4 hours, is used as the public health control: (1) The FOOD shall have an initial temperature of 5C (41F) or less if removed from cold holding temperature control, or 57C (135F) or greater if removed from hot holding temperature control; (2) The FOOD shall be marked or otherwise identified to indicate the time that is 4 hours past the point in time when the FOOD is removed from temperature control; (3) The FOOD shall be cooked and served, served if READY-TO- EAT, or discarded, within 4 hours from the point in time when the FOOD is removed from temperature control; and (4) The FOOD in unmarked containers or PACKAGES, or marked to exceed a 4-hour limit shall be discarded. (C) Variance shall be obtained from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY as specified in ' 3-502.11 as amended by K.A.R. 28-36-103(k). (D) A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that serves a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION may not use time as specified under  (A), (B) or (C) of this section as the public health control for raw EGGS. Specialized Processing Methods 3-502.11 Variance Requirement.* A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall obtain a VARIANCE from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY as specified in ' 8-103.10 and under ' 8-103.11 before: (A) Smoking FOOD as a method of FOOD preservation rather than as a method of flavor enhancement; (B) Curing FOOD; (C) Using FOOD ADDITIVES or adding components such as vinegar: (1) As a method of FOOD preservation rather than as a method of flavor enhancement, or (2) To render a FOOD so that it is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS; (D) Packaging FOOD using a REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING method except as specified under ' 3-502.12 where a barrier to Clostridium botulinum in addition to refrigeration exists; (E) Operating a MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH life-support system display tank used to store and display shellfish that are offered for human consumption; (F) Using time as a public health control as specified under ' 3-501.19. (G) Preparing FOOD by another method that is determined by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY to require a VARIANCE; or (H) Sprouting seeds or beans. Clostridium botulinum and Listeria monocytogenes Controls 3-502.12 Reduced Oxygen Packaging, Criteria.* (A) Except for a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that obtains a VARIANCE as specified under ' 3-502.11 and except as specified under  (C) and (E) and as specified in  (D) of this section, a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that PACKAGES POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD using a REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING method shall ensure that there are at least two barriers in place to control the growth and toxin formation of Clostridium botulinum and the growth of Listeria monocytogenes . (B) A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that PACKAGES POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD using a REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING method shall have a HACCP PLAN that contains the information specified under 8-201.14(D) and that: (1) Identifies the FOOD to be PACKAGED; (2) Except as specified under  (C) and (E) and as specified in  (D) of this section, requires that the PACKAGED FOOD shall be maintained at 5C (41F) or less and meet at least one of the following criteria: (a) Has an AW of 0.91 or less, (b) Has a PH of 4.6 or less, (c) Is a MEAT or POULTRY product cured at a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT regulated by the USDA using substances specified in 9 CFR 424.21, Use of food ingredients and sources of radiation, and is received in an intact PACKAGE, or (d) Is a FOOD with a high level of competing organisms such as raw MEAT or raw POULTRY; (3) Describes how the PACKAGE shall be prominently and conspicuously labeled on the principal display panel in bold type on a contrasting background, with instructions to: (a) Maintain the FOOD at 5C (41F) or below, and (b) Discard the FOOD if within 14 calendar days of its PACKAGING it is not served for on-PREMISES consumption, or consumed if served or sold for off-PREMISES consumption; (4) Limits the refrigerated shelf life to no more than 14 calendar days from PACKAGING to consumption, except the time the product is maintained frozen, or the original manufacturer's "sell by" or "use by" date, whichever occurs first; (5) Includes operational procedures that: (a) Prohibit contacting FOOD with bare hands, (b) Identify a designated work area and the method by which: (i) Physical barriers or methods of separation of raw FOODS and READY-TO-EAT FOODS minimize cross contamination, and (ii) Access to the processing EQUIPMENT is limited to responsible trained personnel familiar with the potential HAZARDS of the operation, and (c) Delineate cleaning and SANITIZATION procedures for FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES; and (6) Describes the training program that ensures that the individual responsible for the REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING operation understands the: (a) Concepts required for a safe operation, (b) EQUIPMENT and facilities, and (c) Procedures specified under Subparagraph (B)(5) of this section and  8-201.14(D). Fish (C) Except for FISH that is frozen before, during, and after PACKAGING, a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT may not PACKAGE FISH using a REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING method. Cook-Chill or Sous Vide (D) Except as specified under  (C) of this section, a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT may package FOOD using a cook-chill or sous vide process without obtaining a VARIANCE if: (1) The FOOD ESTABLISHMENT implements a HACCP PLAN that contains the information as specified under  8-201.14(D); (2) The FOOD is: (a) Prepared and consumed on the PREMISES, or prepared and consumed off the PREMISES but within the same business entity with no distribution or sale of the bagged product to another business entity or the CONSUMER, (b) Cooked to heat all parts of the FOOD to a temperature and for a time as specified under  3-401.11, (c) Protected from contamination after cooking as specified under Part 3-3, (d) Placed in a package or bag with an oxygen barrier before cooking, or placed in a PACKAGE or bag immediately after cooking and before reaching a temperature below 57C (135F), (e) Except for frozen FOOD that is not shelf life restricted, cooled to 5C (41F) in the PACKAGE or bag as specified under  3-501.14 and then cooled to 1C (34F) or less within 48 hours of reaching 5C (41F), and: (i) Held at 1C (34F) and consumed or discarded within 30 days after the date of preparation, or (ii) If removed from a storage unit that maintains a 1C (34F) FOOD temperature, held at 5C (41F) or less for no more than 72 hours before consumption. (f) Held in a refrigeration unit that is equipped with an electronic system that continuously monitors time and temperature and is visually examined for proper operation twice daily, (g) If transported off-site to a satellite location of the same business entity, equipped with verifiable electronic monitoring devices to ensure that times and temperatures are monitored during transportation, and (h) Labeled with the product name and the date PACKAGED; and (3) The records required to confirm that cooling and cold holding refrigeration time/temperature parameters are required as part of the HACCP PLAN, are maintained and are: (a) Made available to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY upon request, and (b) Held for 6 months; and (4) Written operational procedures as specified under Subparagraph (B)(5) of this section and a training program as specified under Subparagraph (B)(6) of this section are implemented. Cheese (E) A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT may PACKAGE cheese using a REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING method without obtaining a VARIANCE if it: (1) Limits the cheeses PACKAGED to those that are commercially manufactured in a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT with no ingredients added in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and that meet the Standards of Identity as specified in 21 CFR 133.150 Hard cheeses, 21 CFR 133.169 Pasteurized process cheese or 21 CFR 133.187 Semisoft cheeses; (2) Has a HACCP PLAN that contains the information specified under  8-201.14(D); (3) Except as specified under Subparagraphs (B)(2), (B)(3)(b), and (B)(4), complies with  (B) of this section; (4) Labels the PACKAGE on the principal display panel with a "use by" date that does not exceed 30 days or the original manufacturer's "sell by" or "use by" date, whichever occurs first; and (5) Discards the REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGED cheese if it is not sold for off-PREMISES consumption or consumed within 30 calendar days of its PACKAGING.  
  
_____
3-6 - FOOD IDENTITY, PRESENTATION, AND ON-PREMISES LABELING 
Subparts 
3-601 Accurate Representation 
3-602 Labeling 
3-603 Consumer Advisory 
_____
  
Accurate Representation 3-601.11 Standards of Identity. PACKAGED FOOD shall comply with standard of identity requirements in 21 CFR 131-169 and 9 CFR 319 Definitions and standards of identity or composition, and the general requirements in 21 CFR 130 - Food Standards: General and 9 CFR 319 Subpart A - General. 3-601.12 Honestly Presented. (A) FOOD shall be offered for human consumption in a way that does not mislead or misinform the CONSUMER. (B) FOOD or COLOR ADDITIVES, colored overwraps, or lights may not be used to misrepresent the true appearance, color, or quality of a FOOD. Labeling 3-602.11 Food Labels. (A) FOOD PACKAGED in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, shall be labeled as specified in LAW, including 21 CFR 101 - Food labeling, and 9 CFR 317 Labeling, marking devices, and containers. (B) Label information shall include: (1) The common name of the FOOD, or absent a common name, an adequately descriptive identity statement; (2) If made from two or more ingredients, a list of ingredients in descending order of predominance by weight, including a declaration of artificial color or flavor and chemical preservatives, if contained in the FOOD; (3) An accurate declaration of the quantity of contents; (4) The name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor; and (5) The name of the FOOD source for each MAJOR FOOD ALLERGEN contained in the FOOD unless the FOOD source is already part of the common or usual name of the respective ingredient (Effective January 1, 2006). (6) Except as exempted in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act  403(Q)(3) - (5), nutrition labeling as specified in 21 CFR 101 - Food Labeling and 9 CFR 317 Subpart B Nutrition Labeling. (7) For any salmonid FISH containing canthaxanthin as a COLOR ADDITIVE, the labeling of the bulk FISH container, including a list of ingredients, displayed on the retail container or by other written means, such as a counter card, that discloses the use of canthaxanthin. (C) Bulk FOOD that is available for CONSUMER self-dispensing shall be prominently labeled with the following information in plain view of the CONSUMER: (1) The manufacturer's or processor's label that was provided with the FOOD; or (2) A card, sign, or other method of notification that includes the information specified under Subparagraphs (B)(1), (2), and (5) of this section. (D) Bulk, unPACKAGED FOODS such as bakery products and unPACKAGED FOODS that are portioned to CONSUMER specification need not be labeled if: (1) A health, nutrient content, or other claim is not made; (2) There are no state or local LAWS requiring labeling; and (3) The FOOD is manufactured or prepared on the PREMISES of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or at another FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or a FOOD PROCESSING PLANT that is owned by the same PERSON and is regulated by the FOOD regulatory agency that has jurisdiction. 3-602.12 Other Forms of Information. (A) If required by LAW, CONSUMER warnings shall be provided. (B) FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or manufacturers' dating information on FOODS may not be concealed or altered. Consumer Advisory 3-603.11 Consumption of Animal Foods that are Raw, Undercooked, or Not Otherwise Processed to Eliminate Pathogens.* (A) Except as specified in  3-401.11(C) and Subparagraph 3-401.11(D)(3) and under  3-801.11(C), if an animal FOOD such as beef, EGGS, FISH, lamb, milk, pork, POULTRY, or shellfish is served or sold raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens, either in READY-TO-EAT form or as an ingredient in another READY-TO-EAT FOOD, the LICENSEE shall inform CONSUMERS of the significantly increased RISK of consuming such FOODS by way of a DISCLOSURE and REMINDER, as specified in  (B) and (C) of this section using brochures, deli case or menu advisories, label statements, table tents, placards, or other effective written means. (B) DISCLOSURE shall include: (1) A description of the animal-derived FOODS, such as "oysters on the half shell (raw oysters)," "raw-EGG Caesar salad," and "hamburgers (can be cooked to order);" or (2) Identification of the animal-derived FOODS by asterisking them to a footnote that states that the items are served raw or undercooked, or contain (or may contain) raw or undercooked ingredients. (C) REMINDER shall include asterisking the animal-derived FOODS requiring DISCLOSURE to a footnote that states: (1) Regarding the safety of these items, written information is available upon request; (2) Consuming raw or undercooked MEATS, POULTRY, seafood, shellfish, or EGGS may increase your RISK of foodborne illness; or (3) Consuming raw or undercooked MEATS, POULTRY, seafood, shellfish, or EGGS may increase your RISK of foodborne illness, especially if you have certain medical conditions.  
  
_____
3-7 - CONTAMINATED FOOD 
Subpart 
3-701 Disposition 
_____
  
Disposition 3-701.11 Discarding or Reconditioning Unsafe, Adulterated, or Contaminated Food.* (A) A FOOD that is unsafe, ADULTERATED, or not honestly presented as specified under  3-101.11 shall be discarded or reconditioned according to an APPROVED procedure. (B) FOOD that is not from an APPROVED source as specified under 3-201.11 - .17 shall be discarded. (C) READY-TO-EAT FOOD that may have been contaminated by an EMPLOYEE who has been RESTRICTED or EXCLUDED as specified under  2-201.12 shall be discarded. (D) FOOD that is contaminated by FOOD EMPLOYEES, CONSUMERS, or other PERSONS through contact with their hands, bodily discharges, such as nasal or oral discharges, or other means shall be discarded.  
  
_____
3-8 - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATIONS 
Subpart 
3-801 Additional Safeguards 
_____
  
Additional Safeguards 3-801.11 Pasteurized Foods, Prohibited Re-Service, and Prohibited Food* In a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that serves a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION: (A) The following criteria apply to JUICE: (1) For the purposes of this paragraph only, children who are age 9 or less and receive FOOD in a school, day care setting, or similar facility that provides custodial care are included as HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATIONS; (2) PrePACKAGED JUICE or a prePACKAGED BEVERAGE containing JUICE, that bears a warning label as specified in 21 CFR, 101.17(g) Food labeling, warning, notice, and safe handling statements, Juices that have not been specifically processed to prevent, reduce, or eliminate the presence of pathogens, or a PACKAGED JUICE or BEVERAGE containing JUICE, that bears a warning label as specified under  3-404.11(B) may not be served or offered for sale; and (3) UnPACKAGED JUICE that is prepared on the premises for service or sale in a READY-TO-EAT form shall be processed under a HACCP PLAN that contains the information specified under  8-201.14(B) - (E) and as specified in 21 CFR Part 120 - Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems, Subpart B Pathogen Reduction, 120.24 Process controls. (B) Pasteurized EGGS or EGG PRODUCTS shall be substituted for raw EGGS in the preparation of: (1) FOODS such as Caesar salad, hollandaise or Barnaise sauce, mayonnaise, meringue, EGGnog, ice cream, and EGG-fortified BEVERAGES, and (2) Except as specified in  (F) of this section, recipes in which more than one EGG is broken and the EGGS are combined; (C) The following FOODS may not be served or offered for sale in a READY-TO-EAT form: (1) Raw animal FOODS such as raw FISH, raw- marinated FISH, raw MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH, and steak tartare, (2) A partially cooked animal FOOD such as lightly cooked FISH, rare MEAT, soft-cooked EGGS that are made from raw EGGS, and meringue; and (3) Raw seed sprouts. (D) FOOD EMPLOYEES may not contact READY-TO-EAT FOOD as specified under  3-301.11(B) and (D). (E) Time only, as the public health control as specified under 3-501.19(D), may not be used for raw EGGS. (F) Subparagraph (B)(2) of this section does not apply if: (1) The raw EGGS are combined immediately before cooking for one CONSUMER'S serving at a single meal, cooked as specified under Subparagraph 3-401.11(A)(1), and served immediately, such as an omelet, souffl, or scrambled EGGS; (2) The raw EGGS are combined as an ingredient immediately before baking and the EGGS are thoroughly cooked to a READY-TO-EAT form, such as a cake, muffin, or bread; or (3) The preparation of the food is conducted under a HACCP PLAN that: (a) Identifies the FOOD to be prepared, (b) Prohibits contacting READY-TO-EAT FOOD with bare hands, (c) Includes specifications and practices that ensure: (i)  Salmonella Enteritidis growth is controlled before and after cooking, and (ii) Salmonella Enteritidis is destroyed by cooking the EGGS according to the temperature and time specified in Subparagraph 3-401.11(A)(2), (d) Contains the information specified under  8-201.14(D) including procedures that: (i) Control cross contamination of READY-TO-EAT FOOD with raw EGGS, and (ii) Delineate cleaning and SANITIZATION procedures for FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES, and (e) Describes the training program that ensures that the FOOD EMPLOYEE responsible for the preparation of the FOOD understands the procedures to be used. Re-service of Food (G) Except as specified in paragraph (H) of this section, FOOD may be re-served as specified under Subparagraph 3-306.14(B)(1) and (2). Prohibited Re-service of Food (H) FOOD may not be re-served under the following conditions: (1) Any FOOD served to patients or clients who are under contact precautions in medical isolation or quarantine, or protective environment isolation may not be re-served to others outside. (2) Packages of FOOD from any patients, clients, or other CONSUMERS should not be re-served to PERSONS in protective environment isolation.  
Chapter 4 - Equipment, Utensils, and Linens 
Parts 
4-1 MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
4-2 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
4-3 NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES 
4-4 LOCATION AND INSTALLATION 
4-5 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION 
4-6 CLEANING OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS 
4-7 SANITIZATION OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS 
4-8 LAUNDERING 
4-9 PROTECTION OF CLEAN ITEMS 
  
_____
4-1 - MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
Subparts 
4-101 Multiuse 
4-102 Single-Service and Single-Use 
_____
  
Multiuse 4-101.11 Characteristics.* Materials that are used in the construction of UTENSILS and FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT may not allow the migration of deleterious substances or impart colors, odors, or tastes to FOOD and under normal use conditions shall be: (A) Safe; (B) Durable, CORROSION-RESISTANT, and nonabsorbent; N (C) Sufficient in weight and thickness to withstand repeated WAREWASHING; N (D) Finished to have a SMOOTH, EASILY CLEANABLE surface; N and (E) Resistant to pitting, chipping, crazing, scratching, scoring, distortion, and decomposition. N 4-101.12 Cast Iron, Use Limitation. (A) Except as specified in  (B) and (C) of this section, cast iron may not be used for UTENSILS or FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT. (B) Cast iron may be used as a surface for cooking. (C) Cast iron may be used in UTENSILS for serving FOOD if the UTENSILS are used only as part of an uninterrupted process from cooking through service. 4-101.13 Lead, Use Limitation. (A) Ceramic, china, and crystal UTENSILS, and decorative UTENSILS such as hand painted ceramic or china that are used in contact with FOOD shall be lead-free or contain levels of lead not exceeding the limits of the following UTENSIL categories:  
  
UTENSIL Category Ceramic Article
Description Maximum Lead
MG/L Beverage Mugs, Cups, Pitchers Coffee Mugs 0.5 Large Hollowware 
(excluding pitchers) Bowls = 1.1 Liter 
(1.16 Quart) 1 Small Hollowware 
(excluding cups & mugs) Bowls < 1.1 Liter 
(1.16 Quart) 2.0 Flat TABLEWARE Plates, Saucers 3.0  
  
(B) Pewter alloys containing lead in excess of 0.05% may not be used as a FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE. (C) Solder and flux containing lead in excess of 0.2% may not be used as a FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE. 4-101.14 Copper, Use Limitation.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, copper and copper alloys such as brass may not be used in contact with a FOOD that has a pH below 6 such as vinegar, fruit JUICE, or wine or for a fitting or tubing installed between a backflow prevention device and a carbonator. (B) Copper and copper alloys may be used in contact with beer brewing ingredients that have a pH below 6 in the prefermentation and fermentation steps of a beer brewing operation such as a brewpub or microbrewery. 4-101.15 Galvanized Metal, Use Limitation.* Galvanized metal may not be used for UTENSILS or FOOD- CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT that are used in contact with acidic FOOD. 4-101.16 Sponges, Use Limitation. Sponges may not be used in contact with cleaned and SANITIZED or in-use FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES. 4-101.17 Wood, Use Limitation. (A) Except as specified in  (B), (C), and (D) of this section, wood and wood wicker may not be used as a FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE. (B) Hard maple or an equivalently hard, close-grained wood may be used for: (1) Cutting boards; cutting blocks; bakers' tables; and UTENSILS such as rolling pins, doughnut dowels, salad bowls, and chopsticks; and (2) Wooden paddles used in confectionery operations for pressure scraping kettles when manually preparing confections at a temperature of 110C (230F) or above. (C) Whole, uncut, raw fruits and vegetables, and nuts in the shell may be kept in the wood shipping containers in which they were received, until the fruits, vegetables, or nuts are used. (D) If the nature of the FOOD requires removal of rinds, peels, husks, or shells before consumption, the whole, uncut, raw FOOD may be kept in: (1) Untreated wood containers; or (2) Treated wood containers if the containers are treated with a preservative that meets the requirements specified in 21 CFR 178.3800 Preservatives for wood. 4-101.18 Nonstick Coatings, Use Limitation. Multiuse KITCHENWARE such as frying pans, griddles, sauce pans, cookie sheets, and waffle bakers that have a perfluorocarbon resin coating shall be used with nonscoring or nonscratching UTENSILS and cleaning aids. 4-101.19 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces. NonFOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT that are exposed to splash, spillage, or other FOOD soiling or that require frequent cleaning shall be constructed of a CORROSION-RESISTANT, nonabsorbent, and SMOOTH material. Single-Service and Single-Use 4-102.11 Characteristics.* Materials that are used to make SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES: (A) May not: (1) Allow the migration of deleterious substances, or (2) Impart colors, odors, or tastes to FOOD; N and (B) Shall be: (1) Safe, and (2) Clean. N  
  
_____
4-2 - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
Subparts 
4-201 Durability and Strength 
4-202 Cleanability 
4-203 Accuracy 
4-204 Functionality 
4-205 Acceptability 
_____
  
Durability and Strength 4-201.11 Equipment and Utensils. EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS shall be designed and constructed to be durable and to retain their characteristic qualities under normal use conditions. 4-201.12 Food Temperature Measuring Devices.* FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES may not have sensors or stems constructed of glass, except that thermometers with glass sensors or stems that are encased in a shatterproof coating such as candy thermometers may be used. Cleanability 4-202.11 Food-Contact Surfaces.* (A) Multiuse FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES shall be: (1) SMOOTH; (2) Free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, inclusions, pits, and similar imperfections; (3) Free of sharp internal angles, corners, and crevices; (4) Finished to have SMOOTH welds and joints; and (5) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, accessible for cleaning and inspection by one of the following methods: (a) Without being disassembled, (b) By disassembling without the use of tools, or (c) By easy disassembling with the use of handheld tools commonly available to maintenance and cleaning personnel such as screwdrivers, pliers, open-end wrenches, and Allen wrenches. (B) Subparagraph (A)(5) of this section does not apply to cooking oil storage tanks, distribution lines for cooking oils, or BEVERAGE syrup lines or tubes. 4-202.12 CIP Equipment. (A) CIP EQUIPMENT shall meet the characteristics specified under  4-202.11 and shall be designed and constructed so that: (1) Cleaning and SANITIZING solutions circulate throughout a fixed system and contact all interior FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES, and (2) The system is self-draining or capable of being completely drained of cleaning and SANITIZING solutions; and (B) CIP EQUIPMENT that is not designed to be disassembled for cleaning shall be designed with inspection access points to ensure that all interior FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES throughout the fixed system are being effectively cleaned. 4-202.13 "V" Threads, Use Limitation. Except for hot oil cooking or filtering EQUIPMENT, "V" type threads may not be used on FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES. 4-202.14 Hot Oil Filtering Equipment. Hot oil filtering EQUIPMENT shall meet the characteristics specified under  4-202.11 or  4-202.12 and shall be readily accessible for filter replacement and cleaning of the filter. 4-202.15 Can Openers. Cutting or piercing parts of can openers shall be readily removable for cleaning and for replacement. 4-202.16 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces. NonFOOD-CONTACT SURFACES shall be free of unnecessary ledges, projections, and crevices, and designed and constructed to allow easy cleaning and to facilitate maintenance. 4-202.17 Kick Plates, Removable. Kick plates shall be designed so that the areas behind them are accessible for inspection and cleaning by being: (A) Removable by one of the methods specified under Subparagraph 4-202.11(A)(5) or capable of being rotated open; and (B) Removable or capable of being rotated open without unlocking EQUIPMENT doors. 4-202.18 Ventilation Hood Systems, Filters. Filters or other grease extracting EQUIPMENT shall be designed to be readily removable for cleaning and replacement if not designed to be cleaned in place. Accuracy 4-203.11 Temperature Measuring Devices, Food. (A) FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES that are scaled only in Celsius or dually scaled in Celsius and Fahrenheit shall be accurate to "1C in the intended range of use. (B) FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES that are scaled only in Fahrenheit shall be accurate to "2 in the intended range of use. 4-203.12 Temperature Measuring Devices, Ambient Air and Water. (A) Ambient air and water TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES that are scaled in Celsius or dually scaled in Celsius and Fahrenheit shall be designed to be easily readable and accurate to "1.5C in the intended range of use. (B) Ambient air and water TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES that are scaled only in Fahrenheit shall be accurate to "3F in the intended range of use. 4-203.13 Pressure Measuring Devices, Mechanical Warewashing Equipment. Pressure measuring devices that display the pressures in the water supply line for the fresh hot water SANITIZING rinse shall have increments of 7 kilopascals (1 pounds per square inch) or smaller and shall be accurate to " 14 kilopascals (" 2 pounds per square inch) in the 100-170 kilopascals (15-25 pounds per square inch) range. Functionality 4-204.11 Ventilation Hood Systems, Drip Prevention. Exhaust ventilation hood systems in FOOD preparation and WAREWASHING areas including components such as hoods, fans, guards, and ducting shall be designed to prevent grease or condensation from draining or dripping onto FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. 4-204.12 Equipment Openings, Closures and Deflectors. (A) A cover or lid for EQUIPMENT shall overlap the opening and be sloped to drain. (B) An opening located within the top of a unit of EQUIPMENT that is designed for use with a cover or lid shall be flanged upward at least 5 millimeters (two-tenths of an inch). (C) Except as specified under  (D) of this section, fixed piping, TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES, rotary shafts, and other parts extending into EQUIPMENT shall be provided with a watertight joint at the point where the item enters the EQUIPMENT. (D) If a watertight joint is not provided: (1) The piping, TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES, rotary shafts, and other parts extending through the openings shall be equipped with an apron designed to deflect condensation, drips, and dust from openings into the FOOD; and (2) The opening shall be flanged as specified under  (B) of this section. 4-204.13 Dispensing Equipment, Protection of Equipment and Food. In EQUIPMENT that dispenses or vends liquid FOOD or ice in unPACKAGED form: (A) The delivery tube, chute, orifice, and splash surfaces directly above the container receiving the FOOD shall be designed in a manner, such as with barriers, baffles, or drip aprons, so that drips from condensation and splash are diverted from the opening of the container receiving the FOOD; (B) The delivery tube, chute, and orifice shall be protected from manual contact such as by being recessed; (C) The delivery tube or chute and orifice of EQUIPMENT used to vend liquid FOOD or ice in unPACKAGED form to self-service CONSUMERS shall be designed so that the delivery tube or chute and orifice are protected from dust, insects, rodents, and other contamination by a self-closing door if the EQUIPMENT is: (1) Located in an outside area that does not otherwise afford the protection of an enclosure against the rain, windblown debris, insects, rodents, and other contaminants that are present in the environment, or (2) Available for self-service during hours when it is not under the full-time supervision of a FOOD EMPLOYEE; and (D) The dispensing EQUIPMENT actuating lever or mechanism and filling device of CONSUMER self-service BEVERAGE dispensing EQUIPMENT shall be designed to prevent contact with the lip-contact surface of glasses or cups that are refilled. 4-204.14 Food Vending Machine, Vending Stage Closure. The dispensing compartment of a FOOD VENDING MACHINE including a machine that is designed to vend prePACKAGED snack FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS such as chips, party mixes, and pretzels shall be equipped with a self-closing door or cover if the machine is: (A) Located in an outside area that does not otherwise afford the protection of an enclosure against the rain, windblown debris, insects, rodents, and other contaminants that are present in the environment; or (B) Available for self-service during hours when it is not under the full-time supervision of a FOOD EMPLOYEE. 4-204.15 Bearings and Gear Boxes, Leakproof. EQUIPMENT containing bearings and gears that require lubricants shall be designed and constructed so that the lubricant cannot leak, drip, or be forced into FOOD or onto FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES. 4-204.16 Beverage Tubing, Separation. Except for cold plates that are constructed integrally with an ice storage bin, BEVERAGE tubing and cold-plate BEVERAGE cooling devices may not be installed in contact with stored ice for human consumption. 4-204.17 Ice Units, Separation of Drains. Liquid waste drain lines may not pass through an ice machine or ice storage bin. 4-204.18 Condenser Unit, Separation. If a condenser unit is an integral component of EQUIPMENT, the condenser unit shall be separated from the FOOD and FOOD storage space by a dustproof barrier. 4-204.19 Can Openers on Food Vending Machines. Cutting or piercing parts of can openers on FOOD VENDING MACHINES shall be protected from manual contact, dust, insects, rodents, and other contamination. 4-204.110 Molluscan Shellfish Tanks. (A) Except as specified under  (B) of this section, MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH life support system display tanks may not be used to display shellfish that are offered for human consumption and shall be conspicuously marked so that it is obvious to the CONSUMER that the shellfish are for display only. (B) MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH life-support system display tanks that are used to store and display shellfish that are offered for human consumption shall be operated and maintained in accordance with a VARIANCE granted by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY as specified in  8-103.10 and a HACCP PLAN that: (1) Is submitted by the LICENSEE and APPROVED by the regulatory authority (2) Ensures that: (a) Water used with FISH other than MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH does not flow into the molluscan tank, (b) The safety and quality of the shellfish as they were received are not compromised by the use of the tank, and (c) The identity of the source of the SHELLSTOCK is retained as specified under  3-203.12. 4-204.111 Food Vending Machines, Automatic Shutoff.* (A) A machine vending POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall have an automatic control that prevents the machine from vending FOOD: (1) If there is a power failure, mechanical failure, or other condition that results in an internal machine temperature that cannot maintain FOOD temperatures as specified under Chapter 3; and (2) If a condition specified under Subparagraph (A)(1) of this section occurs, until the machine is serviced and restocked with FOOD that has been maintained at temperatures specified under Chapter 3. (B) When the automatic shutoff within a machine vending POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD is activated: (1) In a refrigerated FOOD VENDING MACHINE, the ambient temperature may not exceed any time/temperature combination as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2) for more than 30 minutes immediately after the machine is filled, serviced, or restocked; or (2) In a hot holding FOOD VENDING MACHINE, the ambient temperature may not be less than 57C (135) for more than 120 minutes immediately after the machine is filled, serviced, or restocked. 4-204.112 Temperature Measuring Devices. (A) In a mechanically refrigerated or hot FOOD storage unit, the sensor of a TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE shall be located to measure the air temperature or a simulated product temperature in the warmest part of a mechanically refrigerated unit and in the coolest part of a hot FOOD storage unit. (B) Except as specified in  (C) of this section, cold or hot holding EQUIPMENT used for POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD shall be designed to include and shall be equipped with at least one integral or permanently affixed TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE that is located to allow easy viewing of the device's temperature display. (C) Paragraph (B) of this section does not apply to EQUIPMENT for which the placement of a TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE is not a practical means for measuring the ambient air surrounding the FOOD because of the design, type, and use of the EQUIPMENT, such as calrod units, heat lamps, cold plates, bainmaries, steam tables, insulated FOOD transport containers, and salad bars. (D) TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES shall be designed to be easily readable. (E) FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES and water TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES on WAREWASHING machines shall have a numerical scale, printed record, or digital readout in increments no greater than 1C or 2 in the intended range of use. 4-204.113 Warewashing Machine, Data Plate Operating Specifications. A WAREWASHING machine shall be provided with an easily accessible and readable data plate affixed to the machine by the manufacturer that indicates the machine's design and operation specifications including the: (A) Temperatures required for washing, rinsing, and SANITIZING; (B) Pressure required for the fresh water SANITIZING rinse unless the machine is designed to use only a pumped SANITIZING rinse; and (C) Conveyor speed for conveyor machines or cycle time for stationary rack machines. 4-204.114 Warewashing Machines, Internal Baffles. WAREWASHING machine wash and rinse tanks shall be equipped with baffles, curtains, or other means to minimize internal cross contamination of the solutions in wash and rinse tanks. 4-204.115 Warewashing Machines, Temperature Measuring Devices. A WAREWASHING machine shall be equipped with a TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE that indicates the temperature of the water: (A) In each wash and rinse tank; and (B) As the water enters the hot water SANITIZING final rinse manifold or in the chemical SANITIZING solution tank. 4-204.116 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Heaters and Baskets. If hot water is used for SANITIZATION in manual WAREWASHING operations, the SANITIZING compartment of the sink shall be: (A) Designed with an integral heating device that is capable of maintaining water at a temperature not less than 77C (171F); and (B) Provided with a rack or basket to allow complete immersion of equipment and utensils into the hot water. 4-204.117 Warewashing Machines, Automatic Dispensing of Detergents and Sanitizers. A WAREWASHING machine that is installed after adoption of this Code by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, shall be equipped to: (A) Automatically dispense detergents and SANITIZERS; and (B) Incorporate a visual means to verify that detergents and SANITIZERS are delivered or a visual or audible alarm to signal if the detergents and SANITIZERS are not delivered to the respective washing and SANITIZING cycles. 4-204.118 Warewashing Machines, Flow Pressure Device. (A) WAREWASHING machines that provide a fresh hot water SANITIZING rinse shall be equipped with a pressure gauge or similar device such as a transducer that measures and displays the water pressure in the supply line immediately before entering the WAREWASHING machine; and (B) If the flow pressure measuring device is upstream of the fresh hot water SANITIZING rinse control valve, the device shall be mounted in a 6.4 millimeter or one-fourth inch Iron Pipe Size (IPS) valve. (C) Paragraphs (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to a machine that uses only a pumped or recirculated SANITIZING rinse. 4-204.119 Warewashing Sinks and Drainboards, Self-Draining. Sinks and drainboards of WAREWASHING sinks and machines shall be self-draining. 4-204.120 Equipment Compartments, Drainage. EQUIPMENT compartments that are subject to accumulation of moisture due to conditions such as condensation, FOOD or BEVERAGE drip, or water from melting ice shall be sloped to an outlet that allows complete draining. 4-204.121 Food Vending Machines, Liquid Waste Products. (A) FOOD VENDING MACHINES designed to store BEVERAGES that are PACKAGED in containers made from paper products shall be equipped with diversion devices and retention pans or drains for container leakage. (B) FOOD VENDING MACHINES that dispense liquid FOOD in bulk shall be: (1) Provided with an internally mounted waste receptacle for the collection of drip, spillage, overflow, or other internal wastes; and (2) Equipped with an automatic shutoff device that will place the machine out of operation before the waste receptacle overflows. (C) Shutoff devices specified under Subparagraph (B)(2) of this section shall prevent water or liquid FOOD from continuously running if there is a failure of a flow control device in the water or liquid FOOD system or waste accumulation that could lead to overflow of the waste receptacle. 4-204.122 Case Lot Handling Apparatuses, Moveability. Apparatuses, such as dollies, pallets, racks, and skids used to store and transport large quantities of PACKAGED FOODS received from a supplier in a cased or overwrapped lot, shall be designed to be moved by hand or by conveniently available apparatuses such as hand trucks and forklifts. 4-204.123 Food Vending Machine Doors and Openings. (A) FOOD VENDING MACHINE doors and access opening covers to FOOD and container storage spaces shall be tight-fitting so that the space along the entire interface between the doors or covers and the cabinet of the machine, if the doors or covers are in a closed position, is no greater than 1.5 millimeters or one-sixteenth inch by: (1) Being covered with louvers, screens, or materials that provide an equivalent opening of not greater than 1.5 millimeters or one-sixteenth inch. Screening of 12 or more mesh to 2.5 centimeters (12 mesh to 1 inch) meets this requirement; (2) Being effectively gasketed; (3) Having interface surfaces that are at least 13 millimeters or one-half inch wide; or (4) Jambs or surfaces used to form an L-shaped entry path to the interface. (B) FOOD VENDING MACHINE service connection openings through an exterior wall of a machine shall be closed by sealants, clamps, or grommets so that the openings are no larger than 1.5 millimeters or one-sixteenth inch. Acceptability 4-205.10 Food Equipment, Certification and Classification. FOOD EQUIPMENT that is certified or classified for sanitation by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-accredited certification program is deemed to comply with Parts 4-1 and 4-2 of this chapter.  
  
_____
4-3 - NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES 
Subparts 
4-301 Equipment 
4-302 Utensils, Temperature Measuring Devices, and Testing Devices 
_____
  
Equipment 4-301.11 Cooling, Heating, and Holding Capacities.* EQUIPMENT for cooling and heating FOOD, and holding cold and hot FOOD, shall be sufficient in number and capacity to provide FOOD temperatures as specified under Chapter 3. S. 4-301.12 Warewashing Equipment Requirements.* (A) Except as specified in  (C) and  (F) of this section, a sink with at least 3 compartments shall be provided for manually washing, rinsing, and SANITIZING EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS. (B) Sink compartments shall be large enough to accommodate immersion of the largest EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS. If EQUIPMENT or UTENSILS are too large for the WAREWASHING sink, a WAREWASHING machine or alternative EQUIPMENT as specified in  (C) of this section shall be used. (C) Alternative manual WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT may be used when there are special cleaning needs or constraints and its use is APPROVED. Alternative manual WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT may include: (1) High-pressure detergent sprayers; (2) Low- or line-pressure spray detergent foamers; (3) Other task-specific cleaning EQUIPMENT; (4) Brushes or other implements; (5) 2-compartment sinks as specified under  (D) and (E) of this section; or (6) Receptacles that substitute for the compartments of a multicompartment sink. (D) Before a 2-compartment sink is used: (1) The LICENSEE shall have its use APPROVED by the regulatory authority; and (2) The LICENSEE shall limit the number of KITCHENWARE items cleaned and SANITIZED in the 2-compartment sink, and shall limit WAREWASHING to batch operations for cleaning KITCHENWARE such as between cutting one type of raw MEAT and another or cleanup at the end of a shift, and shall: (a) Make up the cleaning and SANITIZING solutions immediately before use and drain them immediately after use, and (b) Use a detergent-SANITIZER to SANITIZE and apply the detergent-SANITIZER in accordance with the manufacturer's label instructions and as specified under  4-501.115, or (c) Use a hot water SANITIZATION immersion step as specified under  4-603.16(C). (E) A 2-compartment sink may not be used for WAREWASHING operations where cleaning and SANITIZING solutions are used for a continuous or intermittent flow of KITCHENWARE or TABLEWARE in an ongoing WAREWASHING process. (F) Manual warewashing sinks are not required if a mechanical warewashing machine is properly used, operated, and maintained and the machine is large enough for washing, rinsing, and SANITIZING the largest EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS. 4-301.13 Drainboards. Drainboards, UTENSIL racks, or tables large enough to accommodate all soiled and cleaned items that may accumulate during hours of operation shall be provided for necessary UTENSIL holding before cleaning and after SANITIZING. 4-301.14 Ventilation Hood Systems, Adequacy. Ventilation hood systems and devices shall be sufficient in number and capacity to prevent grease or condensation from collecting on walls and ceilings. 4-301.15 Clothes Washers and Dryers. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, if work clothes or LINENS are laundered on the PREMISES, a mechanical clothes washer and dryer shall be provided and used. (B) If on-PREMISES laundering is limited to wiping cloths intended to be used moist, or wiping cloths are air-dried as specified under  4-901.12, a mechanical clothes washer and dryer need not be provided. Utensils, Temperature Measuring Devices, and Testing Devices 4-302.11 Utensils, Consumer Self-Service. A FOOD dispensing UTENSIL shall be available for each container displayed at a CONSUMER self-service unit such as a buffet or salad bar. 4-302.12 Food Temperature Measuring Devices. (A) FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES shall be provided and readily accessible for use in ensuring attainment and maintenance of FOOD temperatures as specified under Chapter 3. (B) A TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE with a suitable small-diameter probe that is designed to measure the temperature of thin masses shall be provided and readily accessible to accurately measure the temperature in thin FOODS such as MEAT patties and FISH filets. 4-302.13 Temperature Measuring Devices, Manual Warewashing. In manual WAREWASHING operations, a TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE shall be provided and readily accessible for frequently measuring the washing and SANITIZING temperatures. 4-302.14 Sanitizing Solutions, Testing Devices. A test kit or other device that accurately measures the concentration in MG/L of SANITIZING solutions shall be provided.  
  
_____
4-4 - LOCATION AND INSTALLATION 
Subparts 
4-401 Location 
4-402 Installation 
_____
  
Location 4-401.11 Equipment, Clothes Washers and Dryers, and Storage Cabinets, Contamination Prevention. (A) Except as specified in & (B) of this section, EQUIPMENT, a cabinet used for the storage of FOOD, or a cabinet that is used to store cleaned and SANITIZED EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, laundered LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES may not be located: (1) In locker rooms; (2) In toilet rooms; (3) In garbage rooms; (4) In mechanical rooms; (5) Under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential drips; (6) Under leaking water lines including leaking automatic fire sprinkler heads or under lines on which water has condensed; (7) Under open stairwells; or (8) Under other sources of contamination. (B) A storage cabinet used for LINENS or SINGLE-SERVICE or SINGLE-USE ARTICLES may be stored in a locker room. (C) If a mechanical clothes washer or dryer is provided, it shall be located so that the washer or dryer is protected from contamination and only where there is no exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. Installation 4-402.11 Fixed Equipment, Spacing or Sealing. (A) EQUIPMENT that is fixed because it is not EASILY MOVABLE shall be installed so that it is: (1) Spaced to allow access for cleaning along the sides, behind, and above the EQUIPMENT; (2) Spaced from adjoining EQUIPMENT, walls, and ceilings a distance of not more than 1 millimeter or one thirty-second inch; or (3) SEALED to adjoining EQUIPMENT or walls, if the EQUIPMENT is exposed to spillage or seepage. (B) COUNTER-MOUNTED EQUIPMENT that is not EASILY MOVABLE shall be installed to allow cleaning of the EQUIPMENT and areas underneath and around the EQUIPMENT by being: (1) SEALED; or (2) Elevated on legs as specified under  4-402.12(D). 4-402.12 Fixed Equipment, Elevation or Sealing. (A) Except as specified in  (B) and (C) of this section, floor-mounted EQUIPMENT that is not EASILY MOVABLE shall be SEALED to the floor or elevated on legs that provide at least a 15 centimeter (6 inch) clearance between the floor and the EQUIPMENT. (B) If no part of the floor under the floor-mounted EQUIPMENT is more than 15 centimeters (6 inches) from the point of cleaning access, the clearance space may be only 10 centimeters (4 inches). (C) This section does not apply to display shelving units, display refrigeration units, and display freezer units located in the CONSUMER shopping areas of a retail FOOD store, if the floor under the units is maintained clean. (D) Except as specified in  (E) of this section, COUNTER- MOUNTED EQUIPMENT that is not EASILY MOVABLE shall be elevated on legs that provide at least a 10 centimeter (4 inch) clearance between the table and the EQUIPMENT. (E) The clearance space between the table and COUNTER- MOUNTED EQUIPMENT may be: (1) 7.5 centimeters (3 inches) if the horizontal distance of the table top under the EQUIPMENT is no more than 50 centimeters (20 inches) from the point of access for cleaning; or (2) 5 centimeters (2 inches) if the horizontal distance of the table top under the EQUIPMENT is no more than 7.5 centimeters (3 inches) from the point of access for cleaning  
  
_____
4-5 - MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION 
Subparts 
4-501 Equipment 
4-502 Utensils and Temperature and Pressure Measuring Devices 
_____
  
Equipment 4-501.11 Good Repair and Proper Adjustment. (A) EQUIPMENT shall be maintained in a state of repair and condition that meets the requirements specified under Parts 4-1 and 4-2. (B) EQUIPMENT components such as doors, seals, hinges, fasteners, and kick plates shall be kept intact, tight, and adjusted in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. (C) Cutting or piercing parts of can openers shall be kept sharp to minimize the creation of metal fragments that can contaminate FOOD when the container is opened. 4-501.12 Cutting Surfaces. Surfaces such as cutting blocks and boards that are subject to scratching and scoring shall be resurfaced if they can no longer be effectively cleaned and SANITIZED, or discarded if they are not capable of being resurfaced. 4-501.13 Microwave Ovens. Microwave ovens shall meet the safety standards specified in 21 CFR 1030.10 Microwave ovens. 4-501.14 Warewashing Equipment, Cleaning Frequency. A WAREWASHING machine; the compartments of sinks, basins, or other receptacles used for washing and rinsing EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, or raw FOODS, or laundering wiping cloths; and drainboards or other EQUIPMENT used to substitute for drainboards as specified under  4-301.13 shall be cleaned: (A) Before use; (B) Throughout the day at a frequency necessary to prevent recontamination of EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS and to ensure that the EQUIPMENT performs its intended function; and (C) If used, at least every 24 hours. 4-501.15 Warewashing Machines, Manufacturers' Operating Instructions. (A) A WAREWASHING machine and its auxiliary components shall be operated in accordance with the machine's data plate and other manufacturer's instructions. (B) A WAREWASHING machine's conveyor speed or automatic cycle times shall be maintained accurately timed in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. 4-501.16 Warewashing Sinks, Use Limitation. (A) A WAREWASHING sink may not be used for handwashing as specified under  2-301.15. (B) If a WAREWASHING sink is used to wash wiping cloths, wash produce, or thaw FOOD, the sink shall be cleaned as specified under  4-501.14 before and after each time it is used to wash wiping cloths or wash produce or thaw FOOD. Sinks used to wash or thaw FOOD shall be SANITIZED as specified under Part 4-7 before and after using the sink to wash produce or thaw FOOD. 4-501.17 Warewashing Equipment, Cleaning Agents. When used for WAREWASHING, the wash compartment of a sink, mechanical warewasher, or wash receptacle of alternative manual WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT as specified in  4-301.12(C), shall contain a wash solution of soap, detergent, acid cleaner, alkaline cleaner, degreaser, abrasive cleaner, or other cleaning agent according to the cleaning agent manufacturer's label instructions. 4-501.18 Warewashing Equipment, Clean Solutions. The wash, rinse, and SANITIZE solutions shall be maintained clean. 4-501.19 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Wash Solution Temperature. The temperature of the wash solution in manual WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT shall be maintained at not less than 43C (110) or the temperature specified on the cleaning agent manufacturer's label instructions. 4-501.110 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Wash Solution Temperature. (A) The temperature of the wash solution in spray type warewashers that use hot water to SANITIZE may not be less than: (1) For a stationary rack, single temperature machine, 74C (165); (2) For a stationary rack, dual temperature machine, 66C (150F); (3) For a single tank, conveyor, dual temperature machine, 71C (160); or (4) For a multitank, conveyor, multitemperature machine, 66C (150). (B) The temperature of the wash solution in spray-type warewashers that use chemicals to SANITIZE may not be less than 49C (120). 4-501.111 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Hot Water Sanitization Temperatures.* If immersion in hot water is used for SANITIZING in a manual operation, the temperature of the water shall be maintained at 77C (171) or above. 4-501.112 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Hot Water Sanitization Temperatures. (A) Except as specified in & (B) of this section, in a mechanical operation, the temperature of the fresh hot water SANITIZING rinse as it enters the manifold may not be more than 90C (194), or less than: (1) For a stationary rack, single temperature machine, 74C (165); or (2) For all other machines, 82C (180). (B) The maximum temperature specified under  (A) of this section, does not apply to the high pressure and temperature systems with wand-type, hand-held, spraying devices used for the in-place cleaning and SANITIZING of EQUIPMENT such as meat saws. 4-501.113 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Sanitization Pressure. The flow pressure of the fresh hot water SANITIZING rinse in a WAREWASHING machine may not be less than 100 kilopascals (15 pounds per square inch) or more than 170 kilopascals (25 pounds per square inch) as measured in the water line immediately downstream or upstream from the fresh hot water SANITIZING rinse control valve. 4-501.114 Manual and Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Chemical Sanitization - Temperature, pH, Concentration, and Hardness.* A chemical SANITIZER used in a SANITZING solution for a manual or mechanical operation at exposure times specified under  4-703.11(C) shall meet the criteria specified under 7-204.11 Sanitizers, Criteria, shall be used in accordance with the EPA-approved manufacturer's label use instructions, and shall be used as follows: (A) A chlorine solution shall have a minimum temperature based on the concentration and PH of the solution as listed in the following chart;  
  
Minimum Concentration Minimum Temperature MG/L PH 10 or less 
C () PH 8 or less 
C () 25 49 (120) 49 (120) 50 38 (100) 24 (75) 100 13 (55) 13 (55)  
  
(B) An iodine solution shall have a: (1) Minimum temperature of 24C (75), (2) PH of 5.0 or less or a PH no higher than the level for which the manufacturer specifies the solution is effective, and (3) Concentration between 12.5 MG/L and 25 MG/L; (C) A quaternary ammonium compound solution shall: (1) Have a minimum temperature of 24C (75), (2) Have a concentration as specified under ' 7-204.11 and as indicated by the manufacturer's use directions included in the labeling, and (3) Be used only in water with 500 MG/L hardness or less or in water having a hardness no greater than specified by the manufacturer's label; (D) If another solution of a chemical specified under & (A)-(C) of this section is used, the LICENSEE shall demonstrate to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY that the solution achieves SANITIZATION and the use of the solution shall be APPROVED; or (E) If a chemical SANITIZER other than chlorine, iodine, or a quaternary ammonium compound is used, it shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's use directions included in the labeling. 4-501.115 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Chemical Sanitization Using Detergent-Sanitizers. If a detergent-SANITIZER is used to SANITIZE in a cleaning and SANITIZING procedure where there is no distinct water rinse between the washing and SANITIZING steps, the agent applied in the SANITIZING step shall be the same detergent-SANITIZER that is used in the washing step. 4-501.116 Warewashing Equipment, Determining Chemical Sanitizer Concentration. Concentration of the SANITIZING solution shall be accurately determined by using a test kit or other device. Utensils and Temperature and Pressure Measuring Devices 4-502.11 Good Repair and Calibration. (A) UTENSILS shall be maintained in a state of repair or condition that complies with the requirements specified under Parts 4-1 and 4-2 or shall be discarded. (B) FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES shall be calibrated in accordance with manufacturer's specifications as necessary to ensure their accuracy. (C) Ambient air temperature, water pressure, and water TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES shall be maintained in good repair and be accurate within the intended range of use. 4-502.12 Single-Service and Single-Use Articles, Required Use.* A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT without facilities specified under Parts 4-6 and 4-7 for cleaning and SANITIZING KITCHENWARE and TABLEWARE shall provide only SINGLE-USE KITCHENWARE, SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES, and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES for use by FOOD EMPLOYEES AND SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES for use by CONSUMERS. 4-502.13 Single-Service and Single-Use Articles, Use Limitation. (A) SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES may not be reused. (B) The bulk milk container dispensing tube shall be cut on the diagonal leaving no more than one inch protruding from the chilled dispensing head. 4-502.14 Shells, Use Limitation. Mollusk and crustacea shells may not be used more than once as serving containers.  
  
_____
4-6 - CLEANING OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS 
Subparts 
4-601 Objective 
4-602 Frequency 
4-603 Methods 
_____
  
Objective 4-601.11 Equipment, Food-Contact Surfaces, Nonfood-Contact Surfaces, and Utensils.* (A) EQUIPMENT FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES and UTENSILS shall be clean to sight and touch. (B) The FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of cooking EQUIPMENT and pans shall be kept free of encrusted grease deposits and other soil accumulations. N (C) NonFOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT shall be kept free of an accumulation of dust, dirt, FOOD residue, and other debris. N Frequency 4-602.11 Equipment Food-Contact Surfaces and Utensils.* (A) EQUIPMENT FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES and UTENSILS shall be cleaned: (1) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, before each use with a different type of raw animal FOOD such as beef, FISH, lamb, pork, or POULTRY; (2) Each time there is a change from working with raw FOODS to working with READY-TO-EAT FOODS; (3) Between uses with raw fruits and vegetables and with POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD; (4) Before using or storing a FOOD TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE; and (5) At any time during the operation when contamination may have occurred. (B) Subparagraph (A)(1) of this section does not apply if the FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE or UTENSIL is in contact with a succession of different raw animal FOODS each requiring a higher cooking temperature as specified under  3-401.11 than the previous FOOD, such as preparing raw FISH followed by cutting raw poultry on the same cutting board. (C) Except as specified in  (D) of this section, if used with POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD, EQUIPMENT FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES and UTENSILS shall be cleaned throughout the day at least every 4 hours. (D) Surfaces of UTENSILS and EQUIPMENT contacting POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD may be cleaned less frequently than every 4 hours if: (1) In storage, containers of POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD and their contents are maintained at temperatures specified under Chapter 3 and the containers are cleaned when they are empty; (2) UTENSILS and EQUIPMENT are used to prepare FOOD in a refrigerated room or area that is maintained at one of the temperatures in the following chart and: (a) The UTENSILS and EQUIPMENT are cleaned at the frequency in the following chart that corresponds to the temperature; and  
Temperature Cleaning Frequency _____5.0C (41) or less 24 hours >5.0C-7.2C 
(>41-45) 20 hours >7.2C-10.0C 
(>45-50) 16 hours >10.0C-12.8C 
(>50-55) 10 hours _____ 
  
(b) The cleaning frequency based on the ambient temperature of the refrigerated room or area is documented in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. (3) Containers in serving situations such as salad bars, delis, and cafeteria lines hold READY-TO-EAT POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that is maintained at the temperatures specified under Chapter 3, are intermittently combined with additional supplies of the same FOOD that is at the required temperature, and the containers are cleaned at least every 24 hours; (4) TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICES are maintained in contact with FOOD, such as when left in a container of deli FOOD or in a roast, held at temperatures specified under Chapter 3; (5) EQUIPMENT is used for storage of PACKAGED or unPACKAGED FOOD such as a reach-in refrigerator and the EQUIPMENT is cleaned at a frequency necessary to preclude accumulation of soil residues; (6) The cleaning schedule is APPROVED based on consideration of: (a) Characteristics of the EQUIPMENT and its use, (b) The type of FOOD involved, (c) The amount of FOOD residue accumulation, and (d) The temperature at which the FOOD is maintained during the operation and the potential for the rapid and progressive multiplication of pathogenic or toxigenic microorganisms that are capable of causing foodborne disease; or (7) In-use UTENSILS are intermittently stored in a container of water in which the water is maintained at 57C (135) or more and the UTENSILS and container are cleaned at least every 24 hours or at a frequency necessary to preclude accumulation of soil residues. (E) Except when dry cleaning methods are used as specified under  4-603.11, surfaces of UTENSILS and EQUIPMENT contacting FOOD that is not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS shall be cleaned: N (1) At any time when contamination may have occurred; (2) At least every 24 hours for iced tea dispensers and CONSUMER self-service UTENSILS such as tongs, scoops, or ladles; (3) Before restocking CONSUMER self-service EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS such as condiment dispensers and display containers; and (4) In EQUIPMENT such as ice bins and BEVERAGE dispensing nozzles and enclosed components of EQUIPMENT such as ice makers, cooking oil storage tanks and distribution lines, BEVERAGE and syrup dispensing lines or tubes, coffee bean grinders, and water vending EQUIPMENT: (a) At a frequency specified by the manufacturer, or (b) Absent manufacturer specifications, at a frequency necessary to preclude accumulation of soil or mold. 4-602.12 Cooking and Baking Equipment. (A) The FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of cooking and baking EQUIPMENT shall be cleaned at least every 24 hours. This section does not apply to hot oil cooking and filtering EQUIPMENT if it is cleaned as specified in Subparagraph 4-602.11(D)(6). (B) The cavities and door seals of microwave ovens shall be cleaned at least every 24 hours by using the manufacturer's recommended cleaning procedure. 4-602.13 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces. NonFOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT shall be cleaned at a frequency necessary to preclude accumulation of soil residues. Methods 4-603.11 Dry Cleaning. (A) If used, dry cleaning methods such as brushing, scraping, and vacuuming shall contact only SURFACES that are soiled with dry FOOD residues that are not POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS. (B) Cleaning EQUIPMENT used in dry cleaning FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES may not be used for any other purpose. 4-603.12 Precleaning. (A) FOOD debris on EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS shall be scrapped over a waste disposal unit or garbage receptacle or shall be removed in a WAREWASHING machine with a prewash cycle. (B) If necessary for effective cleaning, UTENSILS and EQUIPMENT shall be preflushed, presoaked, or scrubbed with abrasives. 4-603.13 Loading of Soiled Items, Warewashing Machines. Soiled items to be cleaned in a WAREWASHING machine shall be loaded into racks, trays, or baskets or onto conveyors in a position that: (A) Exposes the items to the unobstructed spray from all cycles; and (B) Allows the items to drain. 4-603.14 Wet Cleaning. (A) EQUIPMENT FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES and UTENSILS shall be effectively washed to remove or completely loosen soils by using the manual or mechanical means necessary such as the application of detergents containing wetting agents and emulsifiers; acid, alkaline, or abrasive cleaners; hot water; brushes; scouring pads; high-pressure sprays; or ultrasonic devices. (B) The washing procedures selected shall be based on the type and purpose of the EQUIPMENT or UTENSIL, and on the type of soil to be removed. 4-603.15 Washing, Procedures for Alternative Manual Warewashing Equipment. If washing in sink compartments or a WAREWASHING machine is impractical such as when the EQUIPMENT is fixed or the UTENSILS are too large, washing shall be done by using alternative manual WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT as specified in  4-301.12(C) in accordance with the following procedures: (A) EQUIPMENT shall be disassembled as necessary to allow access of the detergent solution to all parts; (B) EQUIPMENT components and UTENSILS shall be scrapped or rough cleaned to remove FOOD particle accumulation; and (C) EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS shall be washed as specified under  4-603.14(A). 4-603.16 Rinsing Procedures. Washed UTENSILS and EQUIPMENT shall be rinsed so that abrasives are removed and cleaning chemicals are removed or diluted through the use of water or a detergent-sanitizer solution by using one of the following procedures: (A) Use of a distinct, separate water rinse after washing and before SANITIZING if using: (1) A 3-compartment sink, or (2) Alternative manual WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT equivalent to a 3-compartment sink as specified in  4-301.12(C), or (3) A 3-step washing, rinsing, and SANITIZING procedure in a WAREWASHING system for CIP EQUIPMENT; (B) Use of a detergent-SANITIZER as specified under 4-501.115 if using: (1) Alternative WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT as specified in  4-301.12(C) that is APPROVED for use with a detergent- SANITIZER, or (2) A WAREWASHING system for CIP EQUIPMENT; (C) Use of a nondistinct water rinse that is integrated in the hot water SANITIZATION immersion step of a 2-compartment sink operation; (D) If using a WAREWASHING machine that does not recycle the SANITIZING solution as specified under  (E) of this section, or alternative manual WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT such as sprayers, use of a nondistinct water rinse that is: (1) Integrated in the application of the SANITIZING solution, and (2) Wasted immediately after each application; or (E) If using a WAREWASHING machine that recycles the SANITIZING solution for use in the next wash cycle, use of a nondistinct water rinse that is integrated in the application of the SANITIZING solution. 4-603.17 Returnables, Cleaning for Refilling.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) and (C) of this section, returned empty containers intended for cleaning and refilling with FOOD shall be cleaned and refilled in a regulated FOOD PROCESSING PLANT. (B) A FOOD-specific container for BEVERAGES may be refilled at a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT if: (1) Only a BEVERAGE that is not a POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD is used as specified under  3-304.17(A); (2) The design of the container and of the rinsing EQUIPMENT and the nature of the BEVERAGE, when considered together, allow effective cleaning at home or in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; (3) Facilities for rinsing before refilling returned containers with fresh, hot water that is under pressure and not recirculated are provided as part of the dispensing system; (4) The CONSUMER-owned container returned to the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT for refilling is refilled for sale or service only to the same CONSUMER; and (5) The container is refilled by: (a) An EMPLOYEE of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, or (b) The owner of the container if the BEVERAGE system includes a contamination-free transfer process that cannot be bypassed by the container owner. (C) CONSUMER-owned containers that are not FOOD-specific may be filled at a water VENDING MACHINE or system.  
  
_____
4-7 - SANITATION AND EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS 
Subparts 
4-701 Objective 
4-702 Frequency 
4-703 Methods 
_____
  
Objective 4-701.10 Food-Contact Surfaces and Utensils. EQUIPMENT FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES and UTENSILS shall be SANITIZED. Frequency 4-702.11 Before Use After Cleaning.* UTENSILS and FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT shall be SANITIZED before use after cleaning. Methods 4-703.11 Hot Water and Chemical.* After being cleaned, EQUIPMENT FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES and UTENSILS shall be SANITIZED in: (A) Hot water manual operations by immersion for at least 30 seconds and as specified under  4-501.111; (B) Hot water mechanical operations by being cycled through EQUIPMENT that is set up as specified under  4-501.15, 4-501.112, and 4-501.113 and achieving a UTENSIL surface temperature of 71C (160) as measured by an irreversible registering temperature indicator; or (C) Chemical manual or mechanical operations, including the application of SANITIZING chemicals by immersion, manual swabbing, brushing, or pressure spraying methods, using a solution as specified under  4-501.114 by providing: (1) Except as specified under Subparagraph (C)(2) of this section, an exposure time of at least 10 seconds for a chlorine solution specified under  4-501.114(A), (2) An exposure time of at least 7 seconds for a chlorine solution of 50 MG/L that has a PH of 10 or less and a temperature of at least 38C (100) or a PH of 8 or less and a temperature of at least 24C (75), (3) An exposure time of at least 30 seconds for other chemical SANITIZING solutions, or (4) An exposure time used in relationship with a combination of temperature, concentration, and PH that, when evaluated for efficacy, yields SANITIZATION as defined in Subparagraph 1-201.10(B).  
  
_____
4-8 - LAUNDERING 
Subparts 
4-801 Objective 
4-802 Frequency 
4-803 Methods 
_____
  
Objective 4-801.11 Clean Linens. Clean LINENS shall be free from FOOD residues and other soiling matter. Frequency 4-802.11 Specifications. (A) LINENS that do not come in direct contact with FOOD shall be laundered between operations if they become wet, sticky, or visibly soiled. (B) Cloth gloves used as specified in & 3-304.15(D) shall be laundered before being used with a different type of raw animal FOOD such as beef, FISH, lamb, pork or POULTRY. (C) LINENS and napkins that are used as specified under 3-304.13 and cloth napkins shall be laundered between each use. (D) Wet wiping cloths shall be laundered daily. (E) Dry wiping cloths shall be laundered as necessary to prevent contamination of FOOD and clean serving UTENSILS. Methods 4-803.11 Storage of Soiled Linens. Soiled LINENS shall be kept in clean, nonabsorbent receptacles or clean, washable laundry bags and stored and transported to prevent contamination of FOOD, clean EQUIPMENT, clean UTENSILS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. 4-803.12 Mechanical Washing. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, LINENS shall be mechanically washed. (B) In FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS in which only wiping cloths are laundered as specified in  4-301.15(B), the wiping cloths may be laundered in a mechanical washer, sink designated only for laundering wiping cloths, or a WAREWASHING or FOOD preparation sink that is cleaned as specified under  4-501.14. 4-803.13 Use of Laundry Facilities. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, laundry facilities on the PREMISES of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be used only for the washing and drying of items used in the operation of the establishment. (B) Separate laundry facilities located on the PREMISES for the purpose of general laundering such as for institutions providing boarding and lodging may also be used for laundering FOOD ESTABLISHMENT items.  
  
_____
4-9 - PROTECTION OF CLEAN ITEMS 
Subparts 
4-901 Drying 
4-902 Lubricating and Reassembling 
4-903 Storing 
4-904 Preventing Contamination 
_____
  
Drying 4-901.11 Equipment and Utensils, Air-Drying Required. After cleaning and SANITIZING, EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS: (A) Shall be air-dried or used after adequate draining as specified in the first paragraph of 40 CFR 180.940 Tolerance exemptions for active and inert ingredients for use in antimicrobial formulations (food-contact surface SANITIZING solutions), before contact with FOOD; and (B) May not be cloth dried except that UTENSILS that have been air-dried may be polished with cloths that are maintained clean and dry. 4-901.12 Wiping Cloths, Air-Drying Locations. Wiping cloths laundered in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that does not have a mechanical clothes dryer as specified in  4-301.15(B) shall be air-dried in a location and in a manner that prevents contamination of FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE- SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES and the wiping cloths. This section does not apply if wiping cloths are stored after laundering in a SANITIZING solution as specified under  4-501.114. Lubricating and Reassembling 4-902.11 Food-Contact Surfaces. Lubricants as specified under  7-205.11 shall be applied to FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES that require lubrication in a manner that does not contaminate FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES. 4-902.12 Equipment. EQUIPMENT shall be reassembled so that FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES are not contaminated. Storing 4-903.11 Equipment, Utensils, Linens, and Single- Service and Single-Use Articles. (A) Except as specified in  (D) of this section, cleaned EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS, laundered LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES shall be stored: (1) In a clean, dry location; (2) Where they are not exposed to splash, dust, or other contamination; and (3) At least 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor. (B) Clean EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS shall be stored as specified under  (A) of this section and shall be stored: (1) In a self-draining position that allows air drying; and (2) Covered or inverted. (C) SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES shall be stored as specified under  (A) of this section and shall be kept in the original protective PACKAGE or stored by using other means that afford protection from contamination until used. (D) Items that are kept in closed PACKAGES may be stored less than 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor on dollies, pallets, racks, and skids that are designed as specified under  4-204.122. 4-903.12 Prohibitions. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, cleaned and SANITIZED EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, laundered LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES may not be stored: (1) In locker rooms; (2) In toilet rooms; (3) In garbage rooms; (4) In mechanical rooms; (5) Under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential drips; (6) Under leaking water lines including leaking automatic fire sprinkler heads or under lines on which water has condensed; (7) Under open stairwells; or (8) Under other sources of contamination. (B) Laundered LINENS and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES that are PACKAGED or in a facility such as a cabinet may be stored in a locker room. Preventing Contamination 4-904.11 Kitchenware and Tableware. (A) SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES and cleaned and SANITIZED UTENSILS shall be handled, displayed, and dispensed so that contamination of FOOD- and lip-contact surfaces is prevented. (B) Knives, forks, and spoons that are not prewrapped shall be presented so that only the handles are touched by EMPLOYEES and by CONSUMERS if CONSUMER self-service is provided. (C) Except as specified under  (B) of this section, SINGLE- SERVICE ARTICLES that are intended for FOOD- or lip-contact shall be furnished for CONSUMER self-service with the original individual wrapper intact or from an APPROVED dispenser. 4-904.12 Soiled and Clean Tableware. Soiled TABLEWARE shall be removed from CONSUMER eating and drinking areas and handled so that clean TABLEWARE is not contaminated. 4-904.13 Preset Tableware. (A) TABLEWARE that is preset shall be protected from contamination by being wrapped, covered, or inverted. (B) When TABLEWARE is preset, exposed, unused settings shall be: (1) Removed when a CONSUMER is seated; or (2) Cleaned and SANITIZED before further use if the settings are not removed when a CONSUMER is seated.  
Chapter 5 - Water, Plumbing, and Waste 
Parts 
5-1 WATER 
5-2 PLUMBING SUPPLY SUPPLY SYSTEM 
5-3 MOBILE WATER TANK AND MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT WATER TANK 
5-4 SEWAGE, OTHER LIQUID WASTE, AND RAINWATER 
5-5 REFUSE, RECYCLABLES, AND RETURNABLES 
  
_____
5-1 - WATER 
Subparts 
5-101 Source 
5-102 Quality 
5-103 Quantity and Availability 
5-104 Distribution, Delivery, and Retention 
_____
  
Source 5-101.11 Approved Supply System.* DRINKING WATER shall be obtained from an APPROVED source that is: (A) A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM; or (B) A nonPUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM that is constructed, maintained, and operated according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto. 5-101.12 Supply System Flushing and Disinfection.* A DRINKING WATER supply system shall be flushed and disinfected before being placed in service after construction, repair, or modification and after an emergency situation, such as a flood, that may introduce contaminants to the supply system. 5-101.13 Bottled Drinking Water.* BOTTLED DRINKING WATER used or sold in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be obtained from APPROVED sources in accordance with 21 CFR 129 - Processing and Bottling of Bottled DRINKING WATER. Quality 5-102.11 Standards.* Except as specified under  5-102.12: (A) Water from a PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall meet 40 CFR 141 - National Primary Drinking Water Regulations and state DRINKING WATER quality standards; and (B) Water from a nonPUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall meet state DRINKING WATER quality standards. 5-102.12 Nondrinking Water.* (A) A nonDRINKING WATER supply shall be used only if its use is APPROVED. (B) NonDRINKING WATER shall be used only for nonculinary purposes such as air conditioning, nonFOOD EQUIPMENT cooling, fire protection, and irrigation. 5-102.13 Sampling. Except when used as specified under  5-102.12, water from a nonPUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall be sampled and tested at least annually and as required by state water quality regulations. 5-102.14 Sample Report. The most recent sample report for the nonPUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall be retained on file in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or the report shall be maintained as specified by state water quality regulations. Quantity and Availability 5-103.11 Capacity.* (A) The water source and supply system shall be of sufficient capacity to meet the peak water demands of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. (B) Hot water generation and distribution supply systems shall be sufficient to meet the peak hot water demands throughout the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. 5-103.12 Pressure.* Water under pressure shall be provided to all fixtures, EQUIPMENT, and nonFOOD EQUIPMENT that are required to use water except that water supplied as specified under  5-104.12(A) and (B) to a TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or in response to a temporary interruption of a water supply need not be under pressure. Distribution, Delivery, and Retention 5-104.11 Supply System. Water shall be received from the source through the use of: (A) An APPROVED public water main; or (B) One or more of the following that shall be constructed, maintained, and operated according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto.: (1) Nonpublic water main, water pumps, pipes, hoses, connections, and other appurtenances, (2) Water transport vehicles, or (3) Water containers. 5-104.12 Alternative Water Supply. Water meeting the requirements specified under Subparts 5-101, 5-102, and 5-103 shall be made available for a mobile facility, for a TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT without a permanent water supply, and for a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT with a temporary interruption of its water supply through: (A) A supply of containers of commercially BOTTLED DRINKING WATER; (B) One or more closed portable water containers; (C) An enclosed vehicular water tank; (D) An on-PREMISES water storage tank; or (E) Piping, tubing, or hoses connected to an adjacent APPROVED source.  
  
_____
5-2 - PLUMBING SUPPLY SYSTEM 
Subparts 
5-201 Materials 
5-202 Design, Construction, and Installation 
5-203 Numbers and Capacities 
5-204 Location and Placement 
5-205 Operation and Maintenance 
_____
  
Materials 5-201.11 Approved.* (A) A PLUMBING SUPPLY SYSTEM and hoses conveying water shall be constructed and repaired with APPROVED materials according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto. (B) A water filter shall be made of SAFE MATERIALS. Design, Construction, and Installation 5-202.11 Approved Supply System and Cleanable Fixtures.* (A) A PLUMBING SUPPLY SYSTEM shall be designed, constructed, and installed according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto. (B) A PLUMBING FIXTURE such as a HANDWASHING SINK, toilet, or urinal shall be EASILY CLEANABLE. N 5-202.12 Handwashing Sink, Installation. (A) A HANDWASHING SINK shall be equipped to provide water at a temperature of at least 38C (100) through a mixing valve or combination faucet. (B) A steam mixing valve may not be used at a HANDWASHING SINK. (C) A self-closing, slow-closing, or metering faucet shall provide a flow of water for at least 20 seconds without the need to reactivate the faucet. (D) An automatic handwashing facility shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 5-202.13 Backflow Prevention, Air Gap.* An air gap between the water supply inlet and the flood level rim of the PLUMBING FIXTURE, EQUIPMENT, or nonFOOD EQUIPMENT shall be at least twice the diameter of the water supply inlet and may not be less than 25 mm (1 inch). 5-202.14 Backflow Prevention Device, Design Standard. A backflow or backsiphonage prevention device installed on a water supply system shall meet American Society of Sanitary Engineering (A.S.S.E.) standards for construction, installation, maintenance, inspection, and testing for that specific application and type of device. 5-202.15 Conditioning Device, Design. A water filter, screen, and other water conditioning device installed on water lines shall be designed to facilitate disassembly for periodic servicing and cleaning. A water filter element shall be of the replaceable type. Numbers and Capacities 5-203.11 Handwashing Sinks.* (A) Except as specified in  (B)of this section, at least 1 HANDWASHING SINK, a number of HANDWASHING SINKS necessary for their convenient use by EMPLOYEES in areas specified under  5-204.11, and not fewer than the number of HANDWASHING SINKS required by LAW shall be provided. (B) If APPROVED and capable of removing the types of soils encountered in the FOOD operations involved, automatic handwashing facilities may be substituted for HANDWASHING SINKS in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that has at least one HANDWASHING SINK. 5-203.12 Toilets.* Toilet facilities shall be installed according to applicable state and local requirements or as approved by the regulatory authority. Toilet facilities shall be conveniently located and shall be accessible to employees and patrons at all times, except that food service establishments that have no seating arrangements shall not be required to provide patron access to toilet facilites. Separate toilet facilites shall be provided for each sex in all new, newly constructed, or extensively remodeled facilities that offer food consumption arrangement for 20 or more persons on the premises. 5-203.13 Service Sink. At least 1 service sink or 1 curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain shall be provided and conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. 5-203.14 Backflow Prevention Device, When Required.* A PLUMBING SUPPLY SYSTEM shall be installed to preclude backflow of a solid, liquid, or gas contaminant into the water supply system at each point of use at the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, including on a hose bibb if a hose is attached or on a hose bibb if a hose is not attached and backflow prevention is required by LAW, by: (A) Providing an air gap as specified under  5-202.13; or (B) Installing an APPROVED backflow prevention device as specified under  5-202.14. 5-203.15 Backflow Prevention Device, Carbonator.* (A) If not provided with an air gap as specified under  5-202.13, a double check valve with an intermediate vent preceded by a screen of not less than 100 mesh to 25.4 mm (100 mesh to 1 inch) shall be installed upstream from a carbonating device and downstream from any copper in the water supply line. (B) A single or double check valve attached to the carbonator need not be of the vented type if an air gap or vented backflow prevention device has been otherwise provided as specified under  (A) of this section. Location and Placement 5-204.11 Handwashing Sinks.* A HANDWASHING SINK shall be located: (A) To allow convenient use by EMPLOYEES in FOOD preparation, FOOD dispensing, and WAREWASHING areas; and (B) In, or immediately adjacent to, toilet rooms. 5-204.12 Backflow Prevention Device, Location. A backflow prevention device shall be located so that it may be serviced and maintained. 5-204.13 Conditioning Device, Location. A water filter, screen, and other water conditioning device installed on water lines shall be located to facilitate disassembly for periodic servicing and cleaning. Operation and Maintenance 5-205.11 Using a Handwashing Sink. (A) A HANDWASHING SINK shall be maintained so that it is accessible at all times for EMPLOYEE use. (B) A HANDWASHING SINK may not be used for purposes other than handwashing. (C) An automatic handwashing facility shall be used in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 5-205.12 Prohibiting a Cross Connection.* (A) A PERSON may not create a cross connection by connecting a pipe or conduit between the DRINKING WATER supply system and a nonDRINKING WATER supply system or a water supply system of unknown quality. (B) The piping of a nonDRINKING WATER supply system shall be durably identified so that it is readily distinguishable from piping that carries DRINKING WATER. N 5-205.13 Scheduling Inspection and Service for a Water Supply System Device. A device such as a water treatment device or backflow preventer shall be scheduled for inspection and service, in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and as necessary to prevent device failure based on local water conditions, and records demonstrating inspection and service shall be maintained by the PERSON IN CHARGE. 5-205.14 Water Reservoir of Fogging Devices, Cleaning.* (A) A reservoir that is used to supply water to a device such as a produce fogger shall be: (1) Maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications; and (2) Cleaned in accordance with manufacturer's specifications or according to the procedures specified under  (B) of this section, whichever is more stringent. (B) Cleaning procedures shall include at least the following steps and shall be conducted at least once a week: (1) Draining and complete disassembly of the water and aerosol contact parts; (2) Brush-cleaning the reservoir, aerosol tubing, and discharge nozzles with a suitable detergent solution; (3) Flushing the complete supply system with water to remove the detergent solution and particulate accumulation; and (4) Rinsing by immersing, spraying, or swabbing the reservoir, aerosol tubing, and discharge nozzles with at least 50 MG/L hypochlorite solution. 5-205.15 Supply System Maintained in Good Repair.* A PLUMBING SUPPLY SYSTEM shall be: (A) Repaired according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto.; and (B) Maintained in good repair. S  
  
_____
5-3 - MOBILE WATER TANK AND MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT WATER TANK 
Subparts 
5-301 Materials 
5-302 Design and Construction 
5-303 Numbers and Capacities 
5-304 Operation and Maintenance 
_____
  
Materials 5-301.11 Approved. Materials that are used in the construction of a mobile water tank, mobile FOOD ESTABLISHMENT water tank, and appurtenances shall be: (A) Safe; (B) Durable, CORROSION-RESISTANT, and nonabsorbent; and (C) Finished to have a SMOOTH, EASILY CLEANABLE surface. Design and Construction 5-302.11 Enclosed Supply System, Sloped to Drain. A mobile water tank shall be: (A) Enclosed from the filling inlet to the discharge outlet; and (B) Sloped to an outlet that allows complete drainage of the tank. 5-302.12 Inspection and Cleaning Port, Protected and Secured. If a water tank is designed with an access port for inspection and cleaning, the opening shall be in the top of the tank and: (A) Flanged upward at least 13 mm (one-half inch); and (B) Equipped with a port cover assembly that is: (1) Provided with a gasket and a device for securing the cover in place, and (2) Flanged to overlap the opening and sloped to drain. 5-302.13 "V" Type Threads, Use Limitation. A fitting with "V" type threads on a water tank inlet or outlet shall be allowed only when a hose is permanently attached. 5-302.14 Tank Vent, Protected. If provided, a water tank vent shall terminate in a downward direction and shall be covered with: (A) 16 mesh to 25.4 mm (16 mesh to 1 inch) screen or equivalent when the vent is in a protected area; or (B) A protective filter when the vent is in an area that is not protected from windblown dirt and debris. 5-302.15 Inlet and Outlet, Sloped to Drain. (A) A water tank and its inlet and outlet shall be sloped to drain. (B) A water tank inlet shall be positioned so that it is protected from contaminants such as waste discharge, road dust, oil, or grease. 5-302.16 Hose, Construction and Identification. A hose used for conveying DRINKING WATER from a water tank shall be: (A) Safe; (B) Durable, CORROSION-RESISTANT, and nonaborbent; (C) Resistant to pitting, chipping, crazing, scratching, scoring, distortion, and decomposition; (D) Finished with a SMOOTH interior surface; and (E) Clearly and durably identified as to its use if not permanently attached. Numbers and Capacities 5-303.11 Filter, Compressed Air. A filter that does not pass oil or oil vapors shall be installed in the air supply line between the compressor and DRINKING WATER supply system when compressed air is used to pressurize the water tank supply system. 5-303.12 Protective Cover or Device. A cap and keeper chain, closed cabinet, closed storage tube, or other APPROVED protective cover or device shall be provided for a water inlet, outlet, and hose. 5-303.13 Mobile Food Establishment Tank Inlet. A mobile FOOD ESTABLISHMENT'S water tank inlet shall be: (A) 19.1 mm (three-fourths inch) in inner diameter or less; and (B) Provided with a hose connection of a size or type that will prevent its use for any other service. Operation and Maintenance 5-304.11 Supply System Flushing and Sanitization.* A water tank, pump, and hoses shall be flushed and SANITIZED before being placed in service after construction, repair, modification, and periods of nonuse. 5-304.12 Using a Pump and Hoses, Backflow Prevention. A PERSON shall operate a water tank, pump, and hoses so that backflow and other contamination of the water supply are prevented. 5-304.13 Protecting Inlet, Outlet, and Hose Fitting. If not in use, a water tank and hose inlet and outlet fitting shall be protected using a cover or device as specified under  5-303.12. 5-304.14 Tank, Pump, and Hoses, Dedication. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, a water tank, pump, and hoses used for conveying DRINKING WATER shall be used for no other purpose. (B) Water tanks, pumps, and hoses APPROVED for liquid FOODS may be used for conveying DRINKING WATER if they are cleaned and SANITIZED before they are used to convey water.  
  
_____
5-4 - SEWAGE, OTHER LIQUID WASTE, AND RAINWATER 
Subparts 
5-401 Mobile Holding Tank 
5-402 Retention, Drainage, and Delivery 
5-403 Disposal Facility 
_____
  
Mobile Holding Tank 5-401.11 Capacity and Drainage. A SEWAGE holding tank in a mobile FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be: (A) Sized 15 percent larger in capacity than the water supply tank with a minimum capacity of a 20-gallon tank; and (B) Sloped to a drain that is 25 mm (1 inch) in inner diameter or greater, equipped with a shut-off valve. Retention, Drainage, and Deliver 5-402.10 Establishment Drainage Supply System. FOOD ESTABLISHMENT drainage supply systems, including grease traps, that convey SEWAGE shall be designed and installed as specified under  5-202.11(A). design, construction, and installation 5-402.11 Backflow Prevention.* (A) Except as specified in  (B), (C), and (D) of this section, a direct connection may not exist between the SEWAGE supply system and a drain originating from EQUIPMENT in which FOOD, portable EQUIPMENT, or UTENSILS are placed. (B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply to floor drains that originate in refrigerated spaces that are constructed as an integral part of the building. (C) If allowed by LAW, a WAREWASHING machine may have a direct connection between its waste outlet and a floor drain when the machine is located within 1.5 m (5 feet) of a trapped floor drain and the machine outlet is connected to the inlet side of a properly vented floor drain trap. (D) If allowed by LAW, a WAREWASHING or culinary sink may have a direct connection. location and placement 5-402.12 Grease Trap. If used, a grease trap shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning. operation and maintenance 5-402.13 Conveying Sewage.* SEWAGE shall be conveyed to the point of disposal through an APPROVED sanitary SEWAGE supply system or other supply system, including use of SEWAGE transport vehicles, waste retention tanks, pumps, pipes, hoses, and connections that are constructed, maintained, and operated according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto. 5-402.14 Removing Mobile Food Establishment Wastes. SEWAGE and other liquid wastes shall be removed from a mobile FOOD ESTABLISHMENT at an APPROVED waste SERVICING AREA or by a SEWAGE transport vehicle in such a way that a public health HAZARD or nuisance is not created. 5-402.15 Flushing a Waste Retention Tank. A tank for liquid waste retention shall be thoroughly flushed and drained in a sanitary manner during the servicing operation. Disposal Facility 5-403.11 Approved Sewage Disposal Supply System.* design and construction SEWAGE shall be disposed through an APPROVED facility that is: (A) A public SEWAGE treatment plant; or (B) An individual SEWAGE disposal supply system that is sized, constructed, maintained, and operated according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto. 5-403.12 Other Liquid Wastes and Rainwater. Condensate drainage and other nonSEWAGE liquids and rainwater shall be drained from point of discharge to disposal according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto.  
  
_____
5-5 - REFUSE, RECYCLABLES, AND RETURNABLES 
Subparts 
5-501 Facilities on the Premises 
5-502 Removal 
5-503 Facilities for Disposal and Recycling 
_____
  
Facilities on the Premises 5-501.10 Indoor Storage Area. materials, design, construction, and installation If located within the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, a storage area for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall meet the requirements specified under  6-101.11, 6-201.11 - 6-201.18, 6-202.15, and 6-202.16. 5-501.11 Outdoor Storage Surface. An outdoor storage surface for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material such as concrete or asphalt and shall be SMOOTH, durable, and sloped to drain. 5-501.12 Outdoor Enclosure. If used, an outdoor enclosure for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be constructed of durable and cleanable materials. 5-501.13 Receptacles. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables and for use with materials containing FOOD residue shall be durable, cleanable, insect- and rodent-resistant, leakproof, and nonabsorbent. (B) Plastic bags and wet strength paper bags may be used to line receptacles for storage inside the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, or within closed outside receptacles. 5-501.14 Receptacles in Food Vending Machines. Except for a receptacle for BEVERAGE bottle crown closures, a REFUSE receptacle may not be located within a FOOD VENDING MACHINE. 5-501.15 Outside Receptacles. (A) Receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables used with materials containing FOOD residue and used outside the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be designed and constructed to have tight-fitting lids, doors, or covers. (B) Receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE and recyclables such as an on-site compactor shall be installed so that accumulation of debris and insect and rodent attraction and harborage are minimized and effective cleaning is facilitated around and, if the unit is not installed flush with the base pad, under the unit. numbers and capacities 5-501.16 Storage Areas, Rooms, and Receptacles, Capacity and Availability. (A) An inside storage room and area and outside storage area and enclosure, and receptacles shall be of sufficient capacity to hold REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables that accumulate. (B) A receptacle shall be provided in each area of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or PREMISES where REFUSE is generated or commonly discarded, or where recyclables or returnables are placed. (C) If disposable towels are used at handwashing lavatories, a waste receptacle shall be located at each lavatory or group of adjacent lavatories. 5-501.17 Toilet Room Receptacle, Covered. A toilet room used by females shall be provided with a covered receptacle for sanitary napkins. 5-501.18 Cleaning Implements and Supplies. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, suitable cleaning implements and supplies such as high pressure pumps, hot water, steam, and detergent shall be provided as necessary for effective cleaning of receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables. (B) If APPROVED, off-PREMISES-based cleaning services may be used if on-PREMISES cleaning implements and supplies are not provided. location and placement 5-501.19 Storage Areas, Redeeming Machines, Receptacles and Waste Handling Units, Location. (A) An area designated for REFUSE, recyclables, returnables, and, except as specified in  (B) of this section, a redeeming machine for recyclables or returnables shall be located so that it is separate from FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES and a public health HAZARD or nuisance is not created. (B) A redeeming machine may be located in the PACKAGED FOOD storage area or CONSUMER area of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT if FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES are not subject to contamination from the machines and a public health HAZARD or nuisance is not created. (C) The location of receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables may not create a public health HAZARD or nuisance or interfere with the cleaning of adjacent space. operation and maintenance 5-501.110 Storing Refuse, Recyclables, and Returnables. REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be stored in receptacles or waste handling units so that they are inaccessible to insects and rodents. 5-501.111 Areas, Enclosures, and Receptacles, Good Repair. Storage areas, enclosures, and receptacles for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be maintained in good repair. 5-501.112 Outside Storage Prohibitions. (A) Except as specified in & (B) of this section, REFUSE receptacles not meeting the requirements specified under & 5-501.13(A) such as receptacles that are not rodent-resistant, unprotected plastic bags and paper bags, or baled units that contain materials with FOOD residue may not be stored outside. (B) Cardboard or other packaging material that does not contain FOOD residues and that is awaiting regularly scheduled delivery to a recycling or disposal site may be stored outside without being in a covered receptacle if it is stored so that it does not create a rodent harborage problem. 5-501.113 Covering Receptacles. Receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be kept covered: (A) Inside the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT if the receptacles and units: (1) Contain FOOD residue and are not in continuous use; or (2) After they are filled; and (B) With tight-fitting lids or doors if kept outside the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. 5-501.114 Using Drain Plugs. Drains in receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall have drain plugs in place. 5-501.115 Maintaining Refuse Areas and Enclosures. A storage area and enclosure for REFUSE, recyclables, or returnables shall be maintained free of unnecessary items, as specified under  6-501.114, and clean. 5-501.116 Cleaning Receptacles. (A) Receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be thoroughly cleaned in a way that does not contaminate FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, or SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES, and waste water shall be disposed of as specified under  5-402.13. (B) Soiled receptacles and waste handling units for REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be cleaned at a frequency necessary to prevent them from developing a buildup of soil or becoming attractants for insects and rodents. Removal 5-502.11 Frequency. REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be removed from the PREMISES at a frequency that will minimize the development of objectionable odors and other conditions that attract or harbor insects and rodents. 5-502.12 Receptacles or Vehicles. REFUSE, recyclables, and returnables shall be removed from the PREMISES by way of: (A) Portable receptacles that are constructed and maintained according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto.; or (B) A transport vehicle that is constructed, maintained, and operated according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto. Facilities for Disposal and Recycling 5-503.11 Community or Individual Facility. Solid waste not disposed of through the SEWAGE supply system such as through grinders and pulpers shall be recycled or disposed of in an APPROVED public or private community recycling or REFUSE facility; or solid waste shall be disposed of in an individual REFUSE facility such as a landfill or incinerator which is sized, constructed, maintained, and operated according to K.S.A. 65-161 et seq., and amendments thereto.  
Chapter 6 - Physical Facilities 
Parts 
6-1 MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
6-2 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND INSTALLATION 
6-3 NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES 
6-4 LOCATION AND PLACEMENT 
6-5 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION 
  
_____
6-1 - MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
Subparts 
6-101 Indoor Areas 
6-102 Outdoor Areas 
_____
  
Indoor Areas 6-101.11 Surface Characteristics. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, materials for indoor floor, wall, and ceiling surfaces under conditions of normal use shall be: (1) SMOOTH, durable, and EASILY CLEANABLE for areas where FOOD ESTABLISHMENT operations are conducted; (2) Closely woven and EASILY CLEANABLE carpet for carpeted areas; and (3) Nonabsorbent for areas subject to moisture such as FOOD preparation areas, walk-in refrigerators, WAREWASHING areas, toilet rooms, mobile FOOD ESTABLISHMENT SERVICING AREAS, and areas subject to flushing or spray cleaning methods. (B) In a TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: (1) If graded to drain, a floor may be concrete, machine-laid asphalt, or dirt or gravel if it is covered with mats, removable platforms, duckboards, or other APPROVED materials that are effectively treated to control dust and mud; and (2) Walls and ceilings may be constructed of a material that protects the interior from the weather and windblown dust and debris. Outdoor Areas 6-102.11 Surface Characteristics. (A) The outdoor walking and driving areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or gravel or other materials that have been effectively treated to minimize dust, facilitate maintenance, and prevent muddy conditions. (B) Exterior surfaces of buildings and mobile FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS shall be of weather-resistant materials and shall comply with LAW. (C) Outdoor storage areas for REFUSE, recyclables, or returnables shall be of materials specified under  5-501.11 and 5-501.12.  
  
_____
6-2 - DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND INSTALLATION 
Subparts 
6-201 Cleanability 
6-202 Functionality 
_____
  
Cleanability 6-201.11 Floors, Walls, and Ceilings. Except as specified under  6-201.14 and except for antislip floor coverings or applications that may be used for safety reasons, floors, floor coverings, walls, wall coverings, and ceilings shall be designed, constructed, and installed so they are SMOOTH and EASILY CLEANABLE. 6-201.12 Floors, Walls, and Ceilings, Utility Lines. (A) Utility service lines and pipes may not be unnecessarily exposed. (B) Exposed utility service lines and pipes shall be installed so they do not obstruct or prevent cleaning of the floors, walls, or ceilings. (C) Exposed horizontal utility service lines and pipes may not be installed on the floor. 6-201.13 Floor and Wall Junctures, Coved, and Enclosed or Sealed. (A) In FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS in which cleaning methods other than water flushing are used for cleaning floors, the floor and wall junctures shall be coved and closed to no larger than 1 mm (one thirty-second inch). (B) The floors in FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS in which water flush cleaning methods are used shall be provided with drains and be graded to drain, and the floor and wall junctures shall be coved and SEALED. 6-201.14 Floor Carpeting, Restrictions and Installation. (A) A floor covering such as carpeting or similar material may not be installed as a floor covering in FOOD preparation areas, walk-in refrigerators, WAREWASHING areas, toilet room areas where handwashing lavatories, toilets, and urinals are located, REFUSE storage rooms, or other areas where the floor is subject to moisture, flushing, or spray cleaning methods. (B) If carpeting is installed as a floor covering in areas other than those specified under  (A) of this section, it shall be: (1) Securely attached to the floor with a durable mastic, by using a stretch and tack method, or by another method; and (2) Installed tightly against the wall under the coving or installed away from the wall with a space between the carpet and the wall and with the edges of the carpet secured by metal stripping or some other means. 6-201.15 Floor Covering, Mats and Duckboards. Mats and duckboards shall be designed to be removable and EASILY CLEANABLE. 6-201.16 Wall and Ceiling Coverings and Coatings. (A) Wall and ceiling covering materials shall be attached so that they are EASILY CLEANABLE. (B) Except in areas used only for dry storage, concrete, porous blocks, or bricks used for indoor wall construction shall be finished and SEALED to provide a SMOOTH, nonabsorbent, EASILY CLEANABLE surface. 6-201.17 Walls and Ceilings, Attachments. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, attachments to walls and ceilings such as light fixtures, mechanical room ventilation system components, vent covers, wall mounted fans, decorative items, and other attachments shall be EASILY CLEANABLE. (B) In a CONSUMER area, wall and ceiling surfaces and decorative items and attachments that are provided for ambiance need not meet this requirement if they are kept clean. 6-201.18 Walls and Ceilings, Studs, Joists, and Rafters. Except for TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, studs, joists, and rafters may not be exposed in areas subject to moisture. Functionality 6-202.11 Light Bulbs, Protective Shielding. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, light bulbs shall be shielded, coated, or otherwise shatter-resistant in areas where there is exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; or unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. (B) Shielded, coated, or otherwise shatter-resistant bulbs need not be used in areas used only for storing FOOD in unopened packages, if: (1) The integrity of the packages cannot be affected by broken glass falling onto them; and (2) The packages are capable of being cleaned of debris from broken bulbs before the packages are opened. (C) An infrared or other heat lamp shall be protected against breakage by a shield surrounding and extending beyond the bulb so that only the face of the bulb is exposed. 6-202.12 Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning System Vents. Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems shall be designed and installed so that make-up air intake and exhaust vents do not cause contamination of FOOD, FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES, EQUIPMENT, or UTENSILS. 6-202.13 Insect Control Devices, Design and Installation. (A) Insect control devices that are used to electrocute or stun flying insects shall be designed to retain the insect within the device. (B) Insect control devices shall be installed so that: (1) The devices are not located over a FOOD preparation area; and (2) Dead insects and insect fragments are prevented from being impelled onto or falling on exposed FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. 6-202.14 Toilet Rooms, Enclosed. Except where a toilet room is located outside a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and does not open directly into the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT such as a toilet room that is provided by the management of a shopping mall, a toilet room located on the PREMISES shall be completely enclosed and provided with a tight-fitting and self-closing door. 6-202.15 Outer Openings, Protected.* (A) Except as specified in  (B), (C), and (E) and under  (D) of this section, outer openings of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be protected against the entry of insects and rodents by: (1) Filling or closing holes and other gaps along floors, walls, and ceilings; S (2) Closed, tight-fitting windows; S and (3) Solid, self-closing, tight-fitting doors. S (B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply if a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT opens into a larger structure, such as a mall, airport, or office building, or into an attached structure, such as a porch, and the outer openings from the larger or attached structure are protected against the entry of insects and rodents. (C) Exterior doors used as exits need not be self-closing if they are: (1) Solid and tight-fitting; (2) Designated for use only when an emergency exists, by the fire protection authority that has jurisdiction over the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; and (3) Limited-use so they are not used for entrance or exit from the building for purposes other than the designated emergency exit use. (D) Except as specified in  (B) and (E) of this section, if the windows or doors of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, or of a larger structure within which a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT is located, are kept open for ventilation or other purposes or a TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT is not provided with windows and doors as specified under  (A) of this section, the openings shall be protected against the entry of insects and rodents by: (1) 16 mesh to 25.4 mm (16 mesh to 1 inch) screens; S (2) Properly designed and installed air curtains to control flying insects; S or (3) Other effective means. S (E) Paragraph (D) of this section does not apply if flying insects and other pests are absent due to the location of the ESTABLISHMENT, the weather, or other limiting condition. 6-202.16 Exterior Walls and Roofs, Protective Barrier. Perimeter walls and roofs of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall effectively protect the establishment from the weather and the entry of insects, rodents, and other animals. 6-202.17 Outdoor Food Vending Areas, Overhead Protection. Except for machines that vend canned BEVERAGES, if located outside, a machine used to vend FOOD shall be provided with overhead protection. 6-202.18 Outdoor Servicing Areas, Overhead Protection. Except for areas used only for the loading of water or the discharge of SEWAGE and other liquid waste, through the use of a closed system of hoses, SERVICING AREAS shall be provided with overhead protection. 6-202.19 Outdoor Walking and Driving Surfaces, Graded to Drain. Exterior walking and driving surfaces shall be graded to drain. 6-202.110 Outdoor Refuse Areas, Curbed and Graded to Drain. Outdoor REFUSE areas shall be constructed in accordance with LAW and shall be curbed and graded to drain to collect and dispose of liquid waste that results from the REFUSE and from cleaning the area and waste receptacles. 6-202.111 Private Homes and Living or Sleeping Quarters, Use Prohibition. A private home, a room used as living or sleeping quarters, or an area directly opening into a room used as living or sleeping quarters may not be used for conducting FOOD ESTABLISHMENT operations. 6-202.112 Living or Sleeping Quarters, Separation. Living or sleeping quarters located on the PREMISES of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT such as those provided for lodging registration clerks or resident managers shall be separated from rooms and areas used for FOOD ESTABLISHMENT operations by complete partitioning and solid self-closing doors.  
  
_____
6-3 - NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES 
Subparts 
6-301 Handwashing Sinks 
6-302 Toilets and Urinals 
6-303 Lighting 
6-304 Ventilation 
6-305 Dressing Areas and Lockers 
6-306 Service Sinks 
_____
  
Handwashing Sinks 6-301.10 Minimum Number. HANDWASHING SINKS shall be provided as specified under 5-203.11. 6-301.11 Handwashing Cleanser, Availability. Each HANDWASHING SINK or group of 2 adjacent HANDWASHING SINKS shall be provided with a supply of hand cleaning liquid, powder, or bar soap. 6-301.12 Hand Drying Provision. Each HANDWASHING SINK or group of adjacent HANDWASHING SINKS shall be provided with: (A) Individual, disposable towels; (B) A continuous towel system that supplies the user with a clean towel; or (C) A heated-air hand drying device. 6-301.13 Handwashing Aids and Devices, Use Restrictions. A sink used for FOOD preparation or UTENSIL washing, or a service sink or curbed cleaning facility used for the disposal of mop water or similar wastes, may not be provided with the handwashing aids and devices required for a HANDWASHING SINK as specified under  6-301.11 and 6-301.12 and  5-501.16(C). 6-301.14 Handwashing Signage. A sign or poster that notifies FOOD EMPLOYEES to wash their hands shall be provided at all HANDWASHING SINKS used by FOOD EMPLOYEES and shall be clearly visible to FOOD EMPLOYEES. 6-301.20 Disposable Towels, Waste Receptacle. A HANDWASHING SINK or group of adjacent HANDWASHING SINKS that is provided with disposable towels shall be provided with a waste receptacle as specified under  5-501.16(C). Toilets and Urinals 6-302.10 Minimum Number. Toilets shall be provided as specified under  5-203.12. 6-302.11 Toilet Tissue, Availability. A supply of toilet tissue shall be available at each toilet. Lighting 6-303.11 Intensity. The light intensity shall be: (A) At least 108 lux (10 foot candles) at a distance of 75 cm (30 inches) above the floor, in walk-in refrigeration units and dry FOOD storage areas and in other areas and rooms during periods of cleaning; (B) At least 215 lux (20 foot candles): (1) At a surface where FOOD is provided for CONSUMER self-service such as buffets and salad bars or where fresh produce or PACKAGED FOODS are sold or offered for consumption, (2) Inside EQUIPMENT such as reach-in and under-counter refrigerators; and (3) At a distance of 75 cm (30 inches) above the floor in areas used for handwashing, WAREWASHING, and EQUIPMENT and UTENSIL storage, and in toilet rooms; and (C) At least 540 lux (50 foot candles) at a surface where a FOOD EMPLOYEE is working with FOOD or working with UTENSILS or EQUIPMENT such as knives, slicers, grinders, or saws where EMPLOYEE safety is a factor. Ventilation 6-304.11 Mechanical. If necessary to keep rooms free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes, mechanical ventilation of sufficient capacity shall be provided. Dressing Areas and Lockers 6-305.11 Designation. (A) Dressing rooms or dressing areas shall be designated if EMPLOYEES routinely change their clothes in the establishment. (B) Lockers or other suitable facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of EMPLOYEES' clothing and other possessions. Service Sinks 6-306.10 Availability. A service sink or curbed cleaning facility shall be provided as specified under  5-203.13.  
  
_____
6-4 - LOCATION AND PLACEMENT 
Subparts 
6-401 Handwashing Sinks 
6-402 Toilets Rooms 
6-403 Employee Accommodations 
6-404 Distressed Merchandise 
6-405 Refuse, Recyclables, and Returnables 
_____
  
Handwashing Sinks 6-401.10 Conveniently Located. HANDWASHING SINKS shall be conveniently located as specified under  5-204.11. Toilet Rooms 6-402.11 Convenience and Accessibility. Toilet rooms shall be conveniently located and accessible to EMPLOYEES during all hours of operation. Employee Accommodations 6-403.11 Designated Areas. (A) Areas designated for EMPLOYEES to eat, drink, and use tobacco shall be located so that FOOD, EQUIPMENT, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES are protected from contamination. (B) Lockers or other suitable facilities shall be located in a designated room or area where contamination of FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES can not occur. Distressed Merchandise 6-404.11 Segregation and Location. Products that are held by the LICENSEE for credit, redemption, or return to the distributor, such as damaged, spoiled, or recalled products, shall be segregated and held in designated areas that are separated from FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. Refuse,Recyclables, and Returnables 6-405.10 Receptacles, Waste Handling Units, and Designated Storage Areas. Units, receptacles, and areas designated for storage of REFUSE and recyclable and returnable containers shall be located as specified under  5-501.19.  
  
_____
6-5 - MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION 
Subpart 
6-501 Premises, Structures, Attachments, and Fixtures-Methods 
_____
  
Premises, Structures, Attachments, and Fixtures-Methods 6-501.11 Repairing. PHYSICAL FACILITIES shall be maintained in good repair. 6-501.12 Cleaning, Frequency and Restrictions. (A) PHYSICAL FACILITIES shall be cleaned as often as necessary to keep them clean. (B) Except for cleaning that is necessary due to a spill or other accident, cleaning shall be done during periods when the least amount of FOOD is exposed such as after closing. 6-501.13 Cleaning Floors, Dustless Methods. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, only dustless methods of cleaning shall be used, such as wet cleaning, vacuum cleaning, mopping with treated dust mops, or sweeping using a broom and dust-arresting compounds. (B) Spills or drippage on floors that occur between normal floor cleaning times may be cleaned: (1) Without the use of dust-arresting compounds; and (2) In the case of liquid spills or drippage, with the use of a small amount of absorbent compound such as sawdust or diatomaceous earth applied immediately before spot cleaning. 6-501.14 Cleaning Ventilation Systems, Nuisance and Discharge Prohibition. (A) Intake and exhaust air ducts shall be cleaned and filters changed so they are not a source of contamination by dust, dirt, and other materials. (B) If vented to the outside, ventilation systems may not create a public health HAZARD or nuisance or unLAWful discharge. 6-501.15 Cleaning Maintenance Tools, Preventing Contamination.* FOOD preparation sinks, HANDWASHING SINKS, and WAREWASHING EQUIPMENT may not be used for the cleaning of maintenance tools, the preparation or holding of maintenance materials, or the disposal of mop water and similar liquid wastes. 6-501.16 Drying Mops. After use, mops shall be placed in a position that allows them to air-dry without soiling walls, EQUIPMENT, or supplies. 6-501.17 Absorbent Materials on Floors, Use Limitation. Except as specified in  6-501.13(B), sawdust, wood shavings, granular salt, baked clay, diatomaceous earth, or similar materials may not be used on floors. 6-501.18 Cleaning of Plumbing Fixtures. PLUMBING FIXTURES such as HANDWASHING SINKS, toilets, and urinals shall be cleaned as often as necessary to keep them clean and maintained and used as specified under  5-205.11. 6-501.19 Closing Toilet Room Doors. Except during cleaning and maintenance operations, toilet room doors as specified under  6-202.14 shall be kept closed. 6-501.110 Using Dressing Rooms and Lockers. (A) Dressing rooms shall be used by EMPLOYEES if the EMPLOYEES regularly change their clothes in the establishment. (B) Lockers or other suitable facilities shall be used for the orderly storage of EMPLOYEE clothing and other possessions. 6-501.111 Controlling Pests.* The presence of insects, rodents, and other pests shall be controlled to eliminate their presence on the PREMISES by: (A) Routinely inspecting incoming shipments of FOOD and supplies; S (B) Routinely inspecting the PREMISES for evidence of pests; S (C) Using methods, if pests are found, such as trapping devices or other means of pest control as specified under  7-202.12, 7-206.12, and 7-206.13; and (D) Eliminating harborage conditions. S 6-501.112 Removing Dead or Trapped Birds, Insects, Rodents, and Other Pests.* Dead or trapped birds, insects, rodents, and other pests shall be removed from control devices and the PREMISES at a frequency that prevents their accumulation, decomposition, or the attraction of pests. 6-501.113 Storing Maintenance Tools. Maintenance tools such as brooms, mops, vacuum cleaners, and similar items shall be: (A) Stored so they do not contaminate FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES; and (B) Stored in an orderly manner that facilitates cleaning the area used for storing the maintenance tools. 6-501.114 Maintaining Premises, Unnecessary Items and Litter. The PREMISES shall be free of: (A) Items that are unnecessary to the operation or maintenance of the establishment such as EQUIPMENT that is nonfunctional or no longer used; and (B) Litter. 6-501.115 Prohibiting Animals.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) and (C) of this section, live animals may not be allowed on the PREMISES of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. (B) Live animals may be allowed in the following situations if the contamination of FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES can not result: (1) Edible FISH or decorative FISH in aquariums, shellfish or crustacea on ice or under refrigeration, and shellfish and crustacea in display tank systems; (2) Patrol dogs accompanying police or security officers in offices and dining, sales, and storage areas, and sentry dogs running loose in outside fenced areas; (3) In areas that are not used for FOOD preparation and that are usually open for customers, such as dining and sales areas, SERVICE ANIMALS that are controlled by the disabled EMPLOYEE or PERSON, if a health or safety HAZARD will not result from the presence or activities of the SERVICE ANIMAL; (4) In areas that are not used for FOOD preparation, storage, sales, display, or dining, in which there are caged animals or animals that are similarly confined, such as in a variety store that sells pets or a tourist park that displays animals. (C) Live or dead FISH bait may be stored if contamination of FOOD; clean EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS; and unwrapped SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES can not result.  
Chapter 7 - Poisonous or Toxic Materials 
Parts 
7-1 LABELING AND IDENTIFICATION 
7-2 OPERATIONAL SUPPLIES AND APPLICATIONS 
7-3 STOCK AND RETAIL SALE 
  
_____
7-1 - POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS 
Subparts 
7-101 Original Containers 
7-102 Working Containers 
_____
  
Original Containers 7-101.11 Identifying Information, Prominence.* Containers of POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS and PERSONAL CARE ITEMS shall bear a legible manufacturer's label. Working Containers 7-102.11 Common Name.* Working containers used for storing POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS such as cleaners and SANITIZERS taken from bulk supplies shall be clearly and individually identified with the common name of the material.  
  
_____
7-2 - OPERATIONAL SUPPLIES AND APPLICATIONS 
Subparts 
7-201 Storage 
7-202 Presence and Use 
7-203 Container Prohibitions 
7-204 Chemicals 
7-205 Lubricants 
7-206 Pesticides 
7-207 Medicines 
7-208 First Aid Supplies 
7-209 Other Personal Care Items 
_____
  
Storage 7-201.11 Separation.* POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS shall be stored so they can not contaminate FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES by: (A) Separating the POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS by spacing or partitioning; S and (B) Locating the POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS in an area that is not above FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE or SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. This paragraph does not apply to EQUIPMENT and UTENSIL cleaners and SANITIZERS that are stored in WAREWASHING areas for availability and convenience if the materials are stored to prevent contamination of FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. Presence and Use 7-202.11 Restriction.* (A) Only those POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS that are required for the operation and maintenance of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, such as for the cleaning and SANITIZING of EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS and the control of insects and rodents, shall be allowed in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.S (B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply to PACKAGED POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS that are for retail sale. 7-202.12 Conditions of Use.* POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS shall be: (A) Used according to: (1) LAW and this Code, (2) Manufacturer's use directions included in labeling, and, for a pesticide, manufacturer's label instructions that state that use is allowed in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, (3) The conditions of certification, if certification is required, for use of the pest control materials, and (4) Additional conditions that may be established by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY; and (B) Applied so that: (1) A HAZARD to EMPLOYEES or other PERSONS is not constituted, and (2) Contamination including toxic residues due to drip, drain, fog, splash or spray on FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES is prevented, and for a RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDE, this is achieved by: (a) Removing the items, (b) Covering the items with impermeable covers, or (c) Taking other appropriate preventive actions, and (d) Cleaning and SANITIZING EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS after the application. (C) A RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDE shall be applied only by an applicator certified as defined in 7 USC 136 Definitions, (e) Certified Applicator, of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, or a PERSON under the direct supervision of a certified applicator. Container Prohibitions 7-203.11 Poisonous or Toxic Material Containers.* A container previously used to store POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS may not be used to store, transport, or dispense FOOD. Chemicals 7-204.11 Sanitizers, Criteria.* Chemical SANITIZERS and other chemical antimicrobials applied to FOOD-CONTACT SURFACEs shall meet the requirements specified in 40 CFR 180.940 Tolerance exemptions for active and inert ingredients for use in antimicrobial formulations (food-contact surface sanitizing solutions). 7-204.12 Chemicals for Washing Fruits and Vegetables, Criteria.* Chemicals used to wash or peel raw, whole fruits and vegetables shall meet the requirements specified in 21 CFR 173.315 Chemicals used in washing or to assist in the peeling of fruits and vegetables. 7-204.13 Boiler Water Additives, Criteria.* Chemicals used as boiler water ADDITIVES shall meet the requirements specified in 21 CFR 173.310 Boiler water additives. 7-204.14 Drying Agents, Criteria.* Drying agents used in conjunction with SANITIZATION shall: (A) Contain only components that are listed as one of the following: (1) Generally recognized as safe for use in FOOD as specified in 21 CFR 182 - Substances Generally Recognized as Safe, or 21 CFR 184 - Direct Food Substances Affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe, (2) Generally recognized as safe for the intended use as specified in 21 CFR 186 - Indirect Food Substances Affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe, (3) APPROVED for use as a drying agent under a prior sanction specified in 21 CFR 181 - Prior-Sanctioned Food Ingredients, (4) Specifically regulated as an indirect FOOD ADDITIVE for use as a drying agent as specified in 21 CFR Parts 175-178, or (5) APPROVED for use as a drying agent under the threshold of regulation process established by 21 CFR 170.39 Threshold of regulation for substances used in food-contact articles; and (B) When SANITIZATION is with chemicals, the approval required under Subparagraph (A)(3) or (A)(5) of this section or the regulation as an indirect FOOD ADDITIVE required under Subparagraph (A)(4) of this section, shall be specifically for use with chemical SANITIZING solutions. Lubricants 7-205.11 Incidental Food Contact, Criteria.* Lubricants shall meet the requirements specified in 21 CFR 178.3570 Lubricants with incidental food contact, if they are used on FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES, on bearings and gears located on or within FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES, or on bearings and gears that are located so that lubricants may leak, drip, or be forced into FOOD or onto FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES. Pesticides 7-206.11 Restricted Use Pesticides, Criteria.* RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDES specified under  7-202.12(C) shall meet the requirements specified in 40 CFR 152 Subpart I - Classification of Pesticides. 7-206.12 Rodent Bait Stations.* Rodent bait shall be contained in a covered, tamper-resistant bait station. 7-206.13 Tracking Powders, Pest Control and Monitoring.* (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, a tracking powder pesticide may not be used in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. (B) If used, a nontoxic tracking powder such as talcum or flour may not contaminate FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. N Medicines 7-207.11 Restriction and Storage.* (A) Except for medicines that are stored or displayed for retail sale, only those medicines that are necessary for the health of EMPLOYEES shall be allowed in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. (B) Medicines that are in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT for the EMPLOYEES' use shall be labeled as specified under  7-101.11 and located to prevent the contamination of FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. 7-207.12 Refrigerated Medicines, Storage.* Medicines belonging to EMPLOYEES or to children in a day care center that require refrigeration and are stored in a FOOD refrigerator shall be: (A) Stored in a package or container and kept inside a covered, leakproof container that is identified as a container for the storage of medicines; and (B) Located so they are inaccessible to children. First Aid Supplies 7-208.11 Storage.* First aid supplies that are in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT for the EMPLOYEES' use shall be: (A) Labeled as specified under  7-101.11; S and (B) Stored in a kit or a container that is located to prevent the contamination of FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, and LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES. S Other Personal Care Items 7-209.11 Storage. Except as specified under  7-207.12 and 7-208.11, EMPLOYEES shall store their PERSONAL CARE ITEMS in facilities as specified under  6-305.11(B).  
  
_____
7-3 - STOCK AND RETAIL SALE 
Subpart 
7-301 Storage and Display 
_____
  
Storage and Display 7-301.11 Separation.* POISONOUS or TOXIC MATERIALS shall be stored and displayed for retail sale so they can not contaminate FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE and SINGLE-USE ARTICLES by: (A) Separating the POISONOUS or TOXIC MATERIALS by spacing or partitioning; S and (B) Locating the POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS in an area that is not above FOOD, EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, LINENS, and SINGLE-SERVICE or SINGLE-USE ARTICLES.  
Chapter 8 - Compliance and Enforcement 
Parts 
8-1 CODE APPLICABILITY 
8-2 PLAN SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL 
8-3 LICENSE TO OPERATE 
8-4 INSPECTION AND CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
8-5 PREVENTION OF FOODBORNE DISEASE TRANSMISSION BY EMPLOYEES 
  
_____
8-1 - CODE APPLICABILITY 
Subparts 
8-101 User for Intended Purposes 
8-102 Additional Requirements 
8-103 Variances 
_____
  
Use for Intended Purpose 8-101.10 Public Health Protection. (A) The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall apply this Code to promote its underlying purpose, as specified in  1-102.10, of safeguarding public health and ensuring that FOOD is safe, unADULTERATED, and honestly presented when offered to the CONSUMER. (B) In enforcing the provisions of this Code, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall assess existing facilities or EQUIPMENT that were in use before the effective date of this Code based on the following considerations: (1) Whether the facilities or EQUIPMENT are in good repair and capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition; (2) Whether FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES comply with Subpart 4-101; (3) Whether the capacities of cooling, heating, and holding EQUIPMENT are sufficient to comply with  4-301.11; and (4) The existence of a documented agreement with the LICENSEE that the facilities or EQUIPMENT will be replaced as specified under  8-304.11(G) or upgraded or replaced as specified under  8-304.11(H). Additional Requirements 8-102.10 Preventing Health Hazards, Provision for Conditions Not Addressed. (A) If necessary to protect against public health HAZARDS or nuisances, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY may impose specific requirements in addition to the requirements contained in this Code that are authorized by LAW. (B) The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall document the conditions that necessitate the imposition of additional requirements and the underlying public health rationale. The documentation shall be provided to the LICENSE applicant or LICENSEE and a copy shall be maintained in the REGULATORY AUTHORITY'S file for the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Variances 8-103.10 Modifications and Waivers. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY may grant a VARIANCE by modifying or waiving the requirements of this Code if in the opinion of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY a health HAZARD or nuisance will not result from the VARIANCE. If a VARIANCE is granted, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall retain the information specified under  8-103.11 in its records for the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. 8-103.11 Documentation of Proposed Variance and Justification. Before a VARIANCE from a requirement of this Code is APPROVED, the information that shall be provided by the PERSON requesting the VARIANCE and retained in the REGULATORY AUTHORITY'S file on the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT includes: (A) A statement of the proposed VARIANCE of the Code requirement citing relevant Code section numbers; (B) An analysis of the rationale for how the potential public health HAZARDS and nuisances addressed by the relevant Code sections will be alternatively addressed by the proposal; and (C) A HACCP PLAN if required as specified under  8-201.13(A) that includes the information specified under  8-201.14 as it is relevant to the VARIANCE requested. 8-103.12 Conformance with Approved Procedures.* If the REGULATORY AUTHORITY grants a VARIANCE as specified in 8-103.10, or a HACCP PLAN is otherwise required as specified under  8-201.13, the LICENSEE shall: (A) Comply with the HACCP PLANs and procedures that are submitted as specified under  8-201.14 and APPROVED as a basis for the modification or waiver; and (B) Maintain and provide to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, upon request, records specified under  8-201.14(D) and (E) that demonstrate that the following are routinely employed; (1) Procedures for monitoring the CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS, (2) Monitoring of the CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS, (3) Verification of the effectiveness of the operation or process, and (4) Necessary corrective actions if there is failure at a CRITICAL CONTROL POINT.  
  
_____
8-2 - PLAN SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL 
Subparts 
8-201 Facility and Operating Plans 
8-202 Confidentiality 
_____
  
Facility and Operating Plans 8-201.11 When Plans Are Required. A LICENSE applicant or LICENSEE shall submit to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY properly prepared plans and specifications for review and approval before: (A) The construction of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; (B) The conversion of an existing structure for use as a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; or (C) The remodeling of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or a change of type of FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or FOOD operation if the REGULATORY AUTHORITY determines that plans and specifications are necessary to ensure compliance with this Code; or (D) Approval of plans by the regulatory authority shall not negate the liability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of these regulations. 8-201.12 Contents of the Plans and Specifications. The plans and specifications for a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, including a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT specified under  8-201.13, shall include, as required by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY based on the type of operation, type of FOOD preparation, and FOODS prepared, the following information to demonstrate conformance with Code provisions: (A) Intended menu; (B) Anticipated volume of FOOD to be stored, prepared, and sold or served; (C) Proposed layout, mechanical schematics, construction materials, and finish schedules; (D) Proposed EQUIPMENT types, manufacturers, model numbers, locations, dimensions, performance capacities, and installation specifications; (E) Evidence that standard procedures that ensure compliance with the requirements of this Code are developed or are being developed; and (F) Other information that may be required by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY for the proper review of the proposed construction, conversion or modification, and procedures for operating a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. 8-201.13 When a HACCP Plan is Required. (A) Before engaging in an activity that requires a HACCP PLAN, a LICENSE applicant or LICENSEE shall submit to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY for approval a properly prepared HACCP PLAN as specified under  8-201.14 and the relevant provisions of this Code if: (1) Submission of a HACCP PLAN is required according to K.S.A.36-501 et seq., and amendments thereto.; (2) A VARIANCE is required as specified under Subparagraph 3-401.11(D)(3),  3-502.11, or  4-204.110(B); (3) The REGULATORY AUTHORITY determines that a FOOD preparation or processing method requires a VARIANCE based on a plan submittal specified under  8-201.12, an inspectional finding, or a VARIANCE request. (B) A LICENSE applicant or LICENSEE shall have a properly prepared HACCP PLAN as specified under  3-502.12. 8-201.14 Contents of a HACCP Plan. For a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that is required under  8-201.13 to have a HACCP PLAN, the plan and specifications shall indicate: (A) A categorization of the types of POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS that are specified in the menu such as soups and sauces, salads, and bulk, solid FOODS such as MEAT roasts, or of other FOODS that are specified by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY; (B) A flow diagram by specific FOOD or category type identifying CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS and providing information on the following: (1) Ingredients, materials, and EQUIPMENT used in the preparation of that FOOD, and (2) Formulations or recipes that delineate methods and procedural control measures that address the FOOD safety concerns involved; (C) FOOD EMPLOYEE and supervisory training plan that addresses the FOOD safety issues of concern; (D) A statement of standard operating procedures for the plan under consideration including clearly identifying: (1) Each CRITICAL CONTROL POINT, (2) The CRITICAL LIMITS for each CRITICAL CONTROL POINT, (3) The method and frequency for monitoring and controlling each CRITICAL CONTROL POINT by the FOOD EMPLOYEE designated by the PERSON IN CHARGE, (4) The method and frequency for the PERSON IN CHARGE to routinely verify that the FOOD EMPLOYEE is following standard operating procedures and monitoring CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS, (5) Action to be taken by the PERSON IN CHARGE if the CRITICAL LIMITS for each CRITICAL CONTROL POINT are not met, and (6) Records to be maintained by the PERSON IN CHARGE to demonstrate that the HACCP PLAN is properly operated and managed; and (E) Additional scientific data or other information, as required by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, supporting the determination that FOOD safety is not compromised by the proposal. Confidentiality 8-202.10 Trade Secrets. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall treat as confidential in accordance with LAW, information that meets the criteria specified in LAW for a trade secret and is contained on inspection report forms and in the plans and specifications submitted as specified under  8-201.12 and 8-201.14.  
  
_____
8-3 - LICENSE TO OPERATE 
Subparts 
8-301 Requirement 
8-302 Application Procedure 
8-303 Issuance 
8-304 Conditions of Retention 
_____
  
Requirement 8-301.11 Prerequisite for Operation. A PERSON may not operate a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT without a valid LICENSE to operate issued by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY. Application Procedure 8-302.12 Form of Submission. A PERSON desiring to operate a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall submit to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY a written application for a LICENSE on a form provided by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY. 8-302.13 Qualifications and Responsibilities of Applicants. To qualify for a LICENSE, an applicant shall: (A) Be an owner of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or an officer of the legal ownership or a representative thereof; (B) Comply with the requirements of this Code; (C) As specified under  8-402.11, agree to allow access to the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and to provide required information; and (D) Pay the applicable LICENSE fees at the time the application is submitted. Issuance 8-303.10 New, Converted, or Remodeled Establishments. For FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS that are required to submit plans as specified under  8-201.11 the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall issue a LICENSE to the applicant after: (A) A properly completed application is submitted; (B) The required fee is submitted; (C) The required plans, specifications, and information are reviewed and APPROVED; and (D) A preoperational inspection as specified in  8-203.10 shows that the establishment is built or remodeled in accordance with the APPROVED plans and specifications and that the establishment is in compliance with this Code. 8-303.30 Denial of Application for License, Notice. If an application for a LICENSE to operate is denied, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall provide the applicant with a notice that includes: (A) The specific reasons and Code citations for the LICENSE denial; (B) The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to qualify for a LICENSE; and (C) Advisement of the applicant's right of appeal and the process and time frames for appeal that are provided in LAW. Conditions of Retention 8-304.10 Responsibilities of the Regulatory Authority. (A) At the time a LICENSE is first issued, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall provide to the LICENSEE a copy of this Code so that the LICENSEE is notified of the compliance requirements and the conditions of retention, as specified under  8-304.11, that are applicable to the LICENSE. (B) Failure to provide the information specified in  (A) of this section does not prevent the REGULATORY AUTHORITY from taking authorized action or seeking remedies if the LICENSE HOLDER fails to comply with this Code or an order, warning, or directive of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY. 8-304.11 Responsibilities of the Licensee. Upon acceptance of the LICENSE issued by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, the LICENSEE in order to retain the LICENSE shall: (A) Post the LICENSE in a location in the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that is conspicuous to CONSUMERS; (B) Comply with the provisions of this Code including the conditions of a granted VARIANCE as specified under 8-103.12, and APPROVED plans as specified under 8-201.12; (C) If a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT is required under  8-201.13 to operate under a HACCP PLAN, comply with the plan as specified under  8-103.12; (D) Immediately contact the REGULATORY AUTHORITY to report an illness of a FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE as specified under  2-201.11(B); (E) Immediately discontinue operations and notify the REGULATORY AUTHORITY if an IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD may exist as specified under  8-404.11; (F) Allow representatives of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY access to the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT as specified under  8-402.11; (G) Except as specified under  (H) of this section, replace existing facilities and EQUIPMENT specified in  8-101.10 with facilities and EQUIPMENT that comply with this Code if: (1) The REGULATORY AUTHORITY directs the replacement because the facilities and EQUIPMENT constitute a public health HAZARD or nuisance or no longer comply with the criteria upon which the facilities and EQUIPMENT were accepted, (2) The REGULATORY AUTHORITY directs the replacement of the facilities and EQUIPMENT because of a change of ownership, or (3) The facilities and EQUIPMENT are replaced in the normal course of operation; (H) Upgrade or replace refrigeration EQUIPMENT as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.16(A)(2)(b), if the circumstances specified under Subparagraphs (G)(1)-(3) of this section do not occur first or by September 1, 2009; (I) Comply with directives of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY including time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other directives issued by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY in regard to the LICENSEE'S FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or in response to community emergencies; (J) Accept notices issued and served by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY according to K.S.A. 36-501 et seq., and amendments thereto.; and (K) Be subject to the administrative, civil, injunctive, and criminal remedies authorized in LAW for failure to comply with this Code or a directive of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, including time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other directives. 8-304.20 Licenses Not Transferable. A LICENSE may not be transferred from one PERSON to another PERSON, from one FOOD ESTABLISHMENT to another, or from one type of operation to another.  
  
_____
8-4 - INSPECTION AND CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
Subparts 
8-401 Frequency 
8-402 Competency and Access 
8-403 Report of Findings 
8-404 Imminent Health Hazard 
8-405 Critical Violation 
8-406 Noncritical Violation 
_____
  
Frequency 8-401.20 Performance- and Risk-Based. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall prioritize, and conduct more frequent inspections based upon its assessment of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT'S history of compliance with this Code and the establishment's potential as a vector of foodborne illness by evaluating: (A) Past performance, for nonconformance with Code or HACCP PLAN requirements that are critical; (B) Past performance, for numerous or repeat violations of Code or HACCP PLAN requirements that are noncritical; (C) Past performance, for complaints investigated and found to be valid; (D) The HAZARDS associated with the particular FOODS that are prepared, stored, or served; (E) The type of operation including the methods and extent of FOOD storage, preparation, and service; (F) The number of people served; and (G) Whether the population served is a HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION. Competency and Access 8-402.10 Competency of Inspectors. An authorized representative of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY who inspects a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT or conducts plan review for compliance with this Code shall have the knowledge, skills, and ability to adequately perform the required duties. Access 8-402.11 Allowed at Reasonable Times after Due Notice. After the REGULATORY AUTHORITY presents official credentials and provides notice of the purpose of, and an intent to conduct, an inspection, the PERSON IN CHARGE shall allow the REGULATORY AUTHORITY to determine if the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT is in compliance with this Code by allowing access to the establishment, allowing inspection, and providing information and records specified in this Code and to which the REGULATORY AUTHORITY is entitled according to K.S.A.36-501 et seq., and amendments thereto, during the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT'S hours of operation and other reasonable times. 8-402.20 Refusal, Notification of Right to Access, and Final Request for Access. If a PERSON denies access to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall: (A) Inform the PERSON that: (1) The LICENSEE is required to allow access to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY as specified under  8-402.11 of this Code, (2) Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE to operate as specified under  8-304.11(F), and (B) Make a final request for access. 8-402.30 Refusal, Reporting. If after the REGULATORY AUTHORITY presents credentials and provides notice as specified under  8-402.11, explains the authority upon which access is requested, and makes a final request for access as specified in  8-402.20, the PERSON IN CHARGE continues to REFUSE access, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall provide details of the denial of access on an inspection report form. Report of Findings 8-403.10 Documenting Information and Observations. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall document on an inspection report form: (A) Administrative information about the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT'S legal identity, street addresses, type of establishment and operation, inspection date, and other information such as type of water supply and SEWAGE disposal, status of the LICENSE, and personnel certificates that may be required; and (B) Specific factual observations of violative conditions or other deviations from this Code that require correction by the LICENSEE including: (1) Failure of the PERSON IN CHARGE to demonstrate the knowledge of foodborne illness prevention, application of HACCP principles, and the requirements of this Code as specified under  2-102.11, (2) Failure of FOOD EMPLOYEES, CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEES, and the PERSON IN CHARGE to report a disease or medical condition as specified under  2-201.11(B) and (D), (3) Nonconformance with CRITICAL ITEMS of this Code, (4) Failure of the appropriate FOOD EMPLOYEES to demonstrate their knowledge of, and ability to perform in accordance with, the procedural, monitoring, verification, and corrective action practices required by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY as specified under 8-103.12, (5) Failure of the PERSON IN CHARGE to provide records required by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY for determining conformance with a HACCP PLAN as specified under Subparagraph 8-201.14(D)(6), and (6) Nonconformance with CRITICAL LIMITS of a HACCP PLAN. 8-403.20 Specifying Time Frame for Corrections. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall specify on the inspection report form the time frame for correction of the violations as specified under  8-404.11, 8-405.11, and 8-406.11. 8-403.30 Issuing Report and Obtaining Acknowledgment of Receipt. At the conclusion of the inspection and according to K.S.A.36- 501 et seq., and amendments thereto., the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall provide a copy of the completed inspection report and the notice to correct violations to the LICENSEE or to the PERSON IN CHARGE, and request a signed acknowledgment of receipt. 8-403.40 Refusal to Sign Acknowledgment. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall: (A) Inform a PERSON who declines to sign an acknowledgment of receipt of inspectional findings as specified in  8-403.30 that: (1) An acknowledgment of receipt is not an agreement with findings, (2) Refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will not affect the LICENSEE'S obligation to correct the violations noted in the inspection report within the time frames specified, and (3) A refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt is noted in the inspection report and conveyed to the REGULATORY AUTHORITY'S historical record for the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; and (B) Make a final request that the PERSON IN CHARGE sign an acknowledgment receipt of inspectional findings. 8-403.50 Public Information. Except as specified in  8-202.10, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall treat the inspection report as a public document and shall make it available for disclosure to a PERSON who requests it as provided in LAW. Imminent Health Hazard 8-404.11 Ceasing Operations and Reporting. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, a LICENSEE shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the REGULATORY AUTHORITY if an IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD may exist because of an emergency such as a fire, flood, extended interruption of electrical or water service, SEWAGE backup, misuse of POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS, onset of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak, gross insanitary occurrence or condition, or other circumstance that may endanger public health. (B) A LICENSEE need not discontinue operations in an area of an establishment that is unaffected by the IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. 8-404.12 Resumption of Operations. If operations are discontinued as specified under  8-404.11 or otherwise according to K.S.A.36-501 et seq., and amendments thereto., the LICENSEE shall obtain approval from the REGULATORY AUTHORITY before resuming operations. Violation of Critical Item 8-405.11 Timely Correction. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, a LICENSEE shall at the time of inspection correct a violation of a CRITICAL ITEM of this Code and implement corrective actions for a HACCP PLAN provision that is not in compliance with its CRITICAL LIMIT. (B) Considering the nature of the potential HAZARD involved and the complexity of the corrective action needed, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY may agree to or specify a longer time frame, not to exceed 10 calendar days after the inspection, for the LICENSEE to correct violations of a CRITICAL ITEM or HACCP PLAN deviations. 8-405.20 Verification and Documentation of Correction. (A) After observing at the time of inspection a correction of a violation of a CRITICAL ITEM or deviation, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall enter the violation and information about the corrective action on the inspection report. (B) As specified under  8-405.11(B), after receiving notification that the LICENSEE has corrected a violation of a CRITICAL ITEM or HACCP PLAN deviation, or at the end of the specified period of time, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall verify correction of the violation, document the information on an inspection report, and enter the report in the REGULATORY AUTHORITY'S records. Noncritical Violation 8-406.11 Time Frame for Correction. (A) Except as specified in  (B) of this section, the LICENSEE shall correct noncritical violations by a date and time agreed to or specified by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY but no later than 90 calendar days after the inspection. (B) The REGULATORY AUTHORITY may approve a compliance schedule that extends beyond the time limits specified under  (A) of this section if a written schedule of compliance is submitted by the LICENSEE and no health HAZARD exists or will result from allowing an extended schedule for compliance.  
  
_____
8-5 - PREVENTION OF FOODBORNE DISEASE TRANSMISSION BY EMPLOYEES 
Subpart 
8-501 Investigation and Control 
_____
  
Investigation and Control 8-501.20 Restriction or Exclusion of Food Employee, or Summary Suspension of License. Based on the findings of an investigation related to a FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE who is suspected of being infected or diseased, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY may issue an order to the suspected FOOD EMPLOYEE, CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE or LICENSEE instituting one or more of the following control measures: (A) RESTRICTING the FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE to specific areas and tasks in a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT that present no risk of transmitting the disease; (B) EXCLUDING the FOOD EMPLOYEE or CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE from a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT; or (C) Immediate closing of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT until the REGULATORY AUTHORITY determines that no further danger of disease transmission exists. 8-501.30 Restriction or Exclusion Order: Warning or Hearing Not Required, Information Required in Order. Based on the findings of the investigation and to control disease transmission, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY may issue an order of RESTRICTION or EXCLUSION to a suspected FOOD EMPLOYEE or the LICENSEE without prior warning, notice of a hearing, or a hearing if the order: (A) States the reasons for the RESTRICTION or EXCLUSION that is ordered; (B) States the evidence that the FOOD EMPLOYEE or LICENSEE shall provide in order to demonstrate that the reasons for the RESTRICTION or EXCLUSION are eliminated; (C) States that the suspected FOOD EMPLOYEE or the LICENSEE may request an appeal hearing by submitting a timely request as provided in LAW; and (D) Provides the name and address of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY representative to whom a request for an appeal hearing may be made. 8-501.40 Removal of Exclusions and Restrictions. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall release a FOOD EMPLOYEE, OR CONDITIONAL EMPLOYEE from RESTRICTION or EXCLUSION according to LAW and the conditions specified under  2-201.13.  
Chapter 9 - Mobile Food Establishments, Pushcarts and Temporary Food Establishments 
Parts 
9-1 Code Applicability 
9-2 Mobile Food Establishments and Pushcarts 9-3 Temporary Food Establishments 
  
_____
9-1 - CODE APPLICABILITY 
Subpart 
9-101 General Requirements 
_____
  
Use for Intended Purpose 9-101.11 General Requirements (A) MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, PUSHCARTS, and TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS shall comply with the requirements of these regulations, except as otherwise provided in this section of the regulation. The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards related to the conduct of the food service establishment, may prohibit the sale of some or all POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD, and when no health hazard shall result, may waive or modify requirements of these regulations relating to physical facilities as allows in  8-103.11. (B) MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, PUSHCARTS, and TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS serving only food prepared, packaged in individual servings, transported and stored under conditions meeting the requirements of these regulations, or beverages that are not potentially hazardous, and served in sealed containers need not comply with requirements of these regulations pertaining to the necessity of water and SEWAGE systems nor those requirements pertaining to the cleaning and SANITIZATION of EQUIPMENT and UTENSILS if the required EQUIPMENT for cleaning and SANITIZATION exists at a COMMISSARY. (C) MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, PUSHCARTS, and TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS shall provide only single service articles for use by the consumer.  
  
_____
9-2 - MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
Subparts 
9-201 Water Systems 
9-202 Sewage Systems 
9-203 Commissary 
9-204 Warewashing and Equipment 
9-205 Additional Requirements 
_____
  
Additional Requirements 9-201.11 Water Systems. (A) MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS and PUSHCARTS shall have a potable water system under pressure as required under  5-101.11 & 5-103.12; and (B) The system shall be of sufficient capacity to furnish enough hot and cold water for food preparation, utensil cleaning, sanitizing, and handwashing as required under  5- 103.11; and (C) Inlet and Outlet, Sloped to Drain. (1) A water tank and its inlet and outlet shall be sloped to drain. (2) A water tank inlet shall be positioned so that it is protected from contaminants such as waste discharge, road dust, oil, or grease. (D) Hose, Construction and Identification. A hose used for conveying DRINKING WATER from a water tank shall be: (1) Safe; (2) Durable, CORROSION-RESISTANT, and nonabsorbent; (3) Resistant to pitting, chipping, crazing, scratching, scoring, distortion, and decomposition; (4) Finished with a SMOOTH interior surface; and (5) Clearly and durably identified as to its use if not permanently attached. (E) All water distribution pipes or tubing shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. 9-202.11 Sewage Systems. (A) If liquid waste results from operation of a MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS or PUSHCART, the waste shall be stored in a permanently installed retention tank that is sized according to 5-401.11; and (B) Liquid waste resulting form the operation of a MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS or PUSHCART shall be conveyed and discharged as required under 5-402.13 & 5-402.14; and (C) All connections on the vehicle for servicing MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS or PUSHCARTS waste disposal facilities shall be of a different size or type than those used for supplying potable water to the mobile food establishment as required under  5-401.11(B); and (D) The waste connection shall be located lower than the water inlet connection to preclude contamination of the potable water system as required under  5-301.15(B). 9-203.11 Commissary. (A) PUSHCARTS that are required to operate from a COMMISSARY shall report at least daily to such location for supplies and for cleaning and servicing operations. (B) The commissary used as a base of operation for PUSHCARTS shall be constructed and operated in compliance with the requirements of these regulations. 9-204.11 Equipment. (A) MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS and PUSHCARTS when required shall have a handwashing sink as specified under  5-203.11. (B) WAREWASHING sinks shall meet the requirements specified under  4-301.12. (1) MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS WAREWASHING sinks shall be in the unit. (2) PUSHCART WAREWASHING sinks shall be located; (i) In a properly constructed and operated COMMISSARY; or (ii) On the PUSHCART. (C) All MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS and PUSHCARTS shall have all EQUIPMENT necessary for the operation intended. 9-205.10 Additional Requirements. (A) Additional requirements for MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS and PUSHCARTS may be found at the following code references: (1) 5-301.11 Approved Materials (2) 5-302.11 Enclosed System, Sloped Drain (3) 5-302-12 Cleaning Port Secure (4) 5-302.13 "V" type Threads (5) 5-302.14 Tank Vented (6) 5-302.16 Hose Construction (7) 5-303.11 Filter-Compressed Air (8) 5-304.11 Flushing and Disinfection (9) 5-304.12 Using Pump Hoses (10) 5-304.13 Protecting Inlet, Outlet, Hose Fittings (11) 5-304.14 Tank Pump Hose Dedicated (12) 5-402.10 Drainage System (13) 5-402.11 Backflow Prevention (14) 5-402.15 Flushing Waste Water Tank (15) 5-403.11 Approved Disposal System (16) 5-403.12 Other Liquid Wastes  
  
_____
9-3 - TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
Subparts 
9-301 Restricted Operations 
9-302 Water 
9-303 Sewage 
9-304 Equipment 
9-305 Floors, Walls, Celilings 
_____
  
Floors, Walls, Ceilings 9-301.11 Restricted Operations. (A) A TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall comply with the requirements of these regulations, except as otherwise provided in this regulation. The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards related to operation of the TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. The regulatory authority may prohibit the sale of some or all POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS, and when no health hazard will result, may waive or modify requirements of these regulations as allowed in  8-103.11. (B) These provisions are applicable whenever a TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT is allowed, under the provisions of this regulation, to operate without complying with all the requirements of this regulation. (C) Only one raw POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD requiring on site preparation or cooking shall be prepared or served. Commercially pre-cooked POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS and non POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS may be prepared and served. (D) This prohibition does not apply to any POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD that has been prepared and packaged under conditions meeting the requirements of these regulations, is obtained in individual servings, is stored at a temperature as required in  3-501.16 in facilities meeting the requirements of these regulations, and is served directly in the unopened container in which it was packaged. (E) All food shall be protected from contamination. 9-302.11 Water. Enough potable water shall be available in the TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT for food preparation, for cleaning and sanitizing UTENSILS and EQUIPMENT, and for handwashing. A heating facility capable of producing enough hot water for these purposes shall be provided on the premises. 9-303.11 Sewage. All sewage, including liquid waste, shall be disposed of as specified under  5-403.11. 9-304.11 Equipment. (A) TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS shall have all EQUIPMENT necessary for the operation intended. (B) A convenient handwashing facility shall be available for employee handwashing. This facility shall: (1) Meet the requirements specified in  5-202.12. (2) Be equipped with soap and paper towels. (3) Be accessible at all times for employee use. (4) Have a flow of water that is adequate to quickly and easily remove soap and food debris from hands. (C) WAREWASHING facilities shall be provided for washing, rinsing and sanitizing of equipment. (1) WAREWASHING facilities may be individual to the establishment or shared on site or, (2) Located at a properly constructed and operated commissary. (D) EQUIPMENT shall be located and installed in a way that prevents food contamination and that also facilitates cleaning of the establishment. (E) FOOD CONTACT SURFACES of EQUIPMENT shall be protected from contamination by consumers and other contaminating agents. Effective shields for such EQUIPMENT shall be provided, as necessary to prevent contamination. 9-305.11 Floors, Walls, Ceilings. (A) A TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT may operate out of a tent or canopy as long as the requirements for floors, walls and ceilings in this regulation are met. (B) Floors shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, tight wood, or other similar cleanable material kept in good repair. Dirt or gravel, when graded to drain, may be used as subflooring when covered with clean, removable platforms or duckboards, or covered with wood chips, shavings or other suitable materials effectively treated to control dust as required under  6-101.11(B). (C) Walls and ceilings of food preparation areas shall be constructed in a way that prevents the entrance of insects and rodents. Doors to food preparation areas shall be solid or screened and shall be self closing. Screening material used for walls, doors, or windows shall be at least sixteen mesh to the inch as required under  6-202.15(A). (D) Ceilings shall be made of wood, canvas, or other material that protects the interior of the establishment from environmental contamination as required under  6- 101.11(B). (E) Counter service openings shall not be larger than necessary for the particular operation conducted. These openings shall be provided with tight fitting solid or screened doors or windows or shall be provided with fans installed and operated to restrict the entrance of flying insects. Counter service openings shall be kept closed, except when in actual use.  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted beginning with the 2017 republication that are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 973 11- 3-2016       Added Adopt. Ord. 
pg. no. ix 976  3-16-2017 1 6-104 981  8- 3-2017 1 15-101, 15-102 982  8- 3-2017 1 12-101 Memo of 10-26-2017 1-209 2-308 2-309 2-312 5-204       Added 5-306 991 11- 2-2017       Rpld Adopt. Ord. 
pg. no. IX       Added Adopt. Ord. 
pg. no. IX 1005  8-16-2018 1 15-101-15-104 1006  8-16-2018 1 12-101 2       Added 12-102 3       Rpld 12-401-12-404 1008  9- 6-2018 1       Rpld 13-401-13-406       Added 13-401-13-410 1010 10-18-2018 1 2-105 2 2-108 1012 11-15-2018 1 4-807 1014 12-20-2018 1 13-301-13-305 1015 12-20-2018       Rpld Adopt. Ord. 
pg. no. IX       Added Adopt. Ord. 
pg. no. IX Ord. of 12-20-2018(1) 1-405 Ord. of 12-20-2018(2) 13-101  

UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
VERSION 1.0
APRIL 9, 2019
PREPARED BY: GOULD EVANS
PRESENTED BY: CITY OF LANSING, KS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE TC-1
City of Lansing
TC
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS .................................................................................... PAGE 1-1
SECTION 1.01  OVERVIEW ...................................................................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 1.02  INTERPRETATION ............................................................................................................ 1-2
SECTION 1.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS ........................................................................................ 1-8
SECTION 1.04  ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................................................ 1-8
SECTION 1.05  ENFORCEMENT .............................................................................................................. 1-11
SECTION 1.06  NONCONFORMANCES .................................................................................................... 1-12
ARTICLE 2. APPLICATIONS & PROCEDURES ................................................................... PAGE 2-1
SECTION 2.01  GENERAL  ALL APPLICATIONS ...................................................................................... 2-1
SECTION 2.02  PLATTING ........................................................................................................................ 2-5
SECTION 2.03  ZONING MAP AMENDMENT ............................................................................................. 2-8
SECTION 2.04  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................................ 2-9
SECTION 2.05  ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN ......................................................................................... 2-11
SECTION 2.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW ........................................................................................................ 2-12
SECTION 2.07  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS ......................................................................................... 2-14
SECTION 2.08  VARIANCES ................................................................................................................... 2-15
SECTION 2.09  APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS ....................................................................... 2-15
SECTION 2.10  CODE AMENDMENTS ..................................................................................................... 2-16
ARTICLE 3. SUBDIVISION STANDARDS .............................................................................. PAGE 3-1
SECTION 3.01  STREET NETWORK & DESIGN.......................................................................................... 3-1
SECTION 3.02  OPEN & CIVIC SPACE SYSTEMS .................................................................................... 3-12
SECTION 3.03  BLOCKS & LOTS............................................................................................................ 3-18
SECTION 3.04  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS ........................................................................................... 3-20
SECTION 3.05  COMMUNITY FACILITIES & FEES................................................................................... 3-23
ARTICLE 4. ZONING DISTRICTS & USE STANDARDS ..................................................... PAGE 4-1
SECTION 4.01  ZONING DISTRICTS & INTENT ......................................................................................... 4-1
SECTION 4.02  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ........................................................................... 4-2
SECTION 4.03  PERMITTED USES ............................................................................................................ 4-5
SECTION 4.04  ACCESSORY USE STANDARDS ....................................................................................... 4-18
SECTION 4.05  SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS ............................................................................................ 4-21
SECTION 4.06  TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS ...................................................................................... 4-24
ARTICLE 5. SPECIAL DISTRICTS & STANDARDS ............................................................. PAGE 5-1
SECTION 5.01  PLANNED ZONING DISTRICTS .......................................................................................... 5-1
SECTION 5.02  MIXED-DENSITY NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT................................................................... 5-2
SECTION 5.03  WALKABLE COMMERCIAL STANDARDS .......................................................................... 5-9
SECTION 5.04  MANUFACTURED & MOBILE HOME PLANNED DISTRICT ............................................... 5-14
ARTICLE 6. SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS .................................................................. PAGE 6-1
SECTION 6.01  INTENT & APPLICABILITY ............................................................................................... 6-1
SECTION 6.02  OPEN SPACE DESIGN ....................................................................................................... 6-2
SECTION 6.03  LANDSCAPE DESIGN........................................................................................................ 6-2
SECTION 6.04  BUFFERS & SCREENING .................................................................................................. 6-5
SECTION 6.05  OUTDOOR LIGHTING ....................................................................................................... 6-8
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE TC-2
City of Lansing
TC
ARTICLE 7. ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS ................................................................. PAGE 7-1
SECTION 7.01  INTENT & APPLICABILITY ............................................................................................... 7-1
SECTION 7.02  ACCESS & CIRCULATION ................................................................................................ 7-1
SECTION 7.03  REQUIRED PARKING ........................................................................................................ 7-4
SECTION 7.04  PARKING LOT DESIGN ..................................................................................................... 7-8
SECTION 7.05  LOADING ....................................................................................................................... 7-10
ARTICLE 8. SIGN STANDARDS ............................................................................................... PAGE 8-1
SECTION 8.01  INTENT & APPLICABILITY ............................................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 8.02  EXEMPT SIGNS ................................................................................................................ 8-1
SECTION 8.03  SIGN TYPES ..................................................................................................................... 8-3
SECTION 8.04  SIGN ALLOWANCES ......................................................................................................... 8-5
SECTION 8.05  STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS ......................................................................... 8-6
SECTION 8.06  STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES ......................................................... 8-7
SECTION 8.07  PLANNED DISTRICTS ....................................................................................................... 8-8
ARTICLE 9. DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................ PAGE 9-1
APPENDIX A  RESOURCES, GUIDES & INDUSTRY STANDARDS ....... PAGE APPENDICIES-2
APPENDIX B  GREAT TREES FOR THE KANSAS CITY REGION ........ PAGE APPENDICIES-3
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-1
City of Lansing
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 OVERVIEW
1.02 INTERPRETATION
1.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
1.04 ADMINISTRATION
1.05 ENFORCEMENT
1.06 NONCONFORMANCES
1.01 OVERVIEW
A. Title. These regulations shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Lansing Zoning
and Development Code. References to the Code, UDO, or these regulations shall be
considered a reference to the Lansing Zoning and Development Code. References to zoning or
subdivision regulations or standards may be interpreted as references to specific parts of the
LDC.
B. Purpose. The Lansing Zoning and Development Code serves the following purposes:
1. To promote the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its residents;
2. To implement the City of Lansings Comprehensive Plan;
3. Promote planning and urban design that emphasizes distinct places and unique elements
of community character documented throughout Lansing;
4. Divide the city into zones and districts that promote the character, compatibility, scale and
transitions of land use patterns;
5. To conserve and protect property values throughout the City; and
6. Regulate and restrict the development and use of buildings and land within each zoning
district to create a compatible scale and range of building types within districts, and to
promote the appropriate relationship of development to the public realm and to adjacent
property.
C. Authority and Jurisdiction. These regulations are created through the authority granted by
Chapter 12, Article 7 of the Kansas Statutes. The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all
structures and land within the incorporated area of Lansing, Kansas, as depicted on the official
zoning map, and may apply to any other areas designated by the City through procedures and
criteria authorized by Chapter 12, Article 7 of the Kansas Statutes.
D. Severability. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of these
regulations to be invalid, the judgment shall not affect any other provisions of these regulations. If
any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge the application of a provision of these
regulations to be invalid when applied to a particular property or project, the judgment shall not
affect the application of the provision to other property or projects with different circumstances.
E. Effective Date. April 9th, 2019
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-2
City of Lansing
1.02 INTERPRETATION
A. Rules of Construction. The following rules regarding interpretation of this code apply:
1. All words shall have the customary dictionary meaning, unless specifically defined in
these regulations.
2. The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense includes the present
tense.
3. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
4. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended
for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".
5. Lists of examples prefaced by including the following, such as, or other similar clauses
shall not be construed as exclusive or exhaustive and shall not preclude an interpretation
of these lists including other similar and non-mentioned examples.
6. Shall or must is mandatory; should or may is permissive but recommended as a
way to best meet the standard or intent of the standard.
7. A reference to an administrative official shall refer to that official or his or her official
designee, and all references to specific city officials may also include any other designee
of the City Administrator.
8. Any reference to other official local, state or federal government rules or regulations shall
include the current versions of those regulations, provided they remain binding or are
consistent with the purposes, intent, and objectives included in these regulations.
9. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, governmental
bodies and agencies, and all other legal entities.
10. The word "City" means the City of Lansing, Kansas.
11. The abbreviation N/A means not applicable.
12. Where the conditions imposed by the provisions of these regulations are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions
of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern. In making a determination of which standard is more restrictive the official may
consider which is more specific, which is more consistent with the Comprehensive Plan,
which is more consistent with the purposes, intent and objectives of these regulations,
and which best promotes the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Measurements. The following rules shall apply to the interpretation of measurements and
dimensional standards:
1. General Calculations. When calculations result in fractions it shall be rounded up to the
nearest whole number if the standard is expressed as a minimum requirement, and
rounded down to the nearest whole number if the standard is expressed as maximum
allowance.
2. Buildings: The following shall be used in interpreting dimensional standards for buildings:
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-3
City of Lansing
a. Building Coverage. The percentage of the total
area of the lot covered by buildings or roofed areas
of principal and accessory buildings, measured
along the wall at ground level, excluding the first 4
feet of any unenclosed roof overhangs. Building
coverage may control the scale, mass or orientation
of the building more than is established within the
setback lines. It does not include any unroofed
projections, surface parking, or uncovered patios,
stoops or plazas.
b. Building Frontage. Building frontage is the portion
of the building that establishes the relationship to the
public realm or street upon which the lot fronts.
When expressed as a minimum percentage, it shall
be interpreted as the percent of the lot frontage at
which a building line must be established, including
any specified alternatives to the building line that
establish a similar relationship to the public realm or
street.
c. Building Height. Building height is measured from
the average grade to highest point of a roof.
Average grade is determined by calculating the
average of the highest and lowest elevation of predevelopment
grade along the front building line
parallel to the street. Where significant development
is proposed in association with a grading plan, post
development grades may be used subject to that
plan. Building heights expressed in both dimension
and stories shall use the additional story limits to
impact the scale, form, and mass of the building
within the permitted overall height.
d. Building Setbacks. Setbacks are the minimum
required distance between any lot line and the
building. When front building setbacks are
expressed as a range (i.e. 10 to 25), it shall be
interpreted as a build to range, within which
distance the front building line of the principal
structure shall be established.
e. Story. A story is the part of a building included
between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, that
part of the building which is above the surface of a floor and the ceiling next above. Story heights shall be:
1. 8 to 12 feet, generally;
Figure 1-1 Building Coverage
Amount of the lot allowed to be covered by structures can alter
buildable area in addition to just setbacks.
Figure 1-2 Building Height & Grade
Building height is measured from the average grade at the front
building line to the top of roof. Grades from front to rear do not
affect permitted building height.
Figure 1-3 Top of Roof
Parapets on flat roof buildings are not considered when
measuring height and are subject to limited exceptions in this
Code.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-4
City of Lansing
2. The first story for residential buildings should be 9 to 14 feet;
3. The first story in non-residential buildings should be 12 to 20 feet;
4. Any story that has less than 4 feet of its height exposed above finished
grade on the front elevation, or which has more than 50% of its perimeter
wall area measured from the finished floor elevation surrounded by
finished grade shall not count as a story for the purpose of measuring
building height.
f. Story, Half: The space under a sloping roof that has a line of intersection of the
roof and wall face not more than 2 feet above the floor level and in which the
possible floor area with head room of 5 feet or less is at least 40% of the total
floor area of the story directly beneath.
3. Lots: The following shall be used in interpreting dimensional standards for lots:
a. Lot Area. The minimum required area of a horizontal plane bounded by the
vertical planes through front, rear and side lot lines, or when expressed as a
range it shall be interpreted as a minimum and a maximum.
b. Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured
at right angles to the front right-of-way lines. Where the front and rear lines are
not approximately parallel, the lot depth shall be the average when measured
from at least three different points along the front lot line, including the two
corners at the front lot line.
c. Lot frontage. The portion of the lot that establishes the relationship between the
building and other site elements and the public realm or street upon which the lot
fronts. When expressed as a linear dimension, the horizontal distance between
side lot lines, measured at the front lot line. Where the front lot line abuts a
curved right-of-way, the lot frontage requirement may be applied at the front
building line for purposes of regulating the dimensions of lots. When expressed
as a percentage, the maximum percentage of that frontage width applied to the
entire depth of the frontage area.
d. Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, typically measured
at the front lot line, but for irregular lots it may be measured at the front building
line.
Figure 1-4 Lot Dimensions
(a) = lot area; (b) = lot depth; (c) lot frontage or front setback,
and area of the lot that may be subject to enhance design
standards; and (d)  lot width
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-5
City of Lansing
Figure 1-5 Corner Lots
(A) = Front setbacks; (B) = Side setbacks (street side or interior); (C) = Rear setbacks
e. Corner lots. When applying building, lot and frontage standards to corner lots,
lots can be arranged in one of three patterns based on the context of the block
and abutting lots:
Standard Corner Reverse Corner Corner Orientation
1. Standard Corner: The building orients to the front of all other buildings
fronting on the same street, and an expanded street-side setback may
apply. Side and rear setbacks apply to the remaining sides.
2. Reverse Corner: The building orients to the end-grain of the block, and
the front setback and frontage design applies to that side, and the streetside
setback can be the greater of (a) the stated street-side setback for
that building type or (b) 10 feet in front of the forward most point of the
front building line of the abutting lot. Side and rear setbacks apply to the
remaining sides.
3. Corner orientation: The building orients to the intersection or both
streets, and includes two frontage designs along the street, and two side
lot orientations with abutting lots, but no rear yard.
4. Signs. The following shall be used in
interpreting dimensional standards for signs:
a. General Area Calculation.
Signs mounted on or displayed as a standard
geometrical shape shall be measured by the
standard mathematical formula for that shape.
Signs mounted on or displayed as an irregular
shape shall be measured by the smallest area of
up to two standard geometrical shapes that can
encompass the entire sign mounting.
Figure 1-6 General Area Calculations
Typical method for measuring typical sign shapes; irregular signs are
measured within the smallest area of up to two geometric shape that
contains the entire sign.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-6
City of Lansing
b. Detached Signs. The area of the sign shall
be computed by the entire area of the face of the
structure, cabinet or module enclosed by the border
of the frame.
c. Wall, window or other building-mounted
signs. Any building mounted sign mounted on a
background shall be measured by the area of the
background. If mounted directly on the wall, the
area shall be computed by means of the smallest
single and continuous perimeter of up to two
standard geometric shapes that enclose the outer
limits of the writing, emblem or other display. Gaps
in writing, emblems or other display which are
greater than two times the height of the sign area,
when using the same single continuous perimeter
above, may be subtracted from the calculation of
the sign area but shall be interpreted as two signs.
The area of the wall or window area for the
purposes of determining an allowed percentage
shall be the total surface of the wall or window
visible in an elevation view.
d. Decorative Elements. Embellishments
such as pole covers, framing, decorative roofing
and support structures shall not be included in the
area of the measurement if they contain no writing,
emblem or other display.
e. Double-faced Signs. Where the sign faces
of a double-faced sign are no more than three feet apart at any location, only one face
will be measured in computing sign area. If the two faces of a double-faced sign are of
unequal area, the area of the sign will be the area of the larger face. In all other cases,
the areas of all faces of a multi-faced sign or the surface area of objects will be added
together to compute the area of the sign.
f. Height. Sign height is measured from the existing lowest grade directly below
the sign to the highest point on the sign or sign structure.
g. Clearance. Sign clearance is measured from the highest point of the ground
directly below the sign to the lowest point on the sign structure enclosing the sign
face.
C. Computation of Time. The following rules apply to any computation of time, unless a specific
section of these regulations indicates otherwise:
1. All time periods shall be expressed in days, unless expressed in years. Any time period
expressed in years shall include a full calendar year from the act that commences the
time period.
2. The day of the act that commences a time period shall not be counted.
Figure 1-8 Double-face Signs
When opposing faces are within three feet, a double-faced sign
is considered one sign and the area of one-face is the size;
when separated by more than three feet, each profile is
considered a sign and counts to the total sign area.
Figure 1-7 Gaps Between Signs
Larger gaps may be subtracted from sign area calculations but is
considered two separate signs.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-7
City of Lansing
3. The last day of the time period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal
City holiday, in which case the next working day shall end the time period. In all other
cases Saturday, Sunday or legal City holidays count in the time period.
4. Whenever any time period is expressed for a formal submittal to the City, the time period
shall end at 5:00 P.M. on the last day of that time period.
D. Private Agreements. These regulations are not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise
interfere with any easement, covenant or any other private agreement of legal relationship;
provided, however, that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive (or impose
higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements
or legal relationships, the provision of these regulations shall govern.
E. Unlawful Uses. No structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of
these regulations shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of these
regulations; and to the extent that, in any respect that, said unlawful structure or use is in conflict
with the requirements of these regulations, said structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.
F. Intent Statements, Graphics and Commentary. Intent statements, graphics and commentary
such as captions to graphics or notes in tables, are an aid to interpretation of the text. In the
event of any a conflict or ambiguity between the intent statements, graphics or commentary and a
specific standard, the specific standard shall control.
G. Interpretation of Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to any boundary on the
zoning district map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits, railroad lines, platted lot lines,
shore lines, or centerlines of streets or streams shall be construed to follow said borders.
2. Where the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, the
platted or other official legal line of that property shall be the boundaries, unless the
property boundaries on the map have been substantially altered.
3. Where the district boundaries split any platted lots, the lot shall be interpreted in the
district designated to the majority of the lot.
4. Where the district boundaries split any unplatted property, any future platting of property
may generally follow the zoning boundary and then each resulting property may assume
the zoning applicable to the majority of the resulting lot, or where any resulting lots have
significant discrepancies with zoning boundaries, rezoning may be required.
5. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Lansing shall be classed as
being in the same district and have the same boundaries as it had previous to
annexation.
6. All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting
such streets, alleys, public ways, waterways or railroad rights-of-way. Where the
centerline of a street, alley, public way, waterway or railroad right-of-way serves as a
district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated,
shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline;
7. Whenever any public way is vacated, the adjoining zoning district shall be automatically
extended to its centerline if ownership is split along the centerline.
8. When a lot held in single ownership on the effective date of these regulations is divided
by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restrictive
district unless the application of this provision would increase the area of the less
restrictive portion of the lot by more than 25%.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-8
City of Lansing
H. Interpretation of Plans. Where these regulations refer to the Comprehensive Plan or any maps
associated with these plans, they shall be interpreted as follows:
1. The maps are a general framework and guide for decision-making, and do not predetermine
any specific use of land or buildings, or any application of a specific zoning
category.
2. Any zoning decision consistent with the land use component of the plan, including any
land use, development or zoning map, shall be presumed reasonable. Other zoning
decisions may also be reasonable if justified upon applications of the specific goals and
policies of the plan to a particular context, or if based on analysis of that context
assumptions in the plan have changed or are different from anticipated.
I. Resources, Guides and Industry Standards. Resources, guides and industry standards that
are recognized as reputable authority in the planning, development and urban design
professions, may be used to supplement interpretation of this Code. They shall be subject to the
approval of the Director upon a determination that the content is consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan and the purposes, intent, and design objectives of these regulations. Any
resource, guide, or industry standard approved by the Director shall be listed in Appendix A and
at least one copy shall be kept on file with the Community and Economic Development
Department. Use of these guides shall be consistent with the purposes, intent and design
objectives expressed in these regulations, and shall not be used to otherwise modify, contradict
or in any way conflict with any specific standard in these regulations.
1.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
A. List of Districts. The zoning districts established in Section 4.01 are established to implement
the purposes of these regulations.
B. Zoning Map Incorporation. The boundaries of the districts listed in Section 4.01 are shown on
the zoning district map of the City of Lansing, Kansas, which is filed in the office of the City Clerk.
The map, with all notations, references and official ordinances amending the map is incorporated
into these regulations.
C. Annexed Land. All land which may be annexed to the City shall be classified the corresponding
district most similar to the zoning classification in effect under the prior jurisdiction, until otherwise
changed in accordance with these regulations.
1.04 ADMINISTRATION
A. Staff. The following city staff positions are responsible for administering specific aspects of this
code.
1. Director of Community & Economic Development. The Director of Community and
Economic Development (Director) is responsible for administration of the development
code, and is the principal interpretation and enforcement official of these regulations.
The Director may consult with any other department or relevant outside agencies in order
to coordinate any plans, policies and programs that impact the Comprehensive Plan. The
Director shall make all final interpretation decisions and any final administrative decisions
referred to the Director under the procedures and standards of these regulations. The
Director of Community & Economic Development shall:
a. Approve and issue all building and occupancy certificates.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-9
City of Lansing
b. Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals the records in all
appeals and variances, and to the Planning Commission all applications for
special and conditional uses.
2. Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works is responsible for administration
of the engineering design, construction, operation and maintenance of all public
improvements and private infrastructure specified under these regulations. The Director
of Public Works shall advise the Community & Economic Development Director on any
technical specifications and engineering designs that impact implementation of the
Comprehensive Plan, and may make any final administrative decisions referred to the
Director of Public Works under the procedures and standards of these regulations.
3. Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall be responsible for the enforcement of
these regulations. The Building Inspector shall enforce these regulations and in addition
shall:
a. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine
compliance with the provisions of these regulations.
b. Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning regulations including all
zoning maps, amendments, special uses, conditional uses, variances,
exceptions, appeals and applications.
c. Maintain for distribution to the public a supply of copies of the zoning map, the
compiled text of the zoning regulations, and the rules of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
4. City Clerk. The City Clerk shall maintain permanent and current records of all ordinances
passed relating to these regulations. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to transmit
Planning Commission recommendations regarding acceptance of dedications of
easements to the Governing Body for its action and to transmit final plats to Register of
Deeds for filing.
5. Administrative Clerk of the Community and Economic Development Department. The
Administrative Clerk for the Community and Economic Development Department is
responsible for maintaining permanent and current records of these regulations. The
Administrative Clerk shall also accept applications, filing fees, and preliminary and final
plats. Preliminary and final plats shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission by the
Administrative Clerk.
B. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is the appointed body of the city responsible
for all long-range and comprehensive planning, as well as review, recommendations and
decisions on implementation of the Comprehensive Plan. In addition to other general planning
authority by statute, local ordinance, or bylaws, the Planning Commission shall have the specific
review responsibilities and final administrative decisions referred to the Planning Commission
under the procedures and standards of these regulations.
1. Membership. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Governing Body. Two members may reside
outside of, but within three miles of, the corporate limits of the City, and the remaining
members shall be residents of the City. All members of the Lansing Planning
Commission, in the sole discretion of the Governing Body, may be residents of the City.
Initially, the City shall name in the manner provided above, members to serve for terms of
one year, two years, and three years, divided equally or as equally as possible, for the
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-10
City of Lansing
terms established. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of three years, except
that appointments made to fill a vacancy that occurs before the expiration of a members
term shall be for the remainder of that unexpired term only. Every member of the
Planning Commission shall hold no salaried or elected office with the City government.
Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses
incurred in the performance of assigned duties. It is specifically provided that on the
effective date of this ordinance, such Planning Commission as was legally in existence
immediately prior to such date shall be constituted as the Planning Commission hereby
created, and the terms of the then members of said Planning Commission shall expire on
the same dates as were established at the time of the most recent appointment of each
of such members or until their successors are duly appointed and qualified.
2. Meetings. The Planning Commission shall convene for regular meetings to be held not
less frequently than once a month. Said Planning Commission shall elect one member as
chairperson and one member as vice chairperson. The terms of the office of the
chairperson or vice chairperson shall be for one year or until the successor has been
elected and qualified. Special meetings of the Planning Commission may be called by the
chairperson or, in his or her absence, by the vice chairperson. A quorum of the Lansing
Planning Commission shall consist of a majority of the members.
3. Responsibilities. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for the preparation,
adoption, and maintenance of long-range comprehensive plans to guide the future
development of the Lansing land area. Such general plans shall include a land use
element and a circulation element, and may include a parks and recreation element, a
public facilities element, or other elements as deemed appropriate. The Planning
Commission shall cause zoning and subdivision regulations to be prepared; and it shall
submit to the governing body its recommendation relating to the zoning of lands and the
control of subdivisions. Such studies and recommendations shall consider the existing
zoning and subdivision regulations; the anticipated physical, economic, and population
trends; the distribution and density of population and proposed building intensities, as
well as classes of uses to be authorized. Recommended development plans for public
facilities, urban renewal, environmental sanitation, and area beautification may also be
considered. The Planning Commission shall see that the comprehensive plans are
altered as necessary to serve as a continuous guide to future long-range planning, and
that statements are prepared annually to show the recent and past growth, development
trends and anticipated growth for the succeeding year, and the bearing of such trends
upon the comprehensive plan.
C. Governing Body. The Governing Body is the elected body of the city responsible for all
legislative decisions that affect implementation of the Comprehensive Plan. In addition to other
general authority authorized by law, the Governing Body shall have the appeal authority and final
decision authority referred to the Governing Body under the procedures and standards of these
regulations. The Governing Body shall exercise legislative authority over zoning, subdivision
control, and other planning regulations within the corporate limits of the City.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-11
City of Lansing
D. Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA or Board).
1. Membership. The Board shall consist of five members to be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Governing Body. All the members of the Board shall be residents of
the City of Lansing. None of the members shall hold any other public office of the City,
except that one member shall be a member of the Lansing Planning Commission. One
member of the Planning Commission shall be appointed to the Board in the same
manner as other members of the Board. In the event such member's term on the
Planning Commission shall expire prior to the expiration of the term on the Board, and in
the event such member is not reappointed on the Planning Commission, his or her
position on the Board shall become vacant simultaneously with the expiration of his or
her appointment to the Planning Commission. A member of such Board, once qualified,
can thereafter be removed during the term of office, only for cause and after public
hearing. In the event of the death, resignation or removal of any such member before the
expiration of the term, a successor shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Governing Body to serve the unexpired term.
2. Term. The members shall be appointed for a term of 3 years. It is specifically provided,
however, that on the effective date of this ordinance and such Board as was legally in
existence immediately prior to such date shall be constituted as the Board of Zoning
Appeals hereby created, and the terms of the then members of said Board shall expire on
the same dates as were established at the time of the most recent appointment of each
of such members or until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter,
all appointments shall be made for a term of 3 years.
3. Officers. The Board shall, at the first meeting held in each calendar year, elect a
chairman, a vice-chairman and secretary. The secretary may be an officer or employee of
the City. The chairman, or in his or her absence, the vice-chairman, shall preside at all
meetings, and shall decide all points of order or procedure.
4. Powers and Duties. The Board shall administer the following matters under the
procedures and standards of these regulations:
a. Appeals of administrative decisions;
b. Variances; and
c. Any other exceptions or relief specifically referred to under the procedures and
standards of these regulations.
1.05 ENFORCEMENT
A. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any building, structure, site element or use of land to be
constructed, altered, maintained, or otherwise initiated in violation of these regulations.
B. Enforcement. The City may investigate and initiate proper actions or proceedings to prevent or
terminate any activity or condition that is in violation of these regulations, including revoke or
withhold any permits, prevent the sale or lease of property, correct or abate the nuisance,
withhold any public improvements, or penalize and initiate legal proceedings to prevent the
continuance of unlawful actions or conditions.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-12
City of Lansing
C. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
each day constituting a separate offense. Each offense shall be punished by a fine established
by the Governing Body by resolution. The City of Lansing, Kansas shall further have the right to
maintain suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purposes of enforcing these
regulations and to abate any potential nuisance. In addition to all other remedies provided by
law, injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate actions may be instituted to prevent violations
including revocation of any permit authorized under this code.
1.06 NONCONFORMANCES
A. Intent. It is the general policy of the City to allow uses, buildings and lots that were created legally
and in conformance with then-applicable requirements, but that do not conform to the current
applicable requirements of these regulations to continue. However, it is also the policy of the City
to bring such uses, buildings and lots into conformance with current regulations as is reasonably
practical. The intent of this section is to balance the interests of property owners in past
investments, discourage investment that expands or reinforces non-conforming situations, and
promote investment consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and these regulations.
B. Nonconforming Lot of Record. Any lots platted legally prior to the adoption or amendment of
this Code, but which could not be platted under the current requirements of this Code may
continue to exist provided it complies with all other applicable standards. Any difficulties meeting
these standards caused by the nonconformance of the lot may be used as criteria in granting any
discretionary relief to these standards. The Building Inspector may issue a building permit for any
nonconforming lot of record when:
1. The lot is shown by recorded plat or deed to have been owned separately and
individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size
and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning regulations;
2. The lot has remained in ownership separate and individual from adjoining tracts of land
continuously during the entire time that the creation of such lot has been prohibited by the
applicable zoning regulations; and
3. The lot can meet all yard regulations for the district in which it is located.
C. Nonconforming Structure. An existing structure or dwelling unit which does not comply with the
height or yard requirements which are applicable to new structures or dwelling units in the zoning
district in which it is located may continue to exist subject to the following:
1. Enlargement, Repair, Alteration: Rehabilitation or expansion of the structure that
increases the degree of nonconformity is prohibited. Other rehabilitation expansions may
occur provided that they comply with all other requirements of this Code, are not
detrimental to the purposes, intent and objectives of the standards, and do not negatively
impact development in conformance with this Code on adjacent property.
2. Damage or Destruction: If destroyed by fire, natural disaster, accident or public enemy by
less than 50% of its appraised value, the structure may be restored to its original
condition if the restoration is started within 180 days (6 months).
3. Moving: No nonconforming structure or dwelling unit shall be moved in whole or in part
for any distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the
entire structure or dwelling unit shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located after being moved.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-13
City of Lansing
D. Nonconforming Use. Uses that were legally initiated prior to the adoption or amendment of this
Code, but which could not be continued under the current terms of this Code may continue to
exist subject to the following:
1. The use may not be expanded beyond any specific area of the site or lot, but may be
expanded within any existing building.
2. Any activity that triggers specific site design standards shall require full compliance of the
site design standards in order for the non-conforming use to be allowed to expand.
3. A use that is discontinued for 180 days (6 months) or more shall lose its non-conforming
status, and all future use of the site or building shall comply with these regulations.
4. Any change of use shall be to a conforming use.
5. Nonconforming Accessory Uses: No use which is accessory to a principal nonconforming
use shall continue after such principal use shall cease or terminate.
6. Nonconforming Residential Uses: No nonconforming residential structure or dwelling unit
may be remodeled, extended, expanded and enlarged to accommodate a greater
number of dwelling or lodging units.
E. Nonconforming Site Condition. Any site condition associated with a conforming use or
structure (such as parking, landscape, open space or other non-building site characteristic) in
existence prior to these regulations but which are not compliant with the standards of these
regulations may continue to exist subject to the following:
1. Any change of use or expansion of use shall require compliance with the new standards
up to the proportion that is required by the change.
2. Any site development activity on a portion of a site shall require compliance with the new
standards up to that proportion that is subject to the development activity.
3. Where any investment is greater than 50% of the appraised value of the site, or can
reasonably be interpreted as impacting more than 50% of any one component of the site,
the site or that component shall be brought into full compliance with these standards.
F. Nonconforming Signage. Existing signs which were lawful at the time, but made nonconforming
by adoption or amendment to this Code, shall be legal provided they are maintained in good
condition. Nothing in this Code shall prohibit the ordinary maintenance repair of a nonconforming
sign or replacement of a broken part of a nonconforming sign. Replacement of copy, content or
message may be considered ordinary maintenance.
1. A legal non-conforming sign shall not be:
a. Changed to another type or shape of non-conforming sign;
b. Physically changed to expand or extend the size of the sign or to replace
significant materials of the sign or sign structure;
c. Continued after more than 180 days (6 months) of abandonment or vacancy of
the property;
d. Re-established after any removal of the sign that is not part of ordinary
maintenance; or
e. Continued if a substantial part of the property or building is redeveloped,
including more than 25% of the property or building by area or by value.
2. Nonconforming signs that are destroyed or damaged by 50% or more of their value shall
not be rebuilt or repaired except in conformance with this code.
1 GENERAL
PROVISIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-14
City of Lansing
G. Burden of Proof. The burden shall be on the applicant to establish entitlement to continuation of
nonconforming situations or completion of nonconforming projects.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-1
City of Lansing
ARTICLE 2. APPLICATIONS & PROCEDURES
2.01 GENERAL  ALL APPLICATIONS
2.02 PLATTING
2.03 ZONING MAP AMENDMENT
2.04 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
2.05 ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN
2.06 SITE PLAN REVIEW
2.07 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
2.08 VARIANCES
2.09 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
2.10 CODE AMENDMENTS
Table 2-1: Procedures Summary
Eligible Applicants Preapplication
Meeting
Notice Review Body
Owner PC GB Posted Published Mailed Staff PC GB BZA
Text Amendment ? ? ? R R/PH D
Subdivision  Administrative Plat ? ? D A
Subdivision  Preliminary Plat ? ? ? R D A
Subdivision  Final Plat ? ? R D A*
Zoning Map Amendment ? ? ? ? ? ? ? R R/PH D
Planned DevelopmentPreliminary Plan ? ? ? ? ? ? ? R R/PH D
Planned Development - Final Plan ? R D A
Conditional Use Permit ? ? ? ? ? R R/PH D
Site Plan ? ? ? R D A
Administrative Site Plan ? ? D A
Variance ? ? ? ? ? R D/PH
Appeal of Administrative Decision ? ? ? ? ? ? D/PH
? = required
? = authorized
PC = Planning Commission
GB = Governing Body
BZA = Board of Zoning Appeals
R = Review and recommending authority
D = Decision-making authority
PH = Public hearing required (distinguished from a
public meeting generally open to the public)
A = Appeal of Decision.
A* = Appeal / Acceptance of public property
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-2
City of Lansing
2.01 GENERAL  ALL APPLICATIONS
A. Applications and Fees.
1. Forms. Applications required under this Code shall be submitted to the Community and
Economic Development Department. The Director is authorized to modify the application
forms and submittal requirements as deemed necessary in the Directors discretion.
2. Fees. Applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee established by the
Governing Body. Any application that does not include the required fee shall be returned
to the applicant as incomplete. Fees shall not be required with applications initiated by
the Staff, Planning Commission, or Governing Body.
3. Eligible Applicants. Table 2-1 indicates applicants eligible for each particular application
under this code, which include the following:
a. Owner. The record owner of property impacted by the application, or that
owners authorized agent. In the case of an application requiring a public
hearing, and for the purposes of the right to appeal or protest, all those receiving
mailed notice shall be considered owners impacted by the application.
b. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission, acting on its own initiative
according to its bylaws and rules of procedure.
c. Governing Body. The Governing Body acting on its own initiative according to its
bylaws and rules of procedure.
B. Application Processing Cycles. The Director shall establish a more specific processing cycle
for each type of application, which includes:
1. Dates of regular meetings of review bodies and decision makers that comply with all legal
requirements for notice and public meeting deadlines;
2. Deadlines for receipt of a complete application for consideration at a particular meeting;
3. The scheduling of staff reviews, agency reviews, and staff reports on complete
applications; and
4. The steps and benchmarks in the application process (including required notice
requirements, public meetings, public hearings, decision meetings and review by other
bodies).
C. Pre-Application Meeting. Pre-application meetings may be requested for any application and
shall be required as indicated in Table 2-1. Where required, the applicant shall confer with the
Director and other city officials designated by the Director. The purpose of the pre-application
meeting is to discuss the general nature of the proposal, including:
1. Classification of the application.
2. Procedure and submittal requirements application.
3. Criteria for processing and decisions on the application.
4. Notification requirements, timing and other procedural pre-requisites, or whether any
special community outreach may be important.
5. Planning and infrastructure impacts, including the need for any additional technical
studies or outside agency coordination and review.
6. The relationship to the Comprehensive Plan, and whether any specific plans, policies or
other design, development or economic development initiatives impact the application.
7. Zoning requirements for the property in question and adjacent property.
8. Opportunities to improve any preliminary design concepts and better relate project
benefits or mitigate impacts to other public or private investments in the area.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-3
City of Lansing
A required pre-application meeting may be waived at the Directors discretion and upon the
applicants request for any application that is routine in nature and where the above topics can be
addressed by general correspondence
D. Staff Review. Upon receipt of an application, the Director shall take the following steps:
1. Determine if the application is complete within 7 days of filing. If the Director determines
that it is incomplete, the Director shall notify the applicant of the specific ways in which
the application is deficient and no further processing of the application shall occur until
the deficiencies are corrected.
2. Schedule complete applications for further review according to these regulations.
a. Applications that require a public hearing shall be scheduled for initial review
within 60 days of a determination of a complete application.
b. Applications that do not require a hearing, but an official public meeting shall be
scheduled for review within 30 days of a determination of a complete application
or the recommendation from another required review body.
In the event that the next regular meeting of the review body is beyond these time
periods, or the required notice cannot be given within these time periods, the application
shall be scheduled for the closest available meeting.
3. Prepare a staff report that reviews the application in light of the appropriate policies,
plans and regulations. The Director shall provide a copy of the report to the review body
and the applicant before the scheduled meeting.
E. Notice. When a proposed amendment is not a general revision of existing ordinances and will
affect specific property, the Administrative Clerk of the Community and Economic Development
Department shall mail a written notice regarding the public hearing to the owners of all property
within 200 feet of the boundaries thereof. Such written notice shall include the information
required in the published notice. Failure to receive such notice shall not invalidate any
subsequent action taken. Such notice is sufficient to permit the Planning Commission to
recommend amendments to these regulations which affect only a portion of the land described in
the notice or which give all or any part of the land described a zoning classification of lesser
change than that set forth in the notice, provided that recommending a zoning classification of
lesser change than that set forth in the notice shall be valid without republication and, where
necessary, remailing.
1. Published. Where published notice is required, at least 20 days prior to the public review
notice shall be published in the official City newspaper.
2. Posted. Where posted notice is required, the applicant shall post notice on property that
is the subject of the application at least 20 days before the scheduled review. The City
will furnish the sign(s) for posting, which shall be placed within five feet of the right of way
on a central portion of the site, or in any other manner so that it is visible without
obstructions from public rights-of-way adjacent to the subject property. The City may
determine the number of signs needed and the general location of the posting based on a
site plan provided by the applicant, and property over five acres shall have at least one
sign on each street abutting the property. The applicant shall provide proof to the
Planning Commission at the time of the review verifying that posted notice has been
maintained in accordance with these requirements.
3. Mailed. Where mailed notice is required, notice shall be mailed to all owners of record
within 200 feet, excluding existing rights-of-way, of the boundaries of the property that is
the subject of the application at least 20 days prior to the public review. If the property is
located adjacent to unincorporated property, then the notice shall extend to all
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-4
City of Lansing
unincorporated land within 1,000 feet of the subject property. The applicant is responsible
for furnishing the certified list of property owners. Notice shall be sent to the owners, and
not to merely the occupants. When mailed notices have been properly addressed and
deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice shall not invalidate any
subsequent action.
4. Constructive Notice. Minor technical deviations from stated notice requirements shall not
be deemed to impair notice where there is actual notice of the time, date and place of the
public hearing.
Public notice of a hearing on a proposed amendment shall be published once in the official City
newspaper at least 20 days before the scheduled date set of the hearing. Such notice shall state:
1. The date, time and place of the hearing;
2. The legal description or a general description sufficient to identify the property under
consideration;
3. The present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed classification; and
4. A general statement regarding the proposed change.
F. Public Hearings. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each proposed
amendment that is referred to, filed with, or initiated by it. The hearing shall be conducted, and a
record of the proceedings shall be preserved in such manner and according to such procedures
as the Planning Commission may from time to time prescribe by rule. Any interested person or
party may appear and be heard at the hearing in person, or by agent, representative or attorney.
The Planning Commission may request a report on any proposed amendment from any
governmental official or agency, or any other person, firm or corporation. If such a report is made,
a copy shall be made available to the applicant and any other interested persons and shall be
available for review at least 3 days before the date set for the public hearing.
G. Action by Review Bodies. Review bodies shall take the actions indicated in Table 2-1. A review
body may take any action on the application consistent with notice given or criteria in this Article,
regardless of the presence of the applicant, including the following (or recommend the following
when the review body is a recommending body):
1. Approve the application.
2. Approve the application with conditions or modifications to lessen or mitigate a potential
impact from the proposed application.
3. Deny the application.
4. Continue the application to allow further analysis. The continued application shall not be
more than 60 days from the original review without consent of the applicant. No
application shall be continued more than once by each review body without consent of
the applicant.
H. Appeals. Where a review body is designated as the appellate body in Table 2-1, the following
appeal procedures apply:
1. Appeals shall be filed with the Director within 7 days of the decision by the decisionmaking
review body.
2. The following persons and entities shall have standing to appeal the action of the review
body: the applicant; the Director, on behalf of any public official, department or agency;
any owner of land directly impacted by the action or proposed action; and any person
given the right of appeal by law.
3. The review body designated as the appellate body shall consider the application as a
new matter, and within 60 days of the date that the appeal was filed may take any action
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-5
City of Lansing
authorized by the decision-making review body. The procedure and required notice shall
be the same as required of the original application.
2.02 PLATTING
A. Applicability. Plat applications are required to establish or alter the legal boundaries of property,
and to account for public facilities, infrastructure, development patterns, public realm design or
other long-range growth and development considerations prior to potential fracturing of
ownership.
Specifically, plats shall apply to:
1. The division of land into parcels or tracts of less than 20 acres, and not involving any new
streets or easements of access and not affecting major streets.
2. A change in the boundary between adjoining lands which creates an additional or
substandard lot.
3. Land used for street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or other public utilities
subject to local, state or federal regulations, if a new street or easement of access is
involved.
4. Whenever any lot, parcel or tract of land has not been ordered by law to be partitioned.
5. Lots which have not been previously platted and zoned for industrial purposes, which
may be divided into two or more tracts without replatting or resubdividing such lots in
conformance with these subdivision regulations.
6. Land which is not to be used for cemetery purposes.
B. Types of Plats and Applications. Plat applications are classified and processed as one of three
types:
1. Administrative Plats. Administrative plats are routine applications such as lot line
adjustments, lot splits, lot combinations or small land divisions that do not alter
development patterns or impact public services.
2. Preliminary Plats. Preliminary plats are larger divisions of land with new ownership and
development patterns; or which impact public facilities or land, and are proposed in a
preliminary or conceptual format to prepare for detailed engineering and design of
facilities.
3. Final Plats. Final plats are a refined version of the preliminary plat that presents proposed
ownership and development patterns, as well as the specific location of public facilities
and public property based on detailed designs.
C. Administrative Plat. Administrative plats shall be processed according to the following criteria
and procedures.
1. Review Criteria. An application may be classified as an administrative plat if the Director
determines that all of the following are met.
a. No new street or alley right-of-way, or other public dedication is needed.
b. No significant increase in service requirements (utilities, schools, traffic control,
streets, etc.), or impact on the ability to maintain existing service levels will result.
c. The application affects the boundaries of only four or fewer existing lots, or
results in five or fewer new lots from a previously unplatted parcel, or is finalizing
the legal boundaries of a previously approved preliminary and final plat which
could only be based on a legal survey after construction of improvements.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-6
City of Lansing
d. All lots meet the legal standards of the subdivision regulations and applicable
zoning districts.
e. The lot patterns are consistent with the surrounding area. In determining
consistency, the size and dimension of lots previously developed, the layout and
design of existing subdivisions and rights of way, and the degree of deviation
from previous development shall be considered.
f. No other significant issues exist with potential development enabled by the plat
that could impact planning policies, development regulations or adjacent property
owners.
Any application not classified as an administrative plat shall be processed as a major
subdivision with a preliminary and final plat.
2. Review and Approval. Upon review by the Director and any affected departments or
agencies, and within 60 days of filing, the Director shall approve any administrative plats
that meet all requirements of these regulations, deny the application, or recommend
further processing as a major subdivision.
3. Effect of Decision. Approval of an administrative plat requires the applicant to record the
plat with the Leavenworth County recorder of deeds.
4. Limitations on Successive Applications. Platted lots are eligible only one time for
approval of a consolidation or division through the administrative plat process and any
further division or consolidations of the originally platted lots or newly created lots shall be
processed through the preliminary and final plat process.
D. Preliminary Plat. A preliminary plat shall be processed according to the following criteria and
specific procedures in addition to those identified in Table 2-1 and applicable in Section 2.01.
1. Review Criteria. A preliminary plat shall be reviewed according to the following criteria:
a. The application is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and in particular
the physical patterns, arrangement of streets, blocks, lots and open spaces, and
public realm investments that reflect the principles and concepts of the plan.
b. Compliance with the requirements of this Land Development Code, and in
particular the blocks and lots proposed are capable of meeting all development
and site design standards under the existing or proposed zoning.
c. Any phasing proposed in the application is clearly indicated and demonstrates a
logical and coordinated approach to development, including coordination with
existing and potential development on adjacent property.
d. Any impacts identified by specific studies or technical reports, including a
preliminary review of storm water, are mitigated with generally accepted and
sound planning, engineering, and urban design solutions that reflect long-term
solutions and sound fiscal investments.
e. The application does not deter any existing or future development on adjacent
property from meeting the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
f. The design does not impede the construction of anticipated or planned future
public infrastructure within the area.
g. The recommendations of professional staff, or any other public entity asked to
officially review the plat.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-7
City of Lansing
2. Effect of Decision. The approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute an acceptance
of the subdivision but authorizes preparation of the final plat. Within 60 days after the first
meeting of the Planning Commission following the date of submittal of the plat to the
Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall approve the preliminary plat;
conditionally approve the preliminary plat and state the conditions; or disapprove the
preliminary plat and state the reasons. If such determination is not made within 60 days
after the first meeting of the Planning Commission following the date of submittal of the
plat, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. Action by the Planning
Commission shall be conveyed to the subdivider in writing and shall specifically state the
conditions or deficiencies in conformance with the Subdivision Regulations, in the case of
conditional approval or disapproval.
3. Term of Expiration. The approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for 1 year,
except that any approval of a final plat for any phase specifically indicated on a
preliminary plat shall renew the 12-month period. The Planning Commission may grant
an extension of this period for up to one year, if the applicant demonstrates substantial
progress towards the design and engineering requirements necessary to submit a final
plat.
E. Final Plat. After approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant may submit a final plat for all or
portions of the preliminary plat area for consideration at the next scheduled Planning Commission
meeting. A final plat shall be processed according to the following criteria and specific procedures
in addition to those identified in Table 2-1 and applicable in Section 2.01.
1. Review Criteria. A final plat shall be reviewed according to the following criteria:
a. The layout and design of the final plat is in substantial compliance with the approved
preliminary plat considering the number of lots or parcels; the block layout, street
designs and access; the open space systems and civic design elements; the
infrastructure systems; or other elements of coordinated developments.
b. The construction plans for any utilities, infrastructure or public facilities meet all
technical specifications.
c. The phasing and timing of public improvements ensures construction and
performance guarantees.
d. Any deviations in the final plat from the preliminary plat brings the application in
further compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes and intent of this
Code.
e. The recommendations of professional staff, or any other public entity asked to
officially review the plat.
2. Planning Commission Review. Within 60 days after the first meeting of the Planning
Commission following the date of submittal of the plat to the Planning Commission, the
Planning Commission shall:
a. Approve the final plat;
b. Conditionally approve the final plat and state the conditions;
c. Disapprove the final plat and state the reasons.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-8
City of Lansing
3. Dedication of Land. The Governing Body shall accept or reject the dedication of land for
public purposes within 30 days after the first meeting of the Governing Body following
submission of the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The Governing Body may
defer action for an additional 30 days for allowing modifications to comply with the
requirements established by the Governing Body. If the Governing Body defers or rejects
such dedication, it shall advise the applicant and Planning Commission of the reasons and
specify the nature of the non-compliance.
4. Effect of Decision. The approval of the final plat and acceptance of the dedication of land for
public purposes, and payment of any applicable fees authorizes the filing of the plat with the
Register of Deeds. Any approval with conditions or exceptions to the rules shall be clearly
stated on the plat. Any plat not recorded within 2 years from the date of acceptance of land
by the Governing Body shall be null and void. Upon approval or recording of the plat, the
applicant may proceed with the design and construction of required improvements. No
building permit shall be authorized until the completion, inspection and acceptance of all
required improvements.
2.03 ZONING MAP AMENDMENT
A. Applicability. The zoning map amendment process provides review of changes to the boundary
of zoning districts (rezoning) that may be necessary to account for changed conditions in the
general area or a change in public policies with respect to future development. Zoning map
amendments for specific property may be initiated by the Governing Body, the Planning
Commission, or the owners or authorized agents of any property affected. In addition to the
general requirements in Table 2-1 and Section 2.01, the following requirements are specific to
zoning map amendment applications.
B. Review Criteria. The zoning map amendment shall be reviewed according to the following
criteria:
1. The character of the neighborhood, including the design of streets, civic spaces and other
open spaces; the scale, pattern and design of buildings; and the operation and uses of
land and buildings;
2. The zoning and use of properties nearby, and the compatibility with potential uses in the
proposed district with these zoning districts;
3. The suitability of the subject property for the uses to which it has been restricted;
4. The extent to which removal of the restrictions will detrimentally affect nearby property;
5. The length of time the subject property has remained vacant as zoned;
6. The relative gain to economic development, public health, safety and welfare by the
current restrictions on the applicant's property as compared to the hardship imposed by
such restrictions upon the property;
7. The recommendations of professional staff;
8. The conformance of the requested change to the Comprehensive Plan, and in particular
the relationship of the intent statement for the proposed district and how the specific
application furthers that intent statement in relation to the Comprehensive Plan;
9. The extent to which the proposed use would adversely affect the capacity or safety of any
utilities, infrastructure or public services serving the vicinity; and
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-9
City of Lansing
10. Other factors relevant to a particular proposed amendment or other factors which support
other adopted policies of the City.
C. Protest by Petition. If a written protest against a proposed amendment shall be filed in the office
of the City Clerk within 14 days after the date of the conclusion of the hearing on a proposed
amendment, which protest is duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of the
property proposed to be rezoned, or by the owners of 20% or more of the total area, excepting
public street and ways, which is located within 200 feet of the boundaries of the property
proposed to be rezoned, then such proposed amendment shall not be passed except by a threefourths
vote of all members of the Governing Body.
D. Governing Body Review. The Governing Body shall not consider a request prior to the lapse of
the 14-day protest period. When the Planning Commission submits a recommendation of
approval or disapproval of such amendment and the reasons therefore, the Governing Body may:
1. Adopt such recommendation by ordinance;
2. Override the Planning Commissions recommendation by a 2/3 vote of the membership of
the governing body; or
3. Return such recommendation to the Planning Commission with a statement specifying
the basis for the Governing Body's failure to approve or disapprove the recommendation
of the Planning Commission. Such recommendation shall be considered in like manner
as required for the original zoning recommendation returned to the Planning Commission.
E. Effect of Decision. Amendments to the official Zoning Map (rezoning) shall be approved by the
Governing Body in the form of an ordinance. Approved changes shall be indicated on the Official
Zoning Map by the Director within 30 days following such action.
2.04 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
A. Applicability. The planned development process is intended for development concepts that
require a higher degree of specific planning based on the complexity of the project, conditions of
a particular site or context, and the ability to meet or exceed the purpose, intent and objectives of
this code through more flexible application of the standards. A planned development application
is a type of zoning map amendment, and must meet all of the procedures and requirements of
that process, but it also accommodates a specific development plan. The planned development
process involves at least two steps  the preliminary development plan, and the final
development plan. In most cases land will need to be subdivided in order to carry out a
development plan. The subdivision process is separate from the planned development process,
though may run concurrently with or follow it. In addition to the general requirements in Table 2-1
and Section 2.01, the following requirements are specific to planned development applications.
B. Preliminary Development Plan. A preliminary development plan is a generalized development
plan for the entire area proposed to be included within a planned development. The purpose of a
preliminary development plan is to allow preliminary review of a proposed planned development
before substantial technical work has been undertaken. Additions to previously approved
preliminary development plans may be considered an amendment to that plan and do not require
a minimum size. A preliminary development plan shall generally include:
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-10
City of Lansing
1. Public Realm Plan. A plan outlining the general location, design characteristics, and
functions of all proposed streets, storm water management, open spaces, civic spaces,
and circulation networks  whether public, common or private  that will create the public
realm for the plan.
2. Development Plan. A plan indicating the specific land uses and their density/intensity,
block and lot patterns, building types and scale, design characteristics, and other building
and site design elements that reflect the proposed character of the plan. This plan shall
have a particular emphasis on how these elements relate to the public realm plan and
where transitions between these elements occur at a parcel or block scale, both within
the development and in coordination with abutting property. The development plan shall
specifically identify where development standards may differ from those otherwise
applicable through the base zoning districts and general development requirements of
this code.
3. Existing Conditions. Analysis identifying the general layout of any existing structures,
streets or infrastructure and the location of natural features such as watercourses, steep
grades, significant stands of trees, specimen trees or other features.
4. Phasing or Implementation. A strategy indicating the estimated timing of development,
and any other administrative details of implementing the plan through future final site
plans.
5. Illustrative Plan. The concept plan may include an illustrative plan that includes
renderings, elevations or plans of buildings, streetscapes, and public spaces or other
urban design and architectural details demonstrating how the plan will be executed
according to the applicable development standards.
C. Preliminary Development Plan Review Criteria. A preliminary development plan shall be
reviewed according to the following criteria:
1. The plan represents an improvement over what could have been accomplished through
strict application of otherwise applicable base zoning district standards, based on the
goals of the Comprehensive Plan, and based upon generally accepted planning and
design practice.
2. The benefits from any flexibility in the standards proposed in the plan promote the
general public health, safety and welfare of the community, and in particular of the areas
immediately near or within the proposed project and are not strictly to benefit the
applicant.
3. The benefits from any flexibility in the standards proposed in the plan allow the project to
better meet or exceed the intent statements of the base zoning district(s) and the
standards proposed to be modified when applied to the specific project or site.
4. The plan reflects generally accepted and sound planning and urban design principles
with respect to applying the Comprehensive Plan and any specific plans to the area;
5. The plan meets all of the review criteria for a zoning map amendment.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-11
City of Lansing
D. Effect of Preliminary Development Plan Approval. Approval of a preliminary development plan
shall constitute acceptance of the overall planning concepts and development parameters. In
reviewing and approving a preliminary development plan, the Planning Commission may
recommend, or the Governing Body may require conditions that must be met before an applicant
submits a final development plan. An approved preliminary development plan shall lapse and be
of no further force and effect if a final development plan (or a final development plan for a
designated phase of the preliminary development plan) has not been approved within two years
of the date of approval of the preliminary development plan. Once approved, the zoning
classification can only be changed through rezoning and cannot be changed by expiration of the
preliminary development plan.
E. Designation on Official Zoning Map. Designation on Official Zoning Map. Sites governed by an
approved preliminary development plan shall be designated on the Official Zoning Map with the
letters base zoning district plus P (planned). (For example, where a portion of the development
plan uses the R-3 and the B-2 base zoning districts for the preliminary development plan, the
future zoning of each area shall be R-3-P and B-2-P respectively.)
F. Final Development Plan. Approval of the rezoning based on the preliminary development plan
shall allow the applicant to submit a final development plan for approval. A final development plan
is a detailed plan for implementing the preliminary development plan including technical
information on building, site, open / civic space, and infrastructure development. A final
development plan may include the entire area covered in the preliminary development plan or it
may include one or more phases of the approved preliminary development plan. The plan shall
include all necessary information to demonstrate that all applicable standards, requirements, and
conditions of the preliminary development plan have been met.
G. Final Development Plan Review Criteria. A final development plan shall be reviewed according
to the criteria for Site Plan Review in Section 2.06, with the additional criteria that the final
development plan is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary development plan.
H. Effect of Final Development Plan Approval. Approval of a final development plan shall be the
same for that of Site Plan Review in Section 2.06.
2.05 ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN
A. Applicability. The administrative site plan process is a way to ensure that routine development
projects meet the development and design standards of this code, and all other standards
applicable to the property. Administrative site plans may be initiated by the owners or authorized
agents of any property affected. In addition to the general requirements in Table 2-1 and Section
2.01, the following requirements are specific to administrative site plan applications. The
administrative site plan process does not apply to detached houses or duplexes, but applies to all
other buildings and sites subject to the following:
1. Structural alterations to an existing building that does not change the footprint.
2. Any expansion to an existing building footprint by 15% or less.
3. Any change or intensification of use which alters access and parking requirements of this
Code.
4. Any site development activity which expands the existing impervious surface 25% or less.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-12
City of Lansing
5. Minor changes to the site access and circulation which do not present a significant
change impacting the design of the public realm or traffic conditions near the site.
6. Significant exterior design alterations to an existing building that do not change the
footprint. This excludes ordinary maintenance, but may include things such as re-facing
or changing exterior materials, altering the composition of the faade by changing
patterns of windows and doors, changing architectural details and ornamentation.
The Director may determine that any application meeting these eligibility criteria still presents
significant change or potential impacts on the area, or presents substantial interpretation
questions on the application of development standards, and is not eligible for the administrative
site plan process. These applications must be reviewed through the full site plan and design
review process.
B. Review Criteria. An administrative site plan shall be reviewed according to the following criteria:
1. In general, any site plan in compliance with all requirements of this code shall be
approved.
2. In making a determination of compliance, or for site plans accompanying any
discretionary review or administrative relief, the review body shall consider whether:
a. The site is capable of accommodating the buildings, proposed use, access and
other site design elements required by this code and will not negatively impact
the function and design of rights-of-way or adjacent property.
b. The design and arrangement of buildings and open spaces is consistent with
good planning, landscape design and site engineering principles and practices,
and requirements of Article 7.
c. The architecture and building design uses quality materials and the style is
appropriate for the context considering the proportion, massing, and scale of
different elements of the building.
d. The overall design is compatible to the context considering the location and
relationships of other buildings, open spaces, natural features or site design
elements.
e. Whether any additional site-specific conditions are necessary to meet the intent
and design objectives of any of the applicable development standards.
3. The application meets the criteria for all other reviews needed to build the project as
proposed.
C. Effect of Decision. Approval of an administrative site plan shall authorize the applicant to apply
for a building permit, and other applicable permits.
D. Lapse of Approval. An approved administrative site plan shall expire and be of no further effect
if an application for a building permit for one or more buildings shown on the site plan is not filed
within two years of the approval. The Director may grant an extension for up to one additional
year. Any other element of the plan not submitted for permits within two years shall expire,
unless the application proposes a different schedule that is approved.
2.06 SITE PLAN REVIEW
A. Applicability. The site plan and design review process is a way to coordinate development
projects within the public realm and with adjacent sites, and specifically to demonstrate how new
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-13
City of Lansing
projects meet the development and design standards of this code for compatible arrangement of
buildings, pedestrian and vehicle access, lighting and landscaping. Site plans may be initiated by
the owners or authorized agents of any property affected. In addition to the general requirements
in Table 2-1 and Section 2.01, the following requirements are specific to site plan and design
review applications. The site plan and design review process specifically apply to:
1. Any new building, except detached houses and duplexes.
2. Any expansion to an existing building footprint by more than 15%, except detached
houses and duplexes.
3. Any site development activity which expands the impervious surface by more than 25%
of existing impervious surface on the lot.
4. Any changes to the site access and circulation which present a significant change
impacting the design of the public realm or traffic conditions near the site.
B. Review Criteria. A site plan and design review shall be reviewed according to the following
criteria:
1. In general, any site plan in compliance with all requirements of this code shall be
approved.
2. In making a determination of compliance, or for site plans accompanying any
discretionary review or administrative relief, the review body shall consider whether:
a. The site is capable of accommodating the buildings, proposed use, access and other
site design elements required by the code and will not negatively impact the function
and design of rights-of-way or adjacent property.
b. The design and arrangement of buildings and open spaces is consistent with good
planning, landscape design and site engineering principles and practices.
c. The architecture and building design uses quality materials and the style is
appropriate for the context considering the proportion, massing, and scale of different
elements of the building.
d. The overall design is compatible to the context considering the location and
relationships of other buildings, open spaces, natural features or site design
elements.
e. Whether any additional site-specific conditions are necessary to meet the intent and
design objectives of any of the applicable development standards.
3. The application meets the criteria for all other reviews needed to build the project as
proposed.
4. The recommendations of professional staff.
C. Effect of Decision. Approval of a site plan shall authorize the applicant to apply for a building
permit, and other applicable permits. The Director may approve minor amendments to approved
site plans and design reviews without the refiling of a new application, but in no event shall the
Director approve any change that does not qualify for an administrative site plan, or any change
that is different from any condition of approval of the site plan and design review.
D. Lapse of Approval. An approved site plan and design review shall expire and be of no further
effect if an application for a building permit for one or more buildings shown on the site plan is not
filed within two years of the approval. The Planning Commission may grant an extension for up
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-14
City of Lansing
to one additional year. Any other element of the plan not submitted for permits within two years
shall expire, unless the application proposes a different schedule that is approved.
2.07 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
A. Applicability. A conditional use permit provides flexibility for different uses within a zoning district
and allows the potential for additional uses. These uses are not generally appropriate in that
district, but require a case-specific review to determine the compatibility in a specific context and
location, or due to the varying design and operational characteristics of the use, Conditional use
permits may be initiated by the owners or authorized agents of any property affected. In addition
to the general requirements in Table 2-1 and Section 2.01, the following requirements are specific
to conditional use applications.
B. Review Criteria. A conditional use permit shall be reviewed according to the following criteria:
1. The proposed use complies with all applicable requirements of this code, furthers the
intent of the proposed zoning districts, and does not conflict with the intent of any abutting
districts.
2. Whether any additional site-specific conditions are necessary to meet the purposes and
intent of this Code and the intent or design objectives of any applicable subsections of
this code.
3. The long-range plans applicable to the site and surrounding area are not negatively
impacted considering the permanence of the proposed use, the permanence of existing
uses in the area, and any changes in character occurring in the area.
4. The impact on the public realm, including the design and functions of streetscapes and
relationships of building and site elements to the streetscape.
5. Compatibility with the character of the area in terms of building scale, building form,
landscape and site design.
6. The adequacy of drainage, utilities and other public facilities.
7. Compatibility with the area in terms of operating characteristics such as hours of
operation, visible and audible impacts, traffic patterns, intensity of use as proposed or
foreseeable, and other potential impacts on adjacent property.
8. The proposed conditional use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
9. The recommendations of professional staff.
C. Effect of Decision. Approval of a conditional use permit by the Governing Body shall authorize
the applicant to apply for a building permit, and other applicable permits. Approval shall be valid
for two years (prior to action by the applicant on the permit; distinct from any time limit the
Planning Commission or Governing Body may set for the duration of the permit), and the
Governing Body may grant a one-year extension. Any application not acted upon according to
the approval and conditions within this time period shall be void. Any amendment to a conditional
use permit shall require the same process as the original approval. The rights granted in a
conditional use permit shall extend to the owner or his agent or licensee and shall not run with the
land. If the owner, agent or licensee shall later transfer title to the property subject to the
conditional use permit to a subsequent owner through the transfer of a fee simple title, then the
conditional use permit shall extend to such subsequent owner for a period of 180 days after the
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-15
City of Lansing
effective date of the transfer, being defined as the date of execution and delivery of a deed
attesting to the ownership of the property.
D. Termination. Conditional use permits may be withdrawn, set aside, cancelled and rescinded by
the Governing Body for good cause upon majority vote of the Governing Body after a written
petition, signed and acknowledged before a Notary Public by one or more individuals who are fee
simple owners of property located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property subject to the
conditional use permit or by motion of a Governing Body member.
2.08 VARIANCE
A. Applicability. Variances are a process to provide relief from a strict interpretation of the
standards of this code, which when applied to a particular property and in a specific context would
create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties on all reasonable use of the property.
Variances may be initiated by the owners or authorized agents of any property affected. A
variance shall not permit any use not permitted by these regulations in the particular zoning
district. In addition to the general requirements in Table 2-1 and Section 2.01, the following
requirements are specific to variance applications.
B. Review Criteria. A variance shall be reviewed and approved only on the finding that the
following conditions are met:
1. The variance requested arises from such condition which is unique to the property in
question and which is not ordinarily found in the same zone or district; and is not created
by an action or actions of the property owner or applicant;
2. The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent
property owners or residents;
3. The strict application of the provisions of the zoning regulations of which the variance is
requested will constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented in
the application;
4. The variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity, or general welfare; and
5. The granting of the variance desired will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of
the zoning regulations.
C. Effect of Decision. Findings of fact identifying and evaluating all factors relevant to the
application shall be made part of the public record. Any person, official or governmental agency
dissatisfied with any order or determination of the Board may bring an action in the District Court
of Leavenworth County, Kansas within 30 days of the final decision.
2.09 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
A. Applicability. The appeal of administrative decisions is a process to determine if there was an
error in any final decision in the interpretation, administration or enforcement of this code by an
administrative official of the City. Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any
decision of the officer administering the zoning ordinance. Appeals of administrative decisions
shall be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days of the date of the decision being appealed.
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-16
City of Lansing
B. Effect of Filing. The filing of a complete application for appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed, unless the official whose decision is being appealed certifies
to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the
certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to, or poses irreparable harm to, life or property.
C. Notice. A copy of the notice of public hearing shall be sent to each party to the appeal, and to the
Planning Commission. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application,
and notice of the time, place and subject of each hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper (as designated by the Governing Body) at least 20 days prior to the date fixed for the
public hearing.
D. Action and Review Criteria. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall grant the administrative official's
decision a presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant.
An appeal shall be sustained only upon written findings that the official was in error. In exercising
the appeal power, the Board shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is
taken, and the Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the decision being
appealed. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall take action on an appeal within a reasonable period
of time after application submittal, but in no case more than 60 days after receipt of a complete
application.
E. Effect of Decision. The decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the same effect as a
decision made by the administrative official. Any person, including any City Official or Governing
Body, aggrieved by a decision of the Board may bring an action in the district court within 30 days
of the final decision of the Board.
2.10 CODE AMENDMENTS
A. Applicability. Text amendments to these regulations may be initiated by the Governing Body or
the Planning Commission, or by Staff on behalf of these entities.
B. Specific Procedures. These regulations may be amended at any time after the Planning
Commission has held a public hearing on the proposed amendment. In addition to the general
procedures in Table 2-1, and Section 2.01, applications for text amendments shall be processed
according to the following specific procedures:
1. Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission for all
proposed amendments.
2. Recommendations. Upon the conclusion of a public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall prepare and adopt its recommendations in the form of a proposed Development
Regulation and shall submit it with a record of the hearing to the Governing Body.
3. Action by the Governing Body. When the Planning Commission submits a
recommendation of approval or disapproval, the Governing Body may:
a. Adopt. Adopt the recommendation by ordinance;
b. Override. Override the Planning Commissions recommendation by at least a 2/3
vote of the membership of the Governing Body; or
c. Return. Return such recommendation to the Planning Commission with a
statement specifying the basis for the Governing Body's failure to approve or
disapprove. If the Governing Body returns the Planning Commission's
2 APPLICATIONS
& PROCEDURES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-17
City of Lansing
recommendation, the Planning Commission after considering the same may
resubmit its original recommendation giving the reasons therefore or submit new
and amended recommendations. Upon the receipt of such recommendation, the
Governing Body by a simple majority thereof may adopt or may revise or amend
and adopt such recommendation by ordinance or it need take no further action
thereon. If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendation to the
Governing Body following the Planning Commission's next regular meeting after
receipt of the Governing Body's report, the Governing Body shall consider such
course of inaction on the part of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of
the original recommendation and proceed accordingly.
4. Publication. If the Governing Body adopts an amendment by ordinance, said amendment
shall not become effective until its publication in the official City newspaper.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-1
City of Lansing
ARTICLE 3. SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
3.01 STREET NETWORK & DESIGN
3.02 OPEN & CIVIC SPACE SYSTEMS
3.03 BLOCKS & LOTS
3.04 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
3.05 COMMUNITY FACILITIES & FEES
3.01 STREET NETWORK & DESIGN
A. Intent. This section, adopted pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-705 et. seq. is intended to
serve the following purposes:
1. Plan and coordinate street networks to ensure the proper arrangement of blocks and lots
for long-range development goals;
2. Increase connectivity and improve accessibility options;
3. Promote efficient and safe public realm designs that are inclusive of all potential users,
including pedestrians, bicycles, automobiles, and trucks or transit, so the interests of a
single mode does not compromise other modes.
4. Require and fix the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded and
improved;
5. Specify a variety of street design types for different contexts and allow effective
transitions of street designs to best support development on abutting blocks.
B. Street Network. Arterial, collector and local streets shall generally be laid out according to the
policies of the Comprehensive Plan, the latest edition of the City of Lansing Design Criteria for
Street Improvements (Lansing Technical Specifications and Design Criteria), and other plans or
maps for major streets. In the absence of more specific guidance in these plans, the following
standards shall apply to street networks.
1. Blocks and Connections. Streets shall be laid out to provide a network of blocks and
streets based on the planning context and development pattern as identified in Table 3-1:
Table 3-1: Block Sizes & Connectivity
Planning Context
Block
Length
Block
Area
Cul-de-sac
Limits
Walkable / Compact
Core areas of commercial
centers and new walkable
neighborhoods, and abutting
blocks adjacent to walkable
places.
250 min.
800
max.
3 to 6
acres
Prohibited
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-2
City of Lansing
Table 3-1: Block Sizes & Connectivity
Planning Context
Block
Length
Block
Area
Cul-de-sac
Limits
General
Suburban neighborhoods and
other areas supporting
commercial corridors.
300 min.
1,000
max.
4 to 8
acres
450 max.
Limited to
exceptions
(B.4) only.
Remote Areas or Campuses
Areas removed from walkable
centers and commercial corridors,
or projects arranged around
internal networks or streets to
serve large-scale and isolated
land uses.
500 min.
1,320
max.
6 to
10
acres
600 max.
2. External Connections. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining additions, or
their proper projection where adjoining property is not subdivided, insofar as they may be
necessary for public requirements. Streets arrangement must cause no hardship to
owners of adjoining property when they plat their land and seek to provide for convenient
access to it. In the interest of public safety and for the preservation of the traffic-carrying
capacity of the street system, the Planning Commission shall have the right to restrict and
regulate points of access to all property from the public street system. Such restrictions
shall be indicated on the final plat. Streets that are obviously in alignment with other
already existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street
names should not be similar to already platted street names.
3. Off-sets. Slight jogs in continuous streets at points of intersection with other streets shall
not be permitted unless due to topography. Where offsets cannot be avoided, a minimum
distance of 150 feet shall be established between centerlines of the intersecting streets.
4. Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the block and connectivity standards:
a. Natural Features and Civic Spaces. Proposed streets may follow the natural
topography to reduce drainage problems and grades. Blocks or parcels abutting or
containing important natural features, topographical constraints or otherwise creating
parts of the Civic Space System, may be larger provided the proposed street layout
preserves these features and integrates them into the overall structure of the
community.
b. Regional Transportation Routes. Blocks or parcels abutting intervening regional
transportation routes such as highways or rail rights-of-way may be larger provided
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-3
City of Lansing
that street layouts and development patterns achieve local connectivity in all other
ways possible.
c. Rural Parcels. Tracts divided into larger or rural lots of at least five acres may
exceed block limits provided development is arranged to allow future streets in
compliance with these regulations, and a logical pattern of re-subdivision can occur
with minimal disruption of buildings, utilities, and other structures.
d. Oversized Parcels. Where oversized parcels are platted for special land uses or
development projects that involve large-scale buildings and patterns, such as
campuses or large-scale employment areas, platted blocks may be larger provided
internal access streets mimic the block structure and urban design amenity of these
standards, and create logical extensions and connectivity to the public streetscapes.
5. Walkways and Passages. The Planning Commission may require access easements as
appropriate to the particular circumstances of the proposed subdivision. In any case
where exceptions for larger blocks apply, or any other area where substantial pedestrian
traffic may occur, such as adjacent to schools, the Planning Commission and/or
Governing Body may require pedestrian walkways through blocks or at any dead-end
streets. In blocks longer than 750 feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the
block may be required near the center of the block. Such pedestrian ways or easements
shall have a minimum width of 10 feet. Such walkways shall be dedicated to the public.
6. Adjoining Street Systems. Whenever a developer has dedicated half of a street as a
public way along their property, the adjacent developer must do the same to finish the
street.
Figure 3-3 Walkways and
Passages
Where street networks do not
connect, opportunities to connect
pedestrian routes should be
considered in context of the overall
network and the proximity to
common walkable destinations
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-4
City of Lansing
C. Street Design. The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall be not less than the minimum
street widths established herein. Arterial streets through subdivisions shall conform to the major
street plan of the Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the Planning Commission and the
Governing Body.
1. Street Design Types. Each functional classification may use the following Street Design
Types so that urban design features and streetscape design better support the
development context and character of the area. Table 3-2 identifies which design types
are most appropriate for different contexts and different functional classes of streets.
Table 3-2: Street Design Types & Functional Classification
Street Type
Arterial
(A)
Collector
(C)
Local
(L)
Standard
A basic street type appropriate generally where no particular development
characteristics or urban design context warrant application of other street
types.
? ? ?
Activity
A pedestrian-oriented street type appropriate for all areas where walkability
is a goal. It is characterized by narrow lanes, slow speeds, on-street parking,
and large, well-designed pedestrian amenity zones that support businesses
and economic activity along these streets.
? ? ?
Neighborhood
A community-oriented street type appropriate where a higher level of
neighborhood design amenity and neighborhood walkability is desired. It is
characterized by large street trees, sidewalks, slow speeds, and occasional
on-street parking.
? ? ?
Green
A natural-oriented street type appropriate where streets cross or align with
natural features, particularly to emphasize the parks and environmental
themes in the plan. It is characterized by, slow to moderate speeds, and
informal and natural landscape edges, and the incorporation of the City trails
system.
? ? ?
? Preferred Type
? Limited Type, based on development pattern, street network plan and surrounding context and natural characteristic
2. Typical Cross Sections for Walkable Contexts. The following are typical cross sections for
enacting walkable environments in activity centers and neighborhoods. The following
street types may be applied anywhere throughout Lansing at the discretion of the
Community Development Director, and are intended to support the building standards
outlined in districts not limited to Planned Zoning Districts (5.01), Mixed-Density
Neighborhood Districts (5.02), and places implementing Walkable Commercial Standards
(5.03). The Public Works Director, Economic and Community Development Director, or
Planning Commission may require modifications to these typical cross sections to
account for the specific context and better meet the intent of this section.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-5
City of Lansing
LOCAL  WALKABLE NEIGHBORHOOD
Streetscape Design
A Right-of-way width 50  62
B Roadway Width 25  28 (back of curb)
C Travel Lane
10
2 lanes
D Parking Area 6  7
E Sidewalk 5  8
F Parkway Width 6  8
B/D
Drainage / Street
Edge
1.5 2 rollover curb/gutter
General Design
Walkway Type Sidewalk/Detached
Planting Type Large shade trees.
Tree Spacing 30 50 on center
Bicycle Facility None  w/in traffic flow
Design Speed 20 mph
Posted Speed 20 mph
Traffic Volume < 750 ADT
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-6
City of Lansing
LOCAL  ACTIVITY A STREET
Streetscape Design
A Right-of-way width 60  72
B Roadway Width 32  36 (back of curb)
C Travel Lane 10, 2 lanes
D Parking Area 8 parallel, or 18 angled (may add width to right-of-way width)
E Sidewalk 12  20
F Parkway Width n/a; tree wells within sidewalk
B/D Drainage / Street Edge 1  2 curb/gutter
General Design
Walkway Type Sidewalk/Attached
Planting Type Large or small shade trees in tree well
Tree Spacing 25  40 on center
Bicycle Facility None  w/in traffic flow
Design Speed 20 mph
Posted Speed 20 mph
Traffic Volume < 1,500 ADT
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-7
City of Lansing
COLLECTOR  WALKABLE NEIGHBORHOOD
Streetscape Design
A Right-of-way Width 70  80
B Roadway Width 32  40 (back of curb)
C Travel Lane 10, 2 lanes
D Parking Area 6  7 (limited)
E Sidewalk 6  10
F Parkway Width 8  12
B/D Drainage / Street Edge 1.5 2 rollover curb/gutter
General Design
Walkway Type Sidewalk/Detached;
Planting Type Large shade trees
Tree Spacing 30 50 on center
Bicycle Facility
None  w/in traffic flow; may be sharrow (14 marked lane)
on designated routes or connecting Parks
Design Speed 25 mph
Posted Speed 25 mph
Traffic Volume < 2,500 ADT
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-8
City of Lansing
COLLECTOR  ACTIVITY B STREET
Streetscape Design
A Right-of-way Width 70  80
B Roadway Width 36  40 (back of curb)
C Travel Lane 10  11, 2 lanes
D Parking Area 8 parallel, or 18 angled (may add width to right-of-way width)
E Sidewalk 12  20
F Parkway Width n/a; tree wells within sidewalk
B/D Drainage / Street Edge 1 2 vertical curb/gutter
H
Median Width (landscape or
hardscape)
12 (left turn lanes at intersections where needed) Optional
General Design
Walkway Type Sidewalk/Attached
Planting Type Large or small shade trees in tree well
Tree Spacing 25 40 on center
Bicycle Facility None  w/in traffic flow
Design Speed 20 mph
Posted Speed 20 mph
Traffic Volume < 10,000 ADT
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-9
City of Lansing
1. Additional Cross Sections: The following are additional cross sections for functional
classification and street design types. The Public Works Director, Economic and
Community Development Director, or Planning Commission may require modifications to
these cross sections to account for the specific context and better meet the intent of this
section.
Table 3-3: Additional Street Cross Sections
Width Streetscape Street
ROW Pavement Sidewalk
Planting
Area
Lanes Parking
Arterial
Standard
100 
120
48  72
8  12
or trail
12  20
buffer
12
4  6
lanes
n/a
Activity
80 
100
44 - 48
60 w/
parking
12 
20
32 s.f. tree
well
11
3  4
lanes
8 parallel
(limited)
Neighborhood
80 
110
44  50 8  12
12 min.
tree lawn
12 +
median
optional*
10  11
4 lanes
n/a
Natural 90 min 24  50 trail
20 min.
buffer
10  11
2-4 lanes
n/a
Collector
Standard 60  90 32  52 6  10
8 min. tree
lawn
12
2-4 lanes
n/a
Natural 70 min. 24  32
n/a; trail
optional
20 min.
buffer
10
2-3 lanes
n/a
Local
Standard 60  66 28  32 5
6 -12 tree
lawn
10  11
2 lanes
7  8
Natural 50 min. 24
n/a; trail
optional
12 min.
buffer
10
2 lanes
n/a
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-10
City of Lansing
D. Intersection Design. Intersections shall be
designed according to the following standards:
1. Street Layout. Under normal conditions,
streets shall be laid out to intersect, as
nearly as possible, at right angles. Where
topography or other conditions justify a
variation from the right-angle intersection,
the minimum angle shall be 60 degrees.
Intersecting streets which determine block
length shall be provided at such intervals
as to serve cross traffic adequately and to
meet existing streets in the neighborhood.
2. Corner Radii. Curb radii shall be the
minimum amount necessary to balance the
competing interest of vehicle turning
movements and the distance and safety of
pedestrians crossing the street, based on
the appropriate context. Table 3-4
establishes the base requirements. In
areas where large vehicles will make
frequent turning movements, the Planning
Commission may require greater turning
radius. In areas where slower speeds are
desired, or walkability is desired, the
Planning Commission may require tighter
corner radii.
Table 3-4: Corner Curb Radius
Intersection Type Curb Radius
Local / Local 10-20
Local / Collector 15-25
Local / Arterial 20-30
Collector / Collector 15-25
Collector / Arterial 25-30
Arterial / Arterial 30
Figure 3-4 Curb Radii
Intersections with smaller curb radii reduce crossing
distances and slow traffic.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-11
City of Lansing
3. Sight Distances. Proper lines of sight shall be maintained at all intersections. The proper
line of sight shall be an unobstructed view from the stopping point on the approaching
street to all points three feet above the roadway along the centerline of the intersecting
street. The distance of the unobstructed view shall be based upon the design speed of
the intersection street, specified in Table 3-5.
Table 3-5: Clear Sight Distance
Design Speed of Intersecting Street Intersection Sight Distance
(measured along centerline of intersecting street.)
15 mph 105
20 mph 125
25 mph 150
30 mph 200
35 mph 225 - 250
40 mph 275 - 325
45 mph 325  400
a. No building or other type of visual obstruction shall be placed or maintained within the
triangle created by the centerline of the street intersection, the stopping point on the
approaching street, and the sight distance specified in Table 3-4 to the centerline of
the intersecting street.
b. Street trees, light poles or other limited obstructions are allowed within the sight
triangle provided that they do not have any foliage, limbs, or other obstructions
between 2 and 8 feet, and are no closer than 30 feet to the intersecting right-of-way
line.
c. Fully controlled intersections, where signalization establishes and prioritizes safe
turning movements, may deviate from the above sight triangle standards if site
conditions warrant and based upon a recommendation of the Director of Public
Works.
4. Crosswalks. Intersections of sidewalks with public streets shall have crossings meeting
the following standards.
Figure 3-5 Sight Distances
Site distances for intersections and road access
shall be measured from a control point and
based on the speeds of oncoming traffic.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-12
City of Lansing
a. Curb ramps meeting ADA accessibility standards shall provide a direct, nondiverted
approach from the sidewalk along the block, into the crosswalk area.
b. Crosswalks on collector streets or higher classification shall be considered for
enhanced crossings, including bulb outs, refuge islands or other traffic calming
measures that are appropriate to the context of the intersection.
c. Where blocks exceed more than 800 feet between intersections, or at other
locations of high pedestrian activity, mid-block crossings shall be considered.
Mid-block crossing designs and locations are subject to approval of the Director
of Public Works and Economic and Community Development Director.
3.02 OPEN & CIVIC SPACE SYSTEMS
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to:
1. Recognize open space as an important and enduring element of civic design and
Lansings image and identity.
2. Plan and integrate an open and civic space system into the structure of streets, blocks
and lots as a coordinated part of the public realm.
3. Value the design, function, and appropriate application of different types of open space,
rather than solely the quantity of space.
4. Develop a greater perceived impact from open space by coordinating the design and
location of open spaces across multiple development projects.
5. Consider the context and multiple functions that open spaces can serve to support
development, including ecological, recreation, aesthetic and urban design functions.
6. Create focal points for the community, neighborhood, district, or development site to
which development and site plans should respond to.
7. Integrate natural systems into the design of common or public open spaces.
B. Applicability.
1. Generally. These standards apply to all divisions of land involving more than five acres.
All platted lots shall have access to one or more of the open and civic space types in this
Section, within the specified service area. The open space requirement is in addition to
any landscape, setback, buffer or frontage type requirement in this code, however
effective site design can allow areas to meet multiple standards.
2. Exceptions. The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to the following:
a. Residential, commercial, or industrial development for property to be located on a
lot of record, or vested final plat, which was approved prior to the effective date of
these regulations.
b. Residential, commercial, or industrial development constructed or to be
constructed in accordance with a building permit issued prior to the effective date
of these regulations.
c. Any lot platted within the applicable service area for any existing open and civic
space types below does not require any new open spaces, provided:
i. it is public; or
ii. it is private or common and the property owner has a right to access this
property through easements, covenants or other formal documentation of the
entity with ownership and control of the space.
3. Reductions and Deviation. At the discretion of the Planning Commission and/or
Governing Body, the requirements may deviate from the criteria of this Section:
a. Based on a plan through the planned development process (Section 2.04) that meets
or exceeds the intent of this Section;
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-13
City of Lansing
b. To the point where any lesser percentage of open space will clearly meet both the
service area and level of service targets;
c. For any application that dedicates open space to the public in a type, location and
design standard that is acceptable to meet general public needs; or
C. Required Open Space. The amount of space required shall be based on the base zoning
district(s) proposed or existing for the project and based on Table 3-6.
3-6: Required Open Space
A-1 n/a
R-1, R-2 12%
R-3, R-4, R-5-6 15%
B-1, B-2 8%
B-3 12%
D. Open Space Types & Context. Open and civic space systems shall be laid out according to the
policies of the Comprehensive Plan and this section. Open spaces shall be designed to reinforce
the character of the area and anticipated development patterns, uses and project designs. Table
3-7 indicates the types of open spaces that are eligible for each particular area based on context.
Standards and specifications for each open space type are provided in sub-section F.
Table 3-7: Open and Civic Space Types
Planning Context
Natural
Area
Park
Trail /
Greenway
Green
Square
Plaza /
Courtyard
Walkable / Compact
Downtown, core areas of commercial
centers, near downtown areas and
new walkable neighborhoods, and
abutting blocks adjacent to walkable
places.
? ? ? ? ? ?
General
Suburban neighborhoods and other
areas supporting commercial
corridors.
? ? ? ? ? ?
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-14
City of Lansing
Table 3-7: Open and Civic Space Types
Planning Context
Natural
Area
Park
Trail /
Greenway
Green
Square
Plaza /
Courtyard
Remote Areas or Campuses
Areas removed from walkable centers
and commercial corridors, or projects
arranged around internal networks or
streets to serve large-scale and
isolated land uses.
? ? ? ? ? ?
? Preferred Type for context
? Limited Type based on opportunities corresponding to specific development context and other
factors of more specific plans.
E. Open Space Design Standards. Open Space Systems shall be designed according to the
specific type, and the standards below for each different type.
Natural Area
The size, location and design of a Natural Area shall
be dependent on the planning context, the presence
of natural amenities and ecological resources worthy
of protection and the ability of the designated area to
provide significant continuity with nearby natural
features. In general these areas should provide the
opportunity of at least 5 acres of contiguous
preserved area and ideally up to 40 or more acres.
Service Area:
N/A
Design Elements
Natural Areas include any area of existing or restored open lands such as riparian corridors, flood hazard areas, unique geological formations,
important habitats, significant plant types or substantial groupings of important plant types, wetlands, etc. The goal is to protect the edges to
maximize intact spaces that provide valuable ecosystem services for the community, support preservation goals or enhance the aesthetics and
amenities of the area.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-15
City of Lansing
Park
Size
0.5  2 acres; 1+ acres ideal (Pocket Park)
2  5 acres, 3+ acres ideal (Local Park)
Neighborhood (5-25 acres) and Community Parks
(25+ acres) shall meet the size requirements of the
Parks and Recreation Department plans and
policies.
Service Area
Within block or on adjacent block (Pocket Park)
1000 to  mile (Local Park)
Neighborhood and Community Parks service areas
dependent on Parks and Recreation Department
plans.
Design Elements
Any park planned for public dedication shall be designed according to official plans and policies of the Parks and Recreation Department.
Other parks shall generally be at least 100 wide in all directions, except that linear natural features (Greenway) may be designed as a park with
portions as narrow as 40 provided it has significant continuity between other open space features
One shade tree for every 40 of street frontage shall be required to relate the park to the public realm, plus other landscape to support the overall park
design.
Between 15% and 50% of the area should be allocated to structured recreation such as ball fields, playgrounds or sport courts. The remainder of the
area should be allocated to ground cover, tree areas, gardens, lawns or other landscape amenities.
Trail / Greenway
Size
20 min. width; 30 + ideal, but dependent on
topography and natural features.
Trails / Greenways shall be located to provide
continuity through the area, and connections to
other supporting facilities, with the ability to link
existing or future destinations for pedestrians or
cyclists, such as parks, schools and community
centers or other civic destinations.
Service Area
1/8 mile, or  mile from access point.
Design Elements
Any Trail / Greenway planned for public dedication shall be designed according to official plans and policies of the Parks and Recreation
Department.
Trails / Greenways should include a paved or otherwise dust free stabilized surface at least 8 min width; 10 min. if shared bike / pedestrian trail
The landscape area on each side of the trail should be at least 6, and wider in places to incorporate natural features or significant vegetation.
One shade tree for every 40 of trail length; and 1 ornamental tree or evergreen tree for every 25 of trail length shall be required.
Trails / Greenways located along rights of way may be designed in conjunction with the overall cross-section design of the right-of-way to create the
optimal multi-modal design for the street and trail.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-16
City of Lansing
Green
Size
 to 3 acres
Service Area
1/8 to  mile
Design Elements
Greens shall be at least 150 wide in all directions, and should have an enclosure ratio (width of space to height of buildings) for buildings on the
Green between 4:1 and 2:1.
Greens should have a public street along at least 2 sides with direct pedestrian access to the street.
Buildings fronting on the green should be designed with frequent entrances, transparency and outdoor seating areas to create activity in the space
and make physical and visual connections between the buildings and the space.
One shade tree for every 25 of street frontage; and one ornamental tree for every 2,000 square feet shall be required.
At least 15% of the area shall be designed for formal gathering such as seating areas and other areas of concentrated amenities that serve as a focal
point of the Green.
Square
Size
5,000 s.f. to 1 acre
Service Area
Adjacent block, or up to 1000
Design Elements
Squares shall be at least 75 wide in all directions and should have an enclosure ratio (width of space to height of buildings) for buildings on the
Square between 3:1 and 1:1.
Squares should have a public street along all sides and be designed as a focal point for abutting blocks; streets should be designed for multi-modal
transportation with direct pedestrian access to the Square.
One shade tree for every 40 of street frontage; and one ornamental tree for every 2,000 square feet shall be required.
At least 50% of the area shall be designed for formal gathering such as seating areas and other concentrated amenities.
At least 25% of the area shall be allocated to planter beds, seasonal plantings, garden, lawns or other landscape amenities.
Plaza / Courtyard
Size
1,000 s.f. to 5,000 s.f.
Service Area
On block or immediately adjacent block
Design Elements
Plazas / Courtyards shall be at least 25 wide in all directions, and should have an enclosure ratio (width of space to height of buildings) for buildings on
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-17
City of Lansing
the Plaza/Courtyard between 2:1 and 1:2.
Plazas / Courtyards should have a public street along at least 1 side; streets should be designed for multi-modal transportation with direct pedestrian
access between the Plaza/Courtyard and the street.
Plazas / Courtyards should include seating, art, formal landscape and other amenities and ornamentation as a focal point for gathering places.
Buildings fronting on the Plaza / Courtyard should be designed as street front buildings with frequent entrances, transparency and outdoor seating areas
to create activity in the space and make physical and visual connections between the buildings and the space.
One shade tree for every 40 of street frontage; and one ornamental tree for every 2,000 square feet shall be required.
At least 20% of the area shall be allocated to planter beds, seasonal plantings or foundation plants or other landscape amenities.
F. Location Criteria. The following location criteria shall be used in determining the most
appropriate locations and characteristics of land to be designated as required open and civic
space systems.
1. Visibility. Priority should be given to areas that provided the most visible impact, and to
locations that provide relationships to open and civic space systems on adjacent property
and future development sites.
a. Formal open spaces (Greens, Squares, or Plazas) should be located at
prominent focal points within a subdivision or development site, and included in
or designed as an effective extension of the public rights-of-way, or other
common areas.
b. Natural open space (Natural Areas, Trails / Greenways, or Parks) should be
located along prominent ridges, valleys and view corridors or areas where other
natural features such as significant vegetation or water features exist.
2. Function. Open space shall be located in areas that maximize its functional
characteristics.
a. Formal open space shall be centered in areas that will have the greatest
population density, activity or development intensity in order to provide the
greatest pedestrian accessibility.
b. Natural open space shall be located in areas where the ecological, aesthetic, and
recreational impact will be the greatest.
G. Ownership and Management. All required Open and Civic Space shall be designated as a
separate parcel or tract on the final plat. Documentation recorded with the final plat shall
demonstrate the responsibility and capacity for ongoing maintenance, administrative and financial
management of the space according to these standards. Options for ownership and
management of preserved area include:
1. Creation of or dedication to a non-profit entity capable of carrying out the ownership and
management.
2. Creation of a homeowners and/or leaseholders association that owns it in common
capable of carrying out the ownership and management.
3. Dedication to a public entity as part of the rights-or-way, parks or other community
facilities element of the plan.
Dedication to the City or other public entity is subject to acceptance by and at the sole discretion
of the Governing Body or other public entity. All open spaces designated on the final plat may be
eligible to count towards the Park Land Dedication requirements according to the provisions of
Section 3.05.C.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-18
City of Lansing
3.03 BLOCKS & LOTS
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to:
1. Ensure the proper arrangement of blocks and lots within the structure of the street
network and open and civic space systems.
2. Arrange development in a manner that is least disruptive to existing topography and
capitalize on inherent characteristics of the land as defining features.
3. Coordinate access and utilities for each lot in association with larger systems of streets
and infrastructure.
4. Promote appropriate site and building designs in relation to the public realm.
5. Ensure that all lots are buildable lots according to this Code, and provide that all tracts or
other parcels serve an urban design or planning function in relation to the overall
development pattern.
B. Applicability. The standards in this section apply to any division of land or platting involving new
blocks or lots, to the extent the division impacts any of the standards.
C. Block Arrangement.
1. Generally. All blocks shall be laid out to have two tiers of lots, unless dictated by overriding
development patterns outside of the control or impact of the project. A different
arrangement may be required to provide better circulation or to protect a major circulation
route.
2. Size. The maximum block length shall be based on the street connectivity standards and
specific context as identified in Section 3.01.B.
3. Access and Frontage. The street network, street designs and block arrangements shall
be coordinated to promote the connectivity and public realm design goals of each
particular context.
a. Blocks shall be laid out so
that each lot has access to the street
network.
b. In order to preserve the
design of specific street design types, lot
access should be coordinated at the block
level.
c. When individual lots may
have limited access due to broader
streetscape and urban design goals,
alternative strategies such as alleys,
internal access streets, shared drives or
limited drives with access to interior
portions of the block or lot should be used.
4. Drainage. Storm drainage should
be designed at the largest scale possible
in order to avoid site by site treatment.
Blocks and streets shall conform to
existing topography as nearly as possible to reduce drainage problems.
Figure 3-6 Blocks and Lots: General Layout and Size
Blocks shall be laid out to meet the connectivity standards for each specific
context, including any justified exceptions for disconnected blocks.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-19
City of Lansing
a. Integrating stormwater systems into development patterns using street designs
and open spaces that serve dual purposes is a priority.
b. Where any stream or surface drainage or water course is necessary, easements
shall be granted to the City preserving their storm water function.
c. The City may require installation of pipe, masonry or rip-rap, flumes or inlets, or
other such protective devices.
d. At the site level, infiltrating stormwater through Best Management Practices is
preferred to detention.
e. All plats and easements shall designate maintenance of the stormwater system,
which may be private or City, dependent on each particular application.
4. Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at block corners, point of curves, change in
direction along lot lines and at each lot corner in accordance with specifications of the
City.
6. Focal Elements. On at least two of the four corners of an intersection of two arterial or
collector streets, subdivisions shall provide a focal element within a radius of 125 feet
from the intersection of the centerlines of said streets. The focal point need not be
located at the corner of the lot but must be easily visible from the intersection of the two
streets. A focal element may consist of any of the following or a combination thereof,
and may be incorporated into a major entryway signage feature for the development:
a. A building with distinctive architectural elements, preferably with a vertical
element;
b. A vertical architectural feature (maximum of 45 height and minimum of 25
height) such as a tower, spire or unique roof form;
c. Public art or sculpture, fountains or other water features;
d. Public plazas or other open space; or
e. Landscape features.
D. Lot Arrangement. All lots shall result in buildable sites considering the topography, surrounding
character, proposed land uses, and development standards applicable to the lot.
1. Size. The width and area of all lots shall comply with the requirements of the zoning
district in which they are located.
2. Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be generally perpendicular to the right of way lines or radial
to curved streets. All side lot lines shall bear between 60 and 90 degrees from the street
right-of-way line on a straight street or from the tangent of a curved street, except where
a variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot layout to accommodate
topography and overriding characteristics of the development pattern.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-20
City of Lansing
3. Lot Access. Lot access shall be limited by the specific street type, and the access
guidance provided for each street. Access for any street may be further modified by any
specific access management study. Where access is limited by these standards and
guidelines, alternative access through shared drives, internal access lanes, or alleys shall
be considered. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
their use will produce definite advantages in meeting special situations identified in the
arrangement of blocks and development patterns.
4. Corner Lots. Corner lots should have extra width sufficient to permit the establishment of
front building lines on both adjoining streets, or to permit other building arrangements that
support the proper relation of the building and site to the adjoining streets.
5. Building Lines. Building lines conforming to zoning regulations shall be shown on all lots
within the platted area.
3.04 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to ensure that all improvements necessary to serve lots within
a subdivision are constructed, inspected, or otherwise assured of completion prior to the issuance
of building permits.
B. Bond. Certain improvements shall be installed within the subdivision before building permits are
issued for buildings on abutting lots or, in lieu of actual installation, benefit districts may be used
for the required improvements. As an alternative to the above procedures, the developer may
provide performance bond or other surety acceptable to the Governing Body assuring that the
required improvements will be installed within a reasonable time. All improvements shall be
installed in compliance with the specifications of the City and maintenance bond shall be required
by the Governing Body.
C. Streets. All streets in the subdivision shall be paved. No grading or other construction shall take
place within a street right-of-way until the construction plans have been approved by the City
Engineer. Compliance shall be confirmed by the Public Works Director and City Engineer prior to
the release of the surety by the Governing Body.
D. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all arterial and collector streets, and
sidewalks shall be required on one side of all other streets. All sidewalks shall comply with
Figure 3-7 Lot Access
Access by driveways shall be designed to coordinate with the type of street and the context of the neighborhood. Due to the cumulative
impact of multiple and wide driveways, lot access may be limited based on the street, the width of lot frontage, and the building type
standards of this code.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-21
City of Lansing
Section 3.01-C: Typical Cross Sections. Walks shall also be installed in any pedestrian
easements as may be required by the Planning Commission.
E. Storm Drainage. The applicant shall install culverts, storm sewers, rip-rap slopes, stabilized
ditches, and other improvements in compliance with the current edition of the City of Lansing
Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, and such plans
shall be examined and approved by the Public Works Director prior to construction. If a
subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainageway, or channel; is encroached upon by the
regulatory floodplain; or includes construction of storm water facilities, then a public storm water
easement shall be provided. Such easement or right-of-way shall encompass the lines of such
water course and shall be of such width or construction, or both, as may be necessary to provide
adequate storm water drainage and for access for heavy equipment for maintenance thereof, and
to encompass the flows from an area inundated by a 1% chance (100-year) precipitation event.
The applicant shall be required to have a storm water analysis prepared for the Planning
Commission by a Kansas Licensed Professional Engineer to determine the required width and
extent of such easement for each major water course or drainageway involved. Such study shall
be based on a 1% chance (100-year) storm. Fences, structures, retaining walls, and landscaping
that are likely to restrict storm water flows will not be allowed in drainage easements.
The applicant shall be required to have an engineer's study prepared on the amount of increased
storm water runoff which will be created by proposed development and a plan of how this runoff
will be accommodated. The City may require design modification of the proposed storm water
system to reduce increased runoff, or to retain or detain runoff on-site. No net increase in the rate
of stormwater runoff shall be allowed in accordance with the current edition of the City of Lansing
Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects.
F. Sanitary Sewers. The applicant shall be responsible to provide for and pay the full cost of the
proper installation of all utilities, including sanitary sewers and connection to approved treatment
facilities, water supply, fire hydrants, natural gas, electricity and telephone services. Such utilities
shall be installed according to the current edition of the City of Lansing Technical Specifications
and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects, and specifications of the controlling utility
company or public agency and must be placed underground beginning at that point where said
utilities enter the subdivision. The applicant shall be required to have an engineer's study
prepared on the impact of the proposed development on the capacity of the receiving sanitary
sewer. The proposed development and existing use may not exceed the capacity of the receiving
sanitary sewer in accordance with the current edition of the City of Lansing Technical
Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects.
G. Street Signs. The City shall install street signs at all intersections within a subdivision, the cost of
which shall be paid for by the applicant.
H. Peripheral Street Improvements. The applicant shall be responsible for one-half of all
peripheral streets which may border the subdivision. The applicants responsibility shall be limited
to the dedication of one-half of the recommended rights-of-way as described in these subdivision
regulations. The applicant shall dedicate and build its portion of the improvement, or put money
for the cost of its portion of the improvement into escrow and waive the right to protest any future
benefit district for the improvement.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-22
City of Lansing
1. Money in Lieu. In lieu of the actual construction of proposed perimeter streets prior to the
filing of the final plat, the Governing Body may at its option, accept cash or a cashier's
check into an escrow account for general street improvements, in an amount that will
guarantee one-half of the construction costs, as determined by the City Engineer and
Public Works Director, of the perimeter streets.
I. Upsizing. Whenever any portions of the required public improvements are part of a planned
future facility for the City, serving an area larger than the subdivision and its impact, the City and
applicant will enter into an upsizing agreement. The City and the applicant shall negotiate the
following aspects of the agreement prior to approval of the plat:
1. The applicant shall construct the facilities as planned by the City for future capacity as
part of the subdivision and development process.
2. The applicant shall be responsible for the portion of the costs required to serve the
proposed subdivision based on actual total cost to build the facilities absent any upsizing
agreement.
3. The City shall be responsible for any incremental costs to expand the facility to the
planned capacity, beyond the capacity to serve the subdivision. The Citys participation
may be based by the applicant bidding the project with bid alternates, one alternate to
build the minimum required facility to serve the subdivision or development and the
second bid alternate being for the upsized facility planned by the City.
4. The agreement shall be subject to approval by the City Attorney.
J. Lighting. The applicant shall install street lighting in accordance with the current edition of the
City of Lansing Technical Specifications and Design Criteria for Public Improvement Projects. All
street light locations shall be shown on the construction drawings for the development. The cost
of installation for such street lighting shall be paid by the applicant.
K. Other Utilities. Where alleys are not provided, permanent easements of not less than ten (10)
feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines, and seven and one-half (7.5) feet
on each side of side lot lines, where necessary, for utility poles, wires, conduits, underground
conductors, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains, and other public utilities.
These easements shall provide for a continuous right-of-way. Where the utility company or
agency has the need for a wider easement than required above for a specific location, this
easement shall be shown on the plat. Utility easements shall not be obstructed by structures,
retaining walls or trees. A property owner may install fences and landscape the easement with
grass and shrubs at his or her own risk.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-23
City of Lansing
3.05 COMMUNITY FACILITIES & FEES
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to:
1. Anticipate and evaluate the incremental and long-term impact of development on broader
public and community facility needs.
2. Identify opportunities to integrate plans for public and community facilities into the
planning and design of proposed land divisions.
3. Consider the location of public and community facilities with initial planning
considerations for streets, open spaces, blocks, and lots, so that needed facilities are
located conveniently in neighborhoods and districts and serve as focal points for the
community.
4. Provide the opportunity to negotiate a fair and equitable price for land needed to develop
public or community facilities, or alternatively to provide an incentive for land owners to
dedicate land for needed facilities where the lack of facilities may otherwise constrain
potential future development.
5. Ensure that the most appropriate locations of public and community facilities are
identified and considered prior to the premature commitment of these areas to conflicting
development patterns.
6. Promote fiscal responsibility for all public entities by coordinating the planning, design
and financing of public facilities with impact generated from proposed development.
B. Reservation of Land. The Planning Commission or Governing Body may require the reservation
of land for public or community facilities, public safety facilities, school sites, or other public or
community facilities. The reservation shall be for a time period of no more than one year, unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant, to permit acquisition of the land by the appropriate public
entity.
1. The reservation by the Planning Commission or Governing Body shall:
a. Be based on community facility needs that may serve an impact beyond that
caused by the proposed development, and which are not otherwise met by
standards of this Code;
b. If applicable, be based on an official master plan approved by the entity with
jurisdiction over the public facility identifying the general location and extent of
the facility, or some other documented need for the facility that is available for
public review; and
c. Be accompanied by a conceptual plan and program provided by the entity with
jurisdiction over the improvement, demonstrating how the entitys facility needs
relate to the site. The conceptual plan shall include information reasonably
necessary for the applicant to plan for development around the reserved site and
to prepare contingency plans in the event the site is not acquired by the public
entity. Development plans for the unreserved property shall not adversely affect
the potential use of the reserved property for the designated public or community
facility.
2. During the reservation period or in association with the preliminary plat, the applicant may
submit a contingency preliminary plat for the portion of the property subject to the
reservation. A contingency plat shall include all of the information of a preliminary plat for
the reserved property, and can serve as the preliminary plat if the negotiation is
terminated or unsuccessful. Any final plat for a reserved portion may be conditionally
approved, and shall not be recorded until the one-year reservation period has expired or
negotiations have terminated. Otherwise any reserved portion not acquired within one
year will require a preliminary and final plat according to the standards and procedures in
this Code.
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-24
City of Lansing
C. Park Land Dedication The owner of any property filing a preliminary and final plat apply shall
convey land for park purposes land, or make a payment of money in lieu of land, or a combination
of both, to the City at the time of final plat submittal. This land or fee shall provide for the
recreational needs created by new development in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
1. Dedication. Subdivision plats shall show dedication of land for park uses at locations
designated in the Comprehensive Plan, a relevant plan adopted by the Governing Body,
or as otherwise determined through the plat review process and applying the Open and
Civic Space standards in Section 3.02. When the required dedication is less than four
acres, the Planning Commission and/or Governing Body may require the open space to
be located at a suitable place at the periphery of the subdivision, so a more usable tract
will result when additional open space is obtained when adjacent land is subdivided.
2. Money in Lieu. The Governing Body may decline to accept the public dedication of park
land and require a payment of money in lieu of land dedication to completely or partially
meet the requirements of these regulations. However, money in lieu shall not remove the
obligation of the subdivision to provide neighborhood or project open and civic spaces as
provided in Section 3.02 or Article 6 of these regulations. The amount of money in lieu
shall be based on fees established by the City through its schedule of fees for Park Land
Dedication. In determining whether to recommend and accept a dedication or require the
fee, the Planning Commission and Governing Body shall consider what would be in the
best interest of the City based on, but not limited to, the following factors:
a. Suitability of land for use as a neighborhood or community park, considering
location, access, topography, flood plain or degree of other similar constraints or
impediments;
b. The recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and the Parks
and Recreation Director;
c. Whether the proposed land to be conveyed for park purposes is adjacent to an
existing or proposed school site;
d. Whether there is sufficient existing public or private park land in the area of the
proposed development;
e. Whether the park needs of the area where the proposed development is located
would be best served by expanding or upgrading existing parks;
f. Whether the land is located adjacent to a linear park or greenway; and
g. The guidelines of the current Lansing Comprehensive Plan.
3. Common Amenities Designed to Offset Land or Fees. At the time of the preliminary plat,
or in association with the final plat, the City may a Facilities Use Agreement for a waiver
of all or a portion of park fees for common amenities not dedicated or accepted to a
public entity, based on the following conditions:
a. The relationship of the amenity and recreation benefit to surrounding
development, and particularly the degree the amenities meet the intent of the
Open and Civic Space Standards in Section 3.02;
b. The accessibility of the amenity or benefit to the public at-large;
3 SUBDIVISION
STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-25
City of Lansing
c. The approved mechanism for the continued and future maintenance and
improvements of the amenity of benefit.
d. The extent and/or expense of amenity or benefit, and in general the amenity or
benefit must be equal to 150% of the parkland fee assessment.
e. The extent the amenity or benefit is consistent with overall policies, plans, and
goals of the office of Parks and Recreation.
Any Facilities Use Agreement, whether incorporated as part of the preliminary plat
review, or in association with the approval and acceptance of the Final Plat, shall require
a recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Director, and approval of the Governing
Body.
D. Additional Dedications and Reservations. The provisions of this Section are minimum
standards. None of the subsections above shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from
dedicating other land for any public purpose directly related to the impact of the proposal and in
addition to the requirements of this Section, or from reserving any other lands that may meet the
documented and planned needs of other entities providing community facilities.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-1
City of Lansing
ARTICLE 4. ZONING DISTRICTS & USE STANDARDS
4.01 ZONING DISTRICTS & INTENT
4.02 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
4.03 PERMITTED USES
4.04 ACCESSORY USE STANDARDS
4.05 SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
4.06 TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS
4.01 ZONING DISTRICTS & INTENT
The boundaries of the districts are shown on the official Zoning District Map of the City of Lansing,
Kansas. The Zoning District Map, with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, is
as much a part of these zoning regulations as if such Zoning District Map with all notations, references,
and other information was specifically set forth herein.
Zoning Districts and Intent.
"A-1" Agricultural District. The purpose of this district is to provide for agricultural and related
uses, and to preserve and protect agricultural resources.
"R-1" Suburban Residential District. The intent of the R-1 district is to provide for low density,
single-unit detached residential buildings, including those uses which reinforce residential
neighborhoods.
"R-2" Single-Unit Residential District. The intent of the R-2 district is to provide for single-unit
residential buildings at a higher density than the R-1 District, to support and encourage more
walkable residential neighborhoods.
"R-3" Mixed-Density Neighborhood District. The intent of the R-3 district is to provide for
moderate density residential development with a variety of housing options, in patterns that
create strong, walkable neighborhoods near civic and commercial destinations. The building
scale, frontage designs, and streetscape are compatible throughout the district, and an emphasis
on design details and neighborhood character create comfortable places for people.
"R-4" Multi-Family Residential District. The intent of the R-4 district is to provide for high density
residential development, including single-unit, two-family and multi-family residences, in strong
residential neighborhoods.
R-5 Manufactured Home Planned District. The R-5 district is intended for planned
developments that provide smaller-format manufactured or modular homes that include common
amenities in a neighborhood or community setting, designed in a manner that is compatible with
the surrounding community. The R-5 district is a specific form of a planned district requiring
review and approval as provided in Section 2.04 Planned Development procedures.
"B-1" Neighborhood Business District. The intent of the B-1 district is to provide a zone which is
suitable for small scale businesses serving primarily local needs. The B-1 district is most
appropriate for buildings that front onto local side streets that provide primarily neighborhoodoriented
retail and office uses. These areas serve as a transition from automobile-oriented
environments along K-7 to the adjacent residential neighborhoods and schools.
"B-2" General Business District (Town Center). The intent of the B-2 district is to provide a zone
which is suitable for retail shopping and offices that are typically located in the core area of a city.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-2
City of Lansing
"B-3" Regional Business District. The intent of the B-3 district is to provide for those commercial
uses which are intensive in nature and require larger lots and direct access to major streets. The
B-3 district is most appropriate for automobile oriented, regional commercial and office
development. Within this area, pedestrian links shall be provided to connect the local streets
located on each side of K-7 that serve to connect the residential neighborhoods, schools and
parks.
"I-1" Light Industrial District. The intent of the I-1 district is to permit industrial uses that are not
obnoxious due to appearance, noise, dust, or odor; that do not require intensive land coverage;
and that can be compatibly developed with adjacent districts.
"I-2" Heavy Industrial District. The intent of the I-2 district is to allow basic or primary industries
which are generally incompatible with residential or commercial uses.
4.02 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Generally. The height, area, and bulk requirements for the various districts are established by
Table 4-1. The Development Standards for each district are dependent on the provisions in
Article 5 and Article 6.
Table 4-1: General Development Standards
ELIGIBLE
ZONING
DISTRICT
HEIGHT, AREA AND BULK STANDARDS
LOT STANDARDS MINIMUM SETBACK
MIN. SIZE MIN. WIDTH HEIGHT FRONT INTERIOR SIDE REAR
A-1 1 acre 160 ft. 2.5 stories /
35 ft.
40 ft. 16 ft. 40 ft.
R-1 10,000 s.f. 75 ft.
2.5 stories /
35 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 30 ft.
R-2 6,000 s.f. 60 ft.
2.5 stories /
35 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 30 ft.
R-3 See Article 5 development standards specific to R-3 Walkable Neighborhood District.
R-4 10,000 s.f. 60 ft. 3 stories / 45
ft.
25 ft. 10 ft. 30 ft.
R-5 See Article 5 for development standards specific to Residential Manufactured Home Planned District.
B-1 6,000 s.f. 50 ft. 3 stories / 45
ft.
Sec. 5.03* 0 ft. ** 25 ft.
B-2 6,000 s.f. 50 ft.
3 stories / 45
ft. Sec. 5.03* 0 ft. ** None.
B-3 10,000 s.f. 60 ft.
3 stories / 45
ft. Sec. 5.03* 0 ft. ** 20 ft.
I-1 6,000 s.f. 50 ft.
3 stories / 45
ft. 20 ft. N/A** 25 ft.
I-2 10,000 s.f. 80 ft. 3 stories / 45
ft.
20 ft. N/A** N/A**
*Front setbacks for commercial districts are based on street contexts and allowed Frontage Types defined in 5.03.
**If abutting residential district, setback shall be a minimum of 10 ft.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-3
City of Lansing
B. Requirements. The following general requirements apply to all zoning districts, except where
specifically noted otherwise in these regulations:
1. All structures or uses of land shall require a permit prior to initiation, construction or any
other related development activity, unless specifically exempt from a permit by this code.
The permit shall authorize the building, structure or use according to the standards and
procedures of this code.
2. All required yards, setback areas or other open space shall remain unenclosed and open
to the sky, unless the design standards applicable to a particular lot, building type or open
space specifically allow otherwise.
3. No use, structure or lot shall be maintained in any way that is damaging or harmful to
adjacent property, or to the general public health, safety and welfare.
C. Exceptions. The regulations for height, setback and design of buildings and lots do not apply to
the following situations:
1. Height Exceptions. The height regulations as prescribed in this Chapter shall not apply to:
a. Accessory building elements integral to the design and construction of the
building, such as belfries, chimneys, ornamental towers and spires, elevator
bulkheads, cooling towers, smoke stacks or other equipment, provided they meet
all applicable screening requirements and they are not otherwise extended to
specifically avoid the intent of applicable height limits.
b. Site elements, flag poles, monuments, water towers, fire towers provided they
are setback from the property line at least one foot for each one foot of additional
height above the height limit for the district in which it is located.
c. Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools,
when permitted in a district, may have a maximum height of 60 feet, and
churches and temples may have a maximum height of 75 feet, when the required
side and rear yards are each increased by at least one foot for each one foot of
additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the
building is located.
2. Lot Exceptions. The following are exceptions and supplemental standards for the lot
area and setback standards in this Chapter:
a. Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be
considered as a portion of the required setback.
b. Every part of a required setback shall be open to the sky except for: ordinary
projections of roof lines, eaves, gutters, soffits, sills, belt courses, awnings and
canopies without independent supports, window wells, egress windows,
accessible ramps, stairs, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and
ornamental features which may project to a distance not to exceed 24 inches into
a required yard; or statuary, arbors, trellises, flagpoles, landscaping, lighting and
similar ornamental features which shall be allowed within the required setback
areas.
c. Where a lot is used for a commercial or industrial purpose, more than one main
building may be located on the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all
open space requirements around the lot for the district in which the lot is located.
3. Yard Encroachments. The following accessory elements of buildings may exceed the
required setbacks:
In residential districts, primary entrance features such as porticos, stoops, or unenclosed
porches may extend up to 10 feet into the required front setback provided:
(1) No encroachment shall be closer than five feet from the right-of-way.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-4
City of Lansing
(2) Any roof structure associated with the features shall be single-story.
(3) Any porch must include usable space, typically a depth of at least eight feet and a
width of at least 12 feet.
(4) Any enclosure is limited to no more than 24 square feet.
(5) All primary entry features are integrated into the overall building design including
materials, architectural style and details, and roof structures.
D. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be permitted in association with and on the
same lot as a principal building and are subject to the following additional limitations:
1. Generally. No accessory building shall be erected in any required front or side yard, and
no detached accessory building shall be erected closer than 5 feet to any other building.
No accessory building shall cover more than 30% of the rear yard.
2. Small Sheds. Accessory buildings 120 square feet or less and less than 10 feet tall shall
be limited to one per lot, located behind the rear building line of the principal building, and
be no closer than 5 feet from the rear or side property line.
3. Detached Building. Accessory buildings over 120 square feet shall meet the following:
a. No more than one per lot.
b. Located behind the front building line.
c. Be at least five feet from the rear or side lot line, except that any accessory
building providing garage access off a rear alley may be located within three feet
of the rear lot line.
d. Be no more than one and one-half stories, or no higher than the principal
building, whichever is less.
e. Be limited to no more than 30% of the required rear yard.
f. Be constructed with materials, architectural details and style, and roof forms that
are compatible with the principal structure. Any accessory building larger than
120 square feet not meeting this criteria shall meet the setback requirements for
the principal structure.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-5
City of Lansing
4.03 PERMITTED USES
A. Table of Uses & Definitions. In order to implement the intent of each zoning district, facilitate
complimentary transitions between districts, and to regulate a variety of compatible uses within
zoning districts, use categories and general uses have been established for principal uses of land
and buildings. Table 4-2 indicates permitted uses () subject to general district and building
development standards, conditional uses (C) subject to the discretionary review process, and
uses with supplementary standards (*) related to specific uses.
Table 4-2: Permitted Uses A1 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 B1 B2 B3 I1 I2
CIVIC / INSTITUTIONAL
Armed Forces Reserve Center   
Assembly  Small
Assembly  General C   
Assembly  Event Venue   
Bus Passenger Terminals    
Cemeteries and Mausoleums           
Cultural and Public Service           
Open / Civic Space           
Schools Neighborhood         
Schools  Community         
Schools - Regional C  
Social Services Agency (Ord. 424, Sec. 1) C C C C C C C
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
Detached house, standard     
Detached House  Neighborhood Lot 
Detached House  Compact Lot 
Duplex or two-unit house C  
3- to 4-plex  
Row house  
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-6
City of Lansing
Table 4-2: Permitted Uses A1 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 B1 B2 B3 I1 I2
Small Apartment (3-12 units) 
Medium Apartment (12-40 units)   C
Mixed-use* (Dwellings above commercial /
service)   
Live/Work C C  
Congregate Living   C
Accessory Dwelling* C C C C
Home Occupation*      
Manufactured Home 
RETAIL
Retail  Micro*      
Retail  Light   
Retail  General  
Retail  Heavy  
Grocery  Market   
Grocery  Store  
Grocery  Supermarket 
Outdoor Sales and Display  Yard C     
Outdoor Sales  General C  
Outdoor Sales  Heavy C   
Convenience Store/Fuel Station C   
SERVICE AND EMPLOYMENT
Adult Entertainment C
Animal Care  Kennel* C C C
Animal Care  General C   
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-7
City of Lansing
Table 4-2: Permitted Uses A1 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 B1 B2 B3 I1 I2
Animal Care  Large  
Automobile and Truck Wash Services  C
Day Care, In-Home  Major* C C C C C
Day Care Center C   
Funeral Home and Interment C C 
Food and Beverage  Limited   
Food and Beverage  General  
Healthcare  General  
Healthcare  Large  
Lodging  
Office  General C  
Office  Large / Complex  
Personal Service / Office  Limited   
Personal Service  General   
Personal Service  Heavy  
Personal Service  Household Industrial C  
Personal Storage  Indoor C  
Personal Storage  Outdoor  
Recreation/Entertainment  Indoor Minor
(less than 10K) C   
Recreation/Entertainment  Indoor Major
(10K or more) C C  
Recreation/Entertainment  Outdoor
Minor C C   C
Recreation/Entertainment  Outdoor Major C C 
Recreation  Campground* C
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-8
City of Lansing
Table 4-2: Permitted Uses A1 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 B1 B2 B3 I1 I2
Residential Care  Independent Living C  
Residential Care  Assisted Living C C  
Residential Care  Long-term Care C C C 
Vehicle/Equipment Service and Repair 
Limited C C  
Vehicle/Equipment Service and Repair 
General   
Vehicle/Equipment Service and Repair 
Heavy
C C
INDUSTRIAL
Commercial Storage  Indoor   
Commercial Storage  Outdoor Minor   
Commercial Storage  Outdoor Major C 
Extractive Industry / Natural Resource
Processing C
Freight and Distribution  Light    
Freight and Distribution  Heavy  
Landfill and Waste Processing Facility C C
Manufacturing  Limited / Artisan C    
Manufacturing - Light C C  
Manufacturing - Moderate  
Manufacturing - Heavy C
Petroleum Bulk Stations and Terminals,
Liquid Petroleum Gas C 
Water Treatment Plants and Storage     
AGRICULTURE
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-9
City of Lansing
Table 4-2: Permitted Uses A1 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 B1 B2 B3 I1 I2
Agri-Tourism C
Agriculture  Light Processing 
Agriculture  Heavy Processing C C 
Apiaries (Hobby) C C
Farmers Market  C  
Farming  Light 
Farming  Commercial C C C
Farming  Homestead 
Riding Stables C
COMMUNICATIONS
Wireless Communication Antenna C    
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
The Residential Dwelling category is the principal use of land and buildings for dwelling units. The
arrangement and extent of dwelling units depends on the zoning district, lot sizes and building types,
arranged in the following types:
Accessory Dwelling  A dwelling unit, either in a detached accessory structure, or included within a
principal structure, that is located on the same lot as a detached house and is incidental to the principal
use of the lot for a principal dwelling. Examples include a garage apartment, basement apartment or
second level / attic apartment.
Congregate Living  Congregate Living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a structure by a
group of people who do not meet the definition of one household, but often share a common situation or
facilities. Congregate living does not include residential care facilities or correctional facilities, but may
include dormitories, monasteries, or convents.
Home Occupation - A business, profession, service, or trade conducted for gain or support entirely within
an owner-occupied residential dwelling and/or its accessory structures, when such activities are clearly
incidental or subordinate in use to the dwelling and may involve limited on premise interaction with
customers.
Live / Work - A residential building type designed with a single dwelling unit, but where an additional
component of the structure is designed for a small-scale business function run by the occupant. Live /
Work units can either be detached structures or attached with common party walls with other Live/Work
units similar to the Row House configuration.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-10
City of Lansing
Manufactured Home Community  a parcel of land planned and designed for multiple home sites for the
placement of manufactured, mobile or other small homes, and used for the principal dwelling of
households for long-term residency. Home sites may either be located on a single lot, owned through
appropriate condominium procedures, or platted for individual ownership of each site under certain
conditions.
Mixed Use (apartment over commercial / service)  Residential use or occupancy of one or more dwelling
units in a structure designed or used for other principle non-residential uses.
Multi-unit Household Living  Buildings with two or more dwelling units, dependent on specific building
types permitted in each district, where each is designed for occupancy by one household.
CIVIC / INSTITUTIONAL
The Civic / Institutional category is the use of land and buildings to serve public or community interest by
enhancing the daily cultural, social, or recreation need for residents and neighborhoods, whether by way
of open and public citizenship, by property ownership or residency, or by membership affiliation. It
includes the following types:
Assembly  Small  Places of public assembly designed and located to serve community or civic needs
for residents of nearby neighborhood(s) with regular or periodic organized services or events, and
typically designed for no more than 600 people at maximum occupancy. Examples include a
neighborhood association club houses, meeting hall, or small religious facility.
Assembly  Large. Places of public assembly designed and located to serve community or civic needs of
a broad vicinity with regular or periodic organized services or events, and typically designed for more than
600  1,200 people. Examples include a community center, small event hall or large religious facility.
Assembly  Event Venue - Places of public assembly designed and located to serve community or civic
needs of the city or region and typically designed for 1,200 or more. Examples include an auditorium,
large event hall or major worship hall.
Cemetery / Mausoleum  Land or building used for the burial of the deceased and dedicated for interment
purposes, including both human and animals.
Cultural and Public Service  A civic use offering education, arts and cultural materials or attractions for
the general public, including exhibits and events; or offering administrative, social, tourism, or charitable
services to the general public. Examples include museums, libraries, charitable or philanthropic centers,
tourist information centers, and similar uses.
Open / Civic Space - Areas preserved as primarily open land, except for accessory structures, and
designed to serve a specific urban design function for natural, ecological, aesthetic, recreational or formal
gathering purposes. (see Section 4.02 and 8.02 for more specific types)
School; Neighborhood  A small public or private institution for primary or secondary education and
typically serving up to 600 students, primarily targeted to neighborhoods within 1 mile. Special purpose
schools that have a larger target area but are designed and scaled to perform similarly to a neighborhood
school may be included in this type.
School; Community  A large public or private institution for primary or secondary education and typically
serving more than 600 students and targeted to the broad vicinity, including neighborhoods beyond 1
mile.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-11
City of Lansing
School; Regional  A public or private institution for post-secondary education, skills and trade instruction
or job training, targeted to the region. Examples include colleges, universities, and vocational/technical
schools.
Social Service Agency  Agencies relating to family services, not including residential, correctional,
rehabilitation, and treatment facilities. (see Ordinance 424, Section 1)
RETAIL
The Retail category is the use of land and buildings for the sale, lease or rental of products to the general
public with frequent interaction of patrons or consumers on premises. The types of uses in this category
are dependent on the size of gross leasable area per tenancy, where the smaller formats (Micro,
Neighborhood or Small) are typically dependent on a target market of consumers within the neighborhood
or 1-mile area, and where the larger formats (General, Large and Warehouse) are typically dependent on
a target market beyond the 1 mile area.
Convenience Store/Fuel Station A retail use engaged in the sale of fuel and other convenience goods to
the general public, and may include accessory repair or maintenance services. The use is limited to no
more than 12 fueling stations and no more than 4 garage service bays. Examples include a small
convenience center or large gas station.
Grocery  Market A retail use selling food and produce or specialty food products for household
consumption in a small-scale format under 20,000 square feet. Examples include a corner market,
butcher shop, produce stand or similar food store.
Grocery  Store (20K  45K)  A retail use selling food, produce and other household products for
household consumption in a small-scale format at least 10,000 but less than 45,000 square feet.
Examples include a small grocery store that may serve as the anchor to a small-scale walkable center.
Grocery  Supermarket (45K+)  A retail use selling food, produce and household products for household
consumption in a large-scale format, at least 45,000 square feet. Examples include a large-format
grocery or supermarket, or a similar function housed within a larger warehouse retail store.
Outdoor Sales  Yard - The limited accessory display of merchandise on a sidewalk or an exterior private
area of a site associated with the otherwise permitted non-residential use. The display is further limited
by the following: (1) it only occurs during business hours; (2) all components of the sale are removed from
the site and brought indoors during non-business hours; and (3) is limited to sales or events lasting no
more than 7 days with at least 30 days between consecutive events. Examples include a sidewalk sale
or farm truck / produce stand.
Outdoor Sales  Seasonal - The accessory display and sale of merchandise on a sidewalk or exterior
private area of a site associated with an otherwise permitted non-residential use, where merchandise may
be kept outdoors or where a portion of the site or area is designed and dedicated to facilities to support
the display and sale. The display may be further limited by applicable temporary use standards outlined
in Section 4.05.
Outdoor Sales  General - A retail use where the primary business is associated with merchandise that
can only be displayed permanently and year-round out of doors. Examples include a small-scale nursery,
a lumber yard, or a small machine or equipment sales.
Outdoor Sales  Heavy - A retail use where the primary business is associated with large-scale
equipment and merchandise that can only be displayed permanently and year-round out of doors.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-12
City of Lansing
Examples include a motor vehicle sales lot, equipment sales lot, boat or recreational vehicle sales lot,
large nursery, large machine or farm implement sales yard.
Retail  Micro - A small scale retail use under 500 square feet, including food trucks, sales kiosks or
machines, and other temporary or permanent sales receptacles.
Retail  Light  A small scale retail use at least 500 but less than 6,000 square feet.
Retail  General  A retail use at least 6,000 but less than 20,000 square feet.
Retail  Heavy A large-scale retail use at least 20,000 but less than 100,000 square feet.
SERVICE & EMPLOYMENT
The Service and Employment category is the use of land and buildings for businesses engaged in the
exchange of professional and individual services. It includes the following types:
Adult Entertainment  An establishment used for presenting, selling or featuring material or entertainment
that is characterized by an emphasis on displaying, depicting, describing, or relating to specified content
that is sexual in nature and which excludes minors by their age. (Section 4.04-F)
Animal Care. A service use offering professional medical care or boarding, grooming and training for
animals. This use type is further categorized by the following formats.
Animal Care  Kennel  A service use for the boarding of animals, where there are outside areas
or facilities where more than four dogs are kept for purposes of breeding, boarding, or care.
Animal Care  General  A service use offering basic care for animals in an indoor setting, and
which may include services offered outside of normal business hours. Examples include a small
veterinary office, grooming service, animal hospital or rehabilitation facility.
Animal Care  Large  A service use offering full care for animals with activities taking place in
large scale indoor and/or outdoor facilities, and which may include services offered outside of
normal business hours. Examples include large animal hospitals, kennels, animal adoption
agencies or other similar facilities.
Day Care. A service use engages in the business of providing daily care for individuals unable to care for
themselves, including recreation, education and supervisory services. This use type is further
categorized by the following formats:
Day Care  In home, major. A day care use for more than 6 children under the age of 18, in a
residential building and as an accessory use to the dwelling. The day care provider shall be
licensed with the State of Kansas, and shall comply with all applicable regulations.
Day Care  Center. A day care use for individuals in a commercial building.
Funeral Home and Interment  A service use accommodating preparation and ceremony for the burial of
the deceased.
Food and Beverage. A service use engaged in the business of serving prepared food and beverages to
the public for immediate consumption. This use type is further categorized by the following formats:
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-13
City of Lansing
Food and Beverage  Accessory Drive-Thru  A portion of a facility that relates to dispensing
products or services to patrons who remain in vehicles. May include a window, driving lane,
outside menu boards, and other interior or exterior features and equipment dedicated for this
purpose.
Food and Beverage  Accessory Outdoor  A porch, patio, deck or other area of land used for
seated dining which is not within the interior building walls of a restaurant or eatery.
Food and Beverage  Limited  A service use that prepares and sells food and beverages for on
premise consumption, and may include accessory off-premise consumption through carry-out or
drive-through services, and may also include on premise consumption of alcoholic beverages
and/or accessory indoor entertainment.
Food and Beverage General  A service use that prepares and sells food and beverages for on
premise consumption, but where alcohol sales are a majority of the sales and food services are
subordinate to this function, or where entertainment events by tickets or cover charge, or other
significant attractions are held during nighttime or evening business.
Health Care  General  A facility where multiple groups of physicians, dentists or other health care
professionals offer a range of services in a shared office setting primarily during normal business hours.
Health Care  Large  A large institution offering full-service, 24-hour, in-patient, out-patient and
emergency health care services, including a wide range of accessory office, cafeteria and other uses that
support the institutional setting.
Lodging  A service use by a licensed (where applicable) business providing accommodations for shortterm
overnight occupancy.
Office  General  An office use where the total gross leasable area is at least 6,000 but less than 40,000
square feet, and may include more than one building.
Office  Large / Complex  An office use where the total gross leasable area is at least 40,000 square
feet, or involves more than one building in a complex.
Personal Services  A service use providing professional or individual services and where frequent
interaction with the general public, consumers or patrons occurs on the premises. This use type is
broken into the following sub-classes based on scale and intensity:
Personal Service / Office  Limited  An employment use or personal service where the gross
leasable area is under 6,000 square-feet. Examples include a neighborhood barber shop or hair
salon, a small professional office (lawyer, accountant, architect, or travel agent), a small medical
service such as a dentist, a small bank, dry cleaners or tailor.
Personal Service  General  A service use where the gross leasable area is at least 3,000 and
less than 10,000 square feet. Examples include a large spa or beauty complex, tattoo shop, a
copy center, large post office or mail center, or laundry mat.
Personal Service  Heavy  A service use where the gross leasable area is 10,000 square feet or
more. Examples include a large bank, equipment repair shop, or other service for consumers or
other businesses that requires larger spaces.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-14
City of Lansing
Personal Service  Household Industrial  A service use involving the management of household
waste and other environmental or performance impacts. Examples include exterminating and
disinfecting services, cleaning and repair of household items, and linen supply and industrial
laundry services.
Personal Storage  Indoor  A service use where individual units accessed from inside of a building are
offered for rent or lease for the storage of personal property.
Personal Storage  Outdoor  A service use where individual units accessed from outside of a building
are offered for rent or lease for the storage of personal property.
Recreation/Entertainment  Indoor  A service use providing daily or regularly scheduled activities for
entertainment, instruction or exercise inside a building and open to the general public or through
membership. This use type is broken into the following sub-classes based on scale and intensity:
Recreation/Entertainment  Indoor Minor (less than 10K)  Indoor recreation that involves a
building less than 10,000 square feet. Examples include a small bowling alley, fitness club,
billiard hall, martial arts centers, yoga studio, or dance studio.
Recreation/Entertainment  Indoor Major (10K or more)  Indoor recreation that involves a
building 10,000 square feet or more. Examples include a large bowling alley, sports and
recreation center, theater complex, large health club, or shooting range.
Recreation/Entertainment  Outdoor  A service use providing daily or regularly scheduled activities for
entertainment, recreation or exercise outside and open to the general public or through membership.
This use includes accessory buildings for the transaction of business and accessory indoor services.
This type is broken in to Major and Minor based on the scale and intensity of the use.
Recreation/Entertainment  Outdoor Minor Examples include driving range, miniature golf, golf
course, swimming pool, tennis, batting cage, small band shell or amphitheater.
Recreation/Entertainment  Outdoor Major Examples include theme park, water park,
fairground, zoo, drive-in theater, shooting range, skeet and trap range, racetrack.
Recreation  Campground  A service use providing overnight accommodations within a large
open area for recreational purposes.
Residential Care  Independent Living  A facility providing residential living, social programs and limited
health care services for residents, where the social and healthcare services are accessory to the
building(s) and site design emphasizing household living, where the social programs and health care
services are limited accessory elements in terms of the function and extent, and where dedicated staff are
present primarily during normal business hours. Examples include retirement villages or independent
living communities.
Residential Care  Assisted Living  A facility providing long term care, health services and residency,
that admits residents on medical referral, and where medical, behavioral and rehabilitative care is
necessary beyond normal business hours. Examples include nursing homes, assisted living centers, or
other similar care facilities.
Residential Care  Long-term Care  A facility offering long-term care for individuals residing on the site
that need a high degree of services or monitoring, and where full-time staff are present on the premises at
all times, and where the building(s) and site design emphasize the institutional function, secondary to the
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-15
City of Lansing
residential accommodations. Examples include treatment centers, hospice centers, homeless shelters, or
other facilities with a high intensity of care or supervision.
Temporary Use. A use established for a limited and fixed period of time, and upon its discontinuance no
structures, facilities or other impacts on the site remain and the site is otherwise restored to its pre-use
condition. Examples include short-term events such as festivals, carnivals, or art exhibits; seasonal sales
such as farm produce, holiday tree stands, or pumpkin sales; general merchandise outdoor sales stands
such as flower stands, arts and crafts sales, or other general merchandise.
Vehicle/Equipment Service and Repair  Limited  A service use engaged in motor vehicle maintenance
and repair services, and accessory retail sale of supplies and accessories, but limited to small scale
operations that involve no more than 3 vehicle service bays, and where all work and storage of equipment
and supplies occurs indoors, and where on-site or overnight storage of vehicles is limited to no more than
8 cars on the lot. Examples include a small neighborhood mechanic shop, lubricant center, tire store,
auto glass installation or audio or alarm installation.
Vehicle/Equipment Service and Repair  General  A service use engaged in equipment and motor
vehicle maintenance and repair services, and accessory retail sale of supplies and accessories, that
involves 4 or more vehicle service bays, where all work and storage of equipment and supplies occurs
indoors, but where on-site or overnight storage of vehicles may involve 9 or more cars on the lot.
Examples include large mechanic shop, lubricant center, tire store, auto glass installation or audio or
alarm installation or an auto body shop where the likelihood of overnight storage, outdoor storage and
over-night or multi-day drop off is more likely.
Vehicle/Equipment Service and Repair  Heavy  A service use engaged in the maintenance and repair
of motor vehicles, commercial vehicles or heavy equipment, and accessory retail sale of supplies and
accessories, that is likely to involve larger outdoor storage areas for vehicles and supplies, and where
larger multi-bay garages or warehouses are needed to conduct services.
INDUSTRIAL
The Industrial category is the use of land and buildings engaged in the production, processing, storage or
distribution of goods with potential impacts beyond the site due to the types of activities, the physical
needs of the site or facility, the types of materials used, or the delivery and access operations, and which
in typical formats and operations may not be compatible with other business uses. It includes the
following types:
Commercial Storage  Indoor  Storage of consumer products or small-scale commercial products inside
a building. Examples include mini-warehouses where all storage areas including those leased or rented
to individual customers are accessed from inside the principal building.
Commercial Storage  Outdoor Minor  Storage of consumer products or small-scale commercial
products on an outdoor lot. Examples include contractors yard, or similar facility where products used in
other small business operations are stored for distribution.
Commercial Storage  Outdoor Major  Storage of commercial products or large-scale machinery on an
outdoor lot. Examples include boat or RV storage, towing service storage yard, or similar large-scale
storage lots and facilities.
Extractive Industry / Natural Resource Processing  The growth, harvesting, and preparation of
byproducts of land (other than agriculture) for distribution and sale as a raw material in some other
manufacturing process, where the growth and harvesting involves outdoor machinery operation or
outdoor storage. Examples include a quarry, mining operation, oil or gas well, or wood storage yard.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-16
City of Lansing
Freight and Distribution  Light  An industrial logistics use involved in the storage, order processing and
distribution of consumer products where all operations occur indoors, and where delivery and distribution
occur through commercial truck access. Examples include distribution center, warehouses, moving and
storage operations, cold storage, parcel services and similar uses.
Freight and Distribution  Heavy  An industrial logistics use involved in the storage, order processing
and distribution of business products or raw materials where operations may involve outdoor activities,
and where delivery and distribution occur through large truck, freight or heavy equipment access.
Examples include freight terminals, fleet vehicle terminals, bulk material storage and distribution, cargo
container facilities, and similar uses.
Landfill and Waste Processing Facility  An area dedicated to the storage, processing, treatment and
distribution of waste products. Examples include scrap or salvage yards, transfer stations, and other
similar uses.
Manufacturing  Limited / Artisan  A small-scale Industrial use where activities produce little or no
byproducts such as smoke, odor, dust or noised discernable from outside of the building, where deliveries
and distribution are made by general consumer delivery services requiring no special large truck access,
and where products are made available to the general public. Uses typically occupy buildings or spaces
under 10,000 square feet of gross leasable area. Examples include artists studios, small wood or metal
shops, craft manufacturing, small bakery or micro-brewery, or other similar small-scale assembly of
finished products.
Manufacturing  Light  An industrial use where little or no byproducts such as smoke, odor, dust or noise
are discernable from outside of the building, and where distribution and delivery needs occur through light
to moderate commercial truck access. Examples include research labs or facilities, small equipment or
commodity assembly, warehousing or wholesaling of consumer products, commercial bakery, non-retail
laundry services, or similar businesses that provide products for support of other businesses.
Manufacturing  General  An industrial use where byproducts such as noise, dust, smoke or odor are
produced, but are mitigated to limit impacts beyond the property boundary. Outside storage and activities
may be necessary, and distribution and delivery needs involve frequent or large truck access. Examples
include large scale manufacturing or fabrication plants, food production and manufacturing plants, metal
fabrication plants, chemical laboratories or other similar high-intensity manufacturing or distribution
operations.
Manufacturing  Heavy  An industrial use capable of producing significant byproducts such as noise,
dust, smoke or odor beyond the building or site, or where hazardous materials may be stored, used or
produced as a typical part of the business, and distribution involves heavy truck, freight and machinery
access. Examples include chemical, wood or metal storage and production, pressing and dying plants,
asphalt or cement production, animal processing or other heavy or hazardous manufacturing operations.
AGRICULTURE
The Agriculture category is for the use of land and buildings in the production of food, fiber or raw
materials raised and harvested on large land areas in a rural or open setting.
Agri-Tourism  The accessory use of a commercial farm for special events or retail activities in typical
agricultural structures or settings.
Agriculture  Light Processing  The storage, processing and distribution of farm products produced onsite
where only small-scale facilities are necessary.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-17
City of Lansing
Agriculture  Heavy Processing  The aggregation, storage, processing and distribution of farm products.
Examples include grain elevators, livestock auction yard, stockyard or rendering plant.
Apiaries (Hobby)  The keeping of bees and beehives for hobby purposes.
Farming  Light  The primary use of land for small scale production of field crops or horticulture for food,
where only small-scale accessory storage facilities and light machinery is necessary. Examples include a
community garden, greenhouse, or other small productive edible landscape area.
Farming  Commercial  The primary use of land for commercial production of field crops for food or raw
materials in other agriculture operations; the raising or breeding of livestock, poultry, fish or other animals
for food or use of their byproducts agriculture operations; plant production such as nursery, orchard,
vineyard.
Farming  Homestead  The accessory use of residential property for the production of crops or
horticulture for food, and which may include the limited keeping of animals, where the principal residence
of the owner or operator is on the premises and where activities and equipment used result in impacts
similar to typical residential activities.
Riding Stables  A facility for the boarding and riding of horses, including either general commercial and
recreational purposes, or private purposes for horse owners.
COMMUNICATIONS AND UTILITIES
The communications and utilities category is for buildings, structures, or other infrastructure
improvements that provide essential public services.
Wireless Communication Antenna Any structure or device used to collect or transmit electromagnetic
waves for the provision of commercial wireless communications, including all accessory equipment.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-18
City of Lansing
4.04 ACCESSORY USE STANDARDS
Accessory uses are clearly incidental to and customarily associated with an otherwise permitted or
conditionally allowed use, and generally do not need any specific enabling or development standards,
other than the generally applicable standards. The following accessory uses may be customarily
incidental to otherwise permitted uses in the district, provided they meet the following additional
limitations, performance standards and design criteria.
A. Generally. Accessory uses and the structures shall:
1. Be compatible with the general character of the area and comparable to uses of other
property in the vicinity.
2. Not be constructed, maintained or conducted in a way that produces noise, vibration,
noxious odor or material, any visible light, glare or other visible impacts that are harmful,
damaging or disturbing to the adjacent property.
3. Be conducted in a way that is consistent with the intent and objectives of all other
standards applicable to the property.
B. In-Home Day Care. Where in-home day care services, caring for more than 6 children, are
permitted as an accessory use to a residence subject to additional standards:
1. The day care provider shall be licensed with the State of Kansas, and shall comply with
all applicable regulations.
2. At least 100 square feet of open space per child. Open space shall be enclosed by a
solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least 6 feet, but not more than 8 feet high, and having
a density of not less than 80% per square foot.
3. A loading zone capable of accommodating at least two automobiles for picking-up or
dropping-off passengers.
C. Home Occupation. Home occupations shall meet the following standards:
1. Home occupations shall be entirely contained within the interior of a structure, not
exceeding 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit.
2. All materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall be stored within an
enclosed structure.
3. No alteration of the exterior of the principal residential building shall be made which
changes the character thereof as residence. No sign shall be permitted unless required
by state statutes and, if so required, shall not exceed 2 feet in any one direction, shall not
be illuminated and shall not be placed closer to the front property line than one-half the
distance of the front yard, unless otherwise required by state statutes.
4. No person shall be engaged in such home occupation other than a person occupying
such dwelling unit as his or her residence.
5. No equipment shall be utilized that creates a nuisance due to noise or electrical
interference.
6. The off-street parking regulations set forth in Article 8 shall apply to home occupations. In
no event shall fewer than 2 off-street parking spaces be required.
7. Home occupations shall not in any event include the following, unless permitted through
a conditional use permit:
a. Retail sales of antiques.
b. Funeral services.
c. Retail or wholesale sales of groceries.
d. Retail sales of second-hand merchandise.
e. Tourist homes.
f. Equipment rental.
g. Automobile and other motor vehicle repair services.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-19
City of Lansing
h. Professional offices for physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, ophthalmologists,
dentists, and other related health care professions.
D. Accessory Dwelling. Where accessory dwellings are permitted, all of the following standards
shall be met:
1. One accessory dwelling may be permitted per lot, only when associated with a detached
house.
2. Accessory dwelling units may be located in a detached accessory building or located
within the principle building (such as an attic or basement apartment).
3. The accessory dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the living area of the principal
dwelling or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less.
4. One additional parking space shall be provided on site, although this provision may be
waived if the context and circumstances of each dwelling unit prove the space
unnecessary.
5. The property owner shall occupy either the principal or accessory dwelling as their
permanent residence.
6. Occupancy of the accessory or principal unit is limited to family members related by
blood, marriage or adoption or persons providing nursing or domiciliary care of
assistance to the owner in exchange for lodging.
7. The following additional design considerations apply to accessory dwellings:
a. The accessory dwelling shall be designed to maintain the architectural design,
style, appearance and character of the principal building as a detached house.
b. A separate entrance to the accessory dwelling is not permitted on the front
facade of the principal dwelling.
c. The accessory dwelling shall have a roof pitch, siding, and window proportions
similar to that of the principal dwelling.
d. No exterior stairway to the second floor is permitted at the front of the building.
E. Accessory Drive-Through. Where accessory drive-thru facilities are permitted they shall be
located in side or rear locations that do not interrupt the lot and building frontage, or otherwise be
Figure 4-1 ADUs
There are three types of ADUs  Detached (carriage
houses), attached ADUs (typical with separate access
points), and interior ADUs (completely within and
indistinct from the principal dwelling unit).
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-20
City of Lansing
set back at least 60 feet from the lot frontage. The design and layout of drive-thru facilities for
restaurants, banks, stand-alone automated teller machines (ATMs) or other uses shall:
1. Avoid potential pedestrian/vehicle conflicts on the site and along the streetscape. Access
and circulation should be oriented to remote locations of the site and avoid access and
circulation impacting walkable streets as defined in Article 3.
2. Provide adequate stacking spaces for automobiles before and after use of the facility; and
3. Include buffers or screens according to the standards in Article 7 for any portion of a drivethrough
adjacent to residential uses or other similar conflicts. In general, no portion of the
drive through should be within 100 feet of residential property unless enhanced site design or
operational limits demonstrate visual and noise impacts are mitigated.
F. Outdoor Sales and Display (Limited). Outside sales and display areas, such as vending
machines, sales kiosks, rental machines, and other sidewalk displays of merchandise, may be
accessory to any principal business where the area used for such display is less than 200 square
feet.
G. Outdoor Sales and Display (General). Outside sales and display areas larger than 200 squarefeet,
except for seasonal temporary sales (Section 4.05), may be accessory to any principal
business under the following standards:
1. A site plan showing the location, area, and dimensions of the display area, and
specifications for all lighting and fencing or screening.
2. The area shall be limited to no more than 50% of the building area of the principal use.
3. The area may be located in parking areas, provided it does not interfere with adequate
parking and circulation of the entire site. The permanence of any structures shall be
considered in evaluating the impact on adequate parking needs for the site.
4. The area shall not interfere with pedestrian or building access or clear vision areas.
Display areas located on sidewalks shall not exceed more than 50% of the width of any
sidewalk, and shall provide a clearance of at least 5 feet in all cases.
5. Any temporary or permanent structures shall meet applicable building code provisions.
6. Areas shall be located on a paved surface. Gravel surfaces may permitted provided the
site plan demonstrates sufficient containment and management strategies.
7. The area shall be screened from view along any property line abutting a residential use
or district according to Section 8.04.
8. In reviewing the site plan, additional conditions or performance standards to mitigate
excess noise, visual or operational impacts may be added to address specific sites or
contexts.
H. Commercial Accessory to Residential Buildings. Commercial uses that are accessory to a
primarily residential use are subject to the following standards:
1. The accessory commercial use may be permitted within a multi-unit residential building,
such as those defined in Article 5.02, including a Row House, Small Apartment, or
Medium Apartment, and may be accessory to applicable residential uses included on the
use table, such as dormitories, monasteries, and residential care facilities.
2. The accessory commercial use shall not exceed 5,000 square-feet, or 20% of the
building footprint per floor, whichever is greater.
3. Residences shall have interior access to the commercial use.
4. If intended for public use, a site plan is required also demonstrating the following:
a. The use shall be located on the ground-level and accessible by an exterior
entrance addressing a public street.
b. The use shall be subject to all applicable parking requirements, and all applicable
access requirements to ensure adequate pedestrian access (Article 8).
c. The use may be reviewed under all other standards applicable to mixed-use
buildings.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-21
City of Lansing
d. In reviewing the site plan, additional conditions or performance standards to
mitigate excess noise, visual or operational impacts may be added to address
specific sites or contexts.
4.05 SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
The following specific uses may have particular impacts different than the uses generally enabled in the
zoning districts. These uses shall have the following additional limitations, performance standards, and
design standards as specified and indicated in Table 5-4.
A. Zero Lot-Line Dwellings. Single-unit detached dwellings with one side yard equal to one foot or
less shall be permitted or conditionally permitted and conform to the following standards:
1. Zero lot-line dwellings shall meet all front and rear yard requirements.
2. For any zero lot-line dwelling, the lot-line wall, defined as that wall of the dwelling on the
side lot line, shall have no windows, doors, vents or other openings nor shall any window
on any wall face that side lot line.
3. The side yard requirements for a zero lot-line dwelling on the side opposite the lot-line
wall shall be twice the normal side yard requirement of the zone or 12 feet, whichever is
smaller.
4. No two zero lot-line dwellings shall have their lot-line wall along the same side lot line, nor
shall any zero lot-line dwelling have its lot-line wall adjacent to any lot or tract of land not
developed for zero lot-line dwellings.
5. No lot line wall shall be located on a side lot-line adjacent to any public right-of-way.
6. The required yard setbacks for each zero lot-line lot shall be either shown on the
subdivision plat or recorded as a restrictive covenant on the property deed.
7. The minimum lot width shall not be less than 40 feet.
B. Attached Single-unit Dwellings. Single-unit dwellings on separate lots, but attached to adjacent
dwellings by means of a common wall shall conform to the following standards:
1. The common wall between attached units shall be on the side lot line separating the two
lots and shall not be subject to side yard requirements providing there are no doors,
windows, vents or other openings in the common wall.
2. No unit shall have a common wall on more than two sides.
3. Any exterior wall which is not a common wall must meet all yard requirements.
4. Each lot must have direct access to a public street, unless otherwise allowed by this code
to front on common space.
5. The deed to each lot must include covenants requiring the proper and timely
reconstruction of any damaged or destroyed dwellings.
C. Animal Care, Kennel and Breeding. Where animal care facilities and kennels are permitted as
the primary use, all of the following standards must be met:
1. The minimum lot size shall not be less than one acre;
2. No kennel buildings or runs shall be located nearer than 75 feet to any property line;
3. All kennel runs, or open areas shall be screened around such areas or at the property
lines to prevent the distraction or excitement of the dogs. Such screening shall be either a
solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least 6 feet, but not more than 8 feet, high and having
a density of not less than 80% per square foot.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-22
City of Lansing
D. Micro-Retail
1. Applicable licenses and permits must be displayed in the receptacle, such as a vehicle,
cart, wagon, or kiosk.
2. A vending receptacle, such as food trucks, sales kiosks or machines, or other sales
receptacles, including all attachments and accessories, shall not occupy an area in
excess of 500 square-feet. Merchandise must be secured so that it does not fall or
endanger passerby or protrude into the public right-of-way.
3. A vendor selling food or beverage for immediate consumption must provide trash and/or
recycling, located to minimize impacts of trash, odor, or other visual impacts on adjacent
property or businesses. The vending area shall be cleaned once a day to minimize litter.
4. A food vendor shall not park on any public property except legal parking spaces, unless
permitted to do so by a written agreement with the city or other public property owner. A
vendor shall comply with all laws and ordinances relative to parking. A vendor shall not
park on any private property except with the written permission of the property owner.
5. No receptacle shall be located within 100 feet from the entrance of a business selling
comparable products or services, unless written permission is provided by the business
selling comparable products or services, or the property-owner of said business.
6. Any mobile vendor shall not park in any one location for longer than the legally allowed
parking time, and in no event for more than 48 hours.
7. A vending receptacle shall be enclosed except for doors and windows, shall be
constructed of durable materials, and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
E. Campground
At the time of application to the Planning Commission for a conditional use permit, the applicant
shall include with the application a site plan of all areas designated as campgrounds. This section
is not to provide regulations for R.V. storage. Any areas intended for R.V. camping shall meet the
following requirements:
1. The person operating campground shall keep a register available for inspection at all
reasonable hours, by law enforcement, assessors, and other officials whose duties
necessitate acquisition of such information. The register shall contain the name and
address of the occupant, and the make, model, year, and license number of each
recreational vehicle or vehicle towing such RV. The original records of the register shall
not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of registration.
2. There shall be clearance of not less than fifteen feet between recreational vehicles or
between recreational vehicles and any building.
3. Every recreational vehicle space shall have direct access to an internal paved roadway
with direct access to a public street or highway and shall not abut upon any public street
or highway.
4. There shall be at least one paved surfaced off-street parking space provided for each RV
space. No portion of the roadway shall be used to provide the required off-street parking.
5. All RV spaces shall be clearly identified with letters or numbers of a light-reflective
material a minimum of four inches in height.
6. Each park serving one or more recreational vehicles shall restrict parking to only those
RV's that are equipped with toilet and shower facilities, or shall provide one or more
service buildings which shall:
a. Be located no closer than 15 feet from a recreational vehicle.
b. Be located so that any recreational vehicle it serves shall not be parked more
than 200 feet from it.
c. Be of permanent type construction and be adequately lighted.
d. Be of moisture-resistant material to permit frequent washing and cleaning.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-23
City of Lansing
e. Have one flush-type toilet, one lavatory, and one shower for females, and one
flush-type toilet, one lavatory, and one shower for males, for up to 9 RV spaces.
One additional unit of the above plumbing facilities shall be provided for each sex
for each 10 additional recreational vehicles served or fraction thereof. All
lavatories and showers shall be connected with both hot and cold running water.
f. Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70 degrees
Fahrenheit in the building and provide hot water of 140 degrees Fahrenheit at a
minimum rate of 8 gallons per hour for the required fixture units.
g. Have an accessible, adequate, safe, and potable water supply of cold water.
h. All rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively screened.
(i) Have at least one slop water closet or other facility suitable for the
cleaning and sanitizing of waste and service facilities.
i. Comply with all applicable chapters of the City Code regarding the construction
of buildings and the installation of electrical, plumbing, heating, and ventilating
systems.
j. Be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and kept free of any condition that
will menace the health of any occupants or the public or constitute a nuisance.
7. Every recreational vehicle space shall have an accessible, safe, and potable supply of
water to each lot or space, with individual connections at least 4 inches above ground
surface, at least 3/4 inch in diameter, and equipped with a 3/4 inch valve outlet. The
outlet shall be protected from surface water flooding and all pipes shall be protected
against freezing. Below ground shut-off valves may be used, but stop and waste valves
shall not.
8. Individual sewer connections shall be provided for each lot or space. Every connection or
opening shall be protected to prevent surface water from entering the sewage disposal
system.
9. Provisions for garbage and refuse storage, collection, and disposal, shall be maintained
so as to create no health hazard, rodent harborages, insect breeding areas, accident
hazards, or air pollution.
10. Every recreational vehicle lot or space shall have a weatherproof electrical outlet and
breaker supplying at least one, 30 amperes of service and 110 volts.
11. No LPG containers shall hold more than 25-gallon water capacity; all containers shall be
the LPG containers approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission for their intended
purpose; and shall be integrally attached to the RV in a manner approved by the Liquified
Petroleum Gas Association, Inc. All containers shall be equipped with an approved
excess flow valve at the discharge valve of the containers.
F. Sexually-Oriented/Adult Entertainment Business. An establishment used for presenting,
selling or featuring material or entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on displaying,
depicting, describing, or relating to specified content that is sexual in nature and which excludes
minors by virtue of their age shall conform to the following standards:
1. The exact adult entertainment business shall be specified in the application. No more
than one adult entertainment business shall be applied for on an application.
2. The proposed use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of or in any agricultural and
residential type zoning district, including but not limited to Zoning Districts "A-1", "R-1",
"R-2", "R-3", "R-4", and "R-5", and any residential or office part of Zoning Districts "P" or
"PUD".
3. An adult entertainment business shall not be located in any park or within 1,000 feet of
any pre-existing public, private, or parochial school property, any park, day care center,
hospital, any medical office or clinic of any medical practitioner licensed by the State of
Kansas, or any church, synagogue, or similar place of worship.
4. An adult entertainment business shall not be located in a building or structure which
contains any business that sells or dispenses alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages.
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-24
City of Lansing
5. An adult entertainment business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another existing
adult entertainment business.
6. All building openings, entries, windows, doors, and similar openings for an adult
entertainment business shall be so located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to
prevent a view into the interior from any public or semi-public place by outside passersby.
7. Lobby and entrances shall be so designed to minimize obstruction of nearby streets and
sidewalks during operation.
8. The buildings or structures housing the adult entertainment business shall not be painted
in garish colors or designs.
9. All distances specified herein shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point
on the building housing an adult entertainment business to the nearest point of the
property or zoning district mentioned above.
10. No noise from inside a building housing an adult entertainment business shall be audible
at a point 50 feet from any point on the outside of the building.
In addition to the requirements of this section, the Planning Commission shall consider the
following criteria in reviewing a conditional use application for an adult entertainment business:
1. The nature of the proposed site, including its shape and size, and the proposed size,
shape, and arrangement of structures;
2. Traffic conditions, including the resulting traffic patterns (traffic study);
3. The nature of the surrounding area and the extent to which the proposed use might
impair its present and future development;
4. Facilities for sewers, water, and other utilities, and the ability of the city to supply such
services;
5. The limitations of fire-fighting and rescue equipment, and the means of access for fire
and police protection;
6. The conservation of property values;
7. Contribution, if any, such proposed use, building, or addition would make toward the
deterioration of areas and neighborhoods.
4.06 TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS
No temporary structure or use shall hereafter be built, established, moved, remodeled, altered or
enlarged unless the temporary structure or use is permitted by these regulations.
A. Holiday Tree Sales. Holiday tree sales are permitted in any business or industrial district for a
period not to exceed 60 days. No trees shall be displayed within 30 feet of the intersection of the
curb line of any two streets.
B. Contractors' Office and Equipment Sheds. Contractors' offices and equipment sheds
accessory to a construction project are permitted and may continue only during the duration of
such project. Such uses may not include sleeping or cooking accommodations.
C. Real Estate Offices. Real estate offices are permitted where they are located on-site and are
incidental to a new housing development, provided that such uses continue only until the sale or
lease of all dwelling units in the development. Such uses may not include sleeping or cooking
accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit.
D. Seasonal Farm-Oriented Sales. Seasonal sales of farm produce grown on the premises are
permitted in an "A-1" District. Front yard requirements are not applicable to structures incidental
to such sales if the structures are removed or moved back of the required front yard setback line
at the end of the season during which they are used.
E. Carnivals and Circuses. Carnivals or circuses are permitted in "B-1", "B-2", "B-3", and "I-1"
Districts for a period that does not exceed 21 days. Front yard requirements are not applicable,
4 ZONING DISTRICTS
& USE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-25
City of Lansing
provided that the location of structures or equipment shall conform to the requirements of the
sight triangle as defined by these regulations.
F. Garage, Porch, or Yard Sales. The sale of used or second-hand merchandise shall be permitted
in any residential district or by non-profit organizations, provided that such use shall not exceed 3
consecutive days in duration nor shall it occur more than 2 times in a consecutive 1-year period at
any particular location. Such sales shall be only for the purpose of disposing of personal property.
G. Fireworks Sales. The sale of fireworks shall be permitted in "B-1", "B-2", "B-3", "I-1" and "I-2"
districts, only for the period of June 30 through July 5 of each year, during the hours of 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m.
H. Open Storage. The storage of salvage or scrap materials, inoperable motor vehicles, household
goods or furniture, or business equipment or supplies for more than 9 consecutive days shall not
be allowed in any residential district unless such items are stored in a completely enclosed
building and are clearly secondary to the primary use of the property.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-1
City of Lansing
ARTICLE 5. SPECIAL DISTRICTS & STANDARDS
5.01 PLANNED ZONING DISTRICTS
5.02 MIXED-DENSITY NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
5.03 WALKABLE COMMERCIAL STANDARDS
5.04 MANUFACTURED & MOBILE HOME PLANNED DISTRICT
5.01 PLANNED ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Intent and Applicability. The intent of the planned zoning districts is to encourage innovation in
development, unique and distinctive places, and efficient use of land, buildings and infrastructure.
Specifically, planned zoning and development plans to support the flexibility offered through
planned zoning should accomplish one or more of the following:
1. Preservation of distinct natural features on the land and integration of them into amenities
for the project.
2. Reduction in potential environmental impacts from the development, whether through
disturbance of land, location of streets and infrastructure or operation of sites and
buildings.
3. Create broader community benefits through the better integration of multiple projects,
resulting in designs that could not have otherwise been accomplished through the base
zoning districts and standards.
4. Improved public realm designs, including streetscapes, open space, civic spaces and the
relationship of buildings and sites to those spaces.
5. Creation of unique projects and places that are particularly suited for the planned location
based on the characteristics of the land or the context and relationship to surrounding
areas.
Departures from the base standards of all zoning districts may be considered through planned
zoning, and approved provided they are based upon a comprehensive and well-integrated
development plan for the area.
B. Permitted Uses. The uses allowed in the planned districts shall include all uses that are
applicable in the underlying zoning districts, along with permitted conditional uses. However, the
development plan may propose greater specificity as to allowed uses, whether that is
consideration of additional uses in a limited or specific context, conditions on otherwise allowed
uses, or limitations or prohibition on other uses which are not appropriate according to the plan.
C. Development Standards. The development standards for planned zoning shall be those of the
most comparable base zoning district, except as specifically modified and noted on a
development plan accompanying a planned zoning proposal. Departures from standards may
specifically propose standards that differ from this code for:
1. Street Types
2. Open and Civic Space Types
3. Applicable Uses and Performance Standards
4. Development and Building Design Standards
5. Site Design and Landscape
6. Parking Quantity and Design
7. Signs
D. Rezoning. Approval of a development plan for planned zoning shall be considered a rezoning of
the property and be subject to the procedures and criteria in Section 2.04. The resulting zoning
shall be noted by adding a P to the base zoning district or districts (i.e. R-1 to R-1-P).
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-2
City of Lansing
5.02 R-3 MIXED-DENSITY NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
A. Intent. The intent of the R-3 district is to provide for moderate density residential development
with a variety of housing options in patterns that create strong, walkable neighborhoods near civic
and commercial destinations. The building scale, frontage designs, and streetscape are
compatible throughout the district, and an emphasis on design details and neighborhood
character create comfortable places for people.
B. Design & Performance Standards. Buildings and sites shall be designed to meet the following
performance standards. Any exceptions to the standards or discretionary review process in the
R-3 district shall be judged against these design and performance standards.
1. Design human scale streetscapes with slow traffic speeds, well-connected sidewalks,
and shade and enclosure offered by street trees.
2. Orient all buildings to the street to activate the streetscape, while still promoting effective
transitions from public spaces to private spaces on the lot.
3. Promote human-scale buildings through front entry features, building massing and
architectural details that break up larger masses into smaller components, and create
active, social spaces along the streetscape.
4. Use similar forms and massing, common building elements, and consistent relationships
to the streetscape to create compatibility and effective transitions among different
building types.
5. Minimize the impact of car access on streetscapes and overall neighborhood character
by limiting driveways and the extent of front-loaded garages. Alternative driveway access
patterns and step-backs, side- or rear-access, and detached garages or other access
and parking strategies will reduce the extent of visibility from the streetscape.
6. Reinforce the neighborhood character with quality materials and architectural details that
provide interest, depth, texture, and variety to those experiencing a neighborhood on foot.
7. Create a diversity of dwelling types  in general no neighborhood or application of the R-
3 district should have less than three different building types, and no more than 50% of
any one building type.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-3
City of Lansing
C. Building Types. The following building types have been established to allow a range of building
types within the R-3 district that are compatible in scale, form and relation to the streetscape.
Table 5-1: Building Types
Detached House  Compact or Neighborhood Lot
A residential building designed for one primary dwelling unit in a walkable neighborhood setting.
Duplex
A residential building designed to accommodate two primary dwelling units in a neighborhood or
suburban setting. Duplex units share a single common wall or floor/ceiling, with an outward
design and appearance as a House. A duplex may be on a single lot, or it may be platted as
separate lots along the common wall line subject to platting restrictions. Variants of this type are
primarily based on lot size and context.
3- to 4-Plex
A small scale, multi-unit residential building designed on a small or moderate-sized lot in a
compact walkable neighborhood or mixed-use stetting. The building is accessed by a common
lobby entrance at building frontage, and arranged to integrate into the block structure of a
neighborhood.
Row House
A residential building type designed to accommodate 3 to 8 dwelling units in a compact walkable
neighborhood or mixed-use setting. Each unit is separated by a common side wall with a side-byside
configuration, and each has its own private entrance. Units may be on a single lot subject to
common ownership restrictions or platted on separate lots along the common wall subject to
platting restrictions.
Small Apartment
A small scale, multi-unit residential building on a moderate-sized lot, corridors or mixed-use areas.
The building is accessed by a common lobby entrance at the building frontage and arranged to
integrate into the block structure of a neighborhood.
Medium Apartment
A moderate scale, multi-unit residential building on a moderate-sized lot in high density areas,
corridors or mixed-use areas. The building is accessed by a common lobby entrance at the
building frontage and arranged to integrate into the block structure of a neighborhood.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-4
City of Lansing
D. Building Type Standards. In order to prioritize a compatible form, scale, and transitions of
buildings in this mixed-density neighborhood, the development standards are regulated by
building types. The following building types are enabled in the R-3 District according to the
development standards in Table 5-2.
? = Permitted by right
? = Limited to specific conditions or location criteria in Section D.
* Front setbacks may be modified and further specified by the Frontage Types in Section E.1 which should be consistent for all building
types along the same block frontage.
** Small Apartments and Row Houses shall have a 10 side setback when abutting a detached house.
TABLE 5-2: R-3 BUILDING TYPES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Building Type
Lot Size Building Standards
Area Width Building
Coverage
Front
Setback*
Side
Setback
Corner
Side
Rear
Setback
Max.
Height
Detached House 
Neighborhood Lot ? 6K s.f.  
ac. 50 + 40% 10  35 7 12 30
35 /
2.5 stories
Detached House 
Compact Lot ? 3.5K  6K s.f. 35  50 50% 10  35 5 10 30
30 /
2 stories
Duplex ? 6K  12K 50  100 40% 10  35 7 12 30
35 /
2.5 stories
3- to 4-Plex ?
7.5K  12K
2.5 K s.f. per
unit
60 -100 40% 10 - 35 7 12 30 35 /
2.5 stories
Row House ?
6K  12K
1.5K per unit
3  8 units
per building
60 -200;
18 per unit
70% 10  25 7 / 10** 15 20
40 /
3 stories
Small Apartment ?
6K  12K s.f.
3-12 units
per building
60  100 70% 10  25 7 / 10** 15 20
40 /
3 stories
Medium Apartment ?
12K  1 ac.
1.0K per unit
12  40 units
per building
80  200 60% 10  25 15 20 30 70 / 6
stories
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-5
City of Lansing
Figure 5-1 Limited Application Building Types
Buildings identified as limited application building types in certain
districts should only be located limited locations so the overall scale
of the neighborhood is maintained, but mix of housing types is
integrated by capitalizing on site-specific conditions that can
accommodate these building types, such as: (A) Corner lots where
at least one street is a collector classification or higher; (B) Lots
fronting on or on a block that faces opposite a public or common
open space; (C) Corridors of major collector or arterial streets; and
(D) Blocks immediately abutting non-residential zoning districts,
and where the street is designed according to the walkable street
standards per Section 3.
(A) Corner lots ( B ) L o t s f r o n t i n g open space
(C) Lots fronting collector or
arterial corridors
(D) Lots that transition to
commercial or mixed-use
areas
E. Limited Building Types. Buildings indicated as limited application in Table 5-2 (?) shall only be
permitted in the following locations, unless more specifically located through a planned district.
1. Any corner lots.
2. Lots oriented to the end grain or short-side of a block on a collector street classification or
higher.
3. Lots fronting on or on block faces opposite of public or common open space.
4. Corridors of major collector or arterial streets.
5. Blocks adjacent to a non-residential zoning district.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-6
City of Lansing
F. Neighborhood Design. Buildings and lots in the R-3 District are subject the following
neighborhood design standards, which may be modified only to the extent they equally or better
meet the performance standards in 5.02.B.
1. Frontage Types. The design of lot frontages establishes the relationship of buildings and
lots to the streetscape. The proportion of this area designed for social spaces and
access for pedestrians, as opposed to dedicated to vehicle access, activates the
streetscape. A consistent frontage design among all lots and buildings along a block face
reinforces neighborhood character. All lots and buildings on a block shall have either a
Terrace frontage design or Neighborhood Yard frontage design as specified in Table 5-3.
The frontages shall be consistent for all lots on the same block face.
TABLE 5-3: FRONTAGE DESIGN STANDARDS
Frontage Element
Terrace Frontage Neighborhood Yard Frontage
Front Building Line Setback 10  20 20  35
Driveway Width*
(in front of front building line OR
within first 20 from front lot line)
15% of lot width, up to 24 maximum 20% of lot width, up to 24 maximum
Driveway Width*
(beyond front building line OR
more than 20 from front lot line)
25% of lot width; no limit behind building 35% of lot width; no limit behind building
Front Loaded Garage
Placement and Limitations
Prohibited; requires side-loaded, rear-loaded
or detached garages.
 Minimum 4  12 behind front building
line if less than 30% of facade;
 Minimum 12 behind front building line if
30% to 45% of facade;
 Prohibited if over 45% of facade;
 All other cases require side-loaded, rearloaded
or detached garages.
Landscape [See Article 7 for
standards and specifications.]
 50% minimum landscape area
 1 ornamental tree for every 40 of lot
frontage
 1 street tree for every 40 of lot frontage.
[See Section 3.01, Neighborhood Street
Design Types]
 Foundation plantings of shrubs or
perennial plants on 50% of foundation.
 65% minimum landscape area
 1 ornamental tree for every 30 of lot
frontage; may substitute 1 shade tree for
2 ornamental trees
 1 street tree for every 40 of lot frontage.
[See Section 3.01, Neighborhood Street
Design Types]
 Foundation plantings of shrubs or
perennial plants on 50% of foundation.
* In cases where driveway width standards limit or prevent private drives to parking areas or garages, the following configurations
should be used to access lots: single lanes to expanded setback parking pads; shared drives along lot lines; common lanes and
access easements internal to block shared by 3 or more lots; or mid-block alleys accessing all lots on the block. No required
parking area, whether in a garage or surface lot, shall be placed between the front building line and the street.
2. Front Entry Features. Front entry features create a human-scale relationship of buildings
to the street. They provide opportunities for subtle variations in design on the
streetscape, and can help create compatible relationships between buildings of different
sizes while adding great diversity and interest to the streetscape. All buildings shall have
an entry feature of a porch or stoop, meeting the following:
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-7
City of Lansing
a. Porches shall be at least 8 feet deep and covering at least 50% of the front
faade.
b. Stoops shall be at least 48 square feet and include ornamental features to accent
the door, such as a canopy, transom windows, enhanced trim and molding,
decorative railings or other similar accents.
c. Entry features shall be single-story, so that the roof structure and any
ornamentation occur between 8 feet and 12 feet above the floor-level of the entry
feature.
d. Entry features shall remain unenclosed.
e. All entry features shall have a sidewalk of at least 5 feet wide directly connecting
the entry feature to the public sidewalk or street.
f. Entry features shall be integrated into the overall building design including
compatible materials, roof forms, and architectural style and details.
g. Entry features meeting this requirement may encroach up to 10 feet in front of
the required front building line, but never closer than 5 to a public or common
property line.
h. To maintain neighborhood character, variations in the front entry features shall
create diversity among adjacent buildings along a block face, so that the same or
similar entry feature does not occur within two buildings on either side. Variations
may include any combination of:
(1) Different types: such as stoop vs. porch;
(2) Different roof styles: such as gable, hip, shed, flat, arched, or no roof;
(3) Different locations and extent: such as centered, shifted, wrapped; and
half or full.
(4) Different ornamentation or architectural styles that lead to distinct
qualities within a similar scale or pattern.
3. Open Space. A hierarchy of different types, sizes and ownership (public, common, and
private) open space is an extension of the public realm that shapes neighborhood
character. Each building type shall provide the open space specified in Table 5-4
through common or private areas within the lot or project. Open space shall be designed
as gathering spaces or for active use by residents, as opposed to simply buffer or
landscape areas. Buildings and lots may credit any public or neighborhood common
open spaces toward this requirement, provided it meets the design standards in Section
3.02 and is within the distance specified by Table 5-4 from the lot.
TABLE 5-4: OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
Building Type Private Open Space Distance for Public or Common Area Credit
Detached House  Neighborhood Lot
N/A - yard standards address open space; however all lots should be within
Detached House  Compact Lot 1,500 of common or public open space.
Duplex
3- to 4-Plex 400 s.f. / unit 1,320
Row House 400 s.f. / unit 1,320
Small Apartment 200 s.f. / unit
660
Medium Apartment 150 s.f. / unit 660
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-8
City of Lansing
Figure 5-2 Courtyard Pattern
Courtyard patterns allow multiple buildings to front on common
open spaces with reduced lot sizes and setbacks, provided all
open space design standards are met, provided the courtyard
and building maintain streetscape standards on a public street,
and provided vehicle access and parking is limited and on
remote portions of the site.
G. Courtyard Pattern. Residential buildings and
lots may be designed to front on a courtyard
based on the following design standards.
1. Applicability. The courtyard pattern is
appropriate where:
a. Courtyards are designed and
visible as an extension of the
public streetscape and open
space system for the
neighborhood.
b. Blocks and surrounding lots
are deep, allowing a different
configuration of buildable lots;
or
c. Other developed areas where
existing lot patterns in the
vicinity warrant use of this
pattern to facilitate infill
development and compatible
building types.
2. Eligible Building Types. The following building types are eligible for this pattern, subject
to the limitations stated:
a. Small apartments, up to 5 buildings or 36 units, whichever is less.
b. Row houses, up to 4 buildings or 24 units, whichever is less.
c. 3-/4-plex, duplex, detached house, up to 6 buildings.
3. Design Standards and Exceptions.
a. The minimum lot size per building may be reduced up to 30%, provided the
courtyard is owned in common by all lots or otherwise established as a sharedspace
amenity.
b. The courtyard shall be designed according to the standards in Section 3.02 and
have frontage on a public street.
c. Lots may front on the courtyard, rather than along a street.
d. The front setback may be reduced to 5 from the courtyard.
e. Any buildings fronting on the street, or the sides of any buildings adjacent to the
street shall still meet requirements for public frontages and orientation standards
in this section.
4. Vehicle Access. Vehicle access and parking for each lot shall be designed in a way that
minimizes the impact on the public street and the courtyard.
a. The frontage design standards in this section shall apply to both the public street
frontage of the project and to the lot frontages on the courtyard. Examples of
access that can meet this standard include single lane shared drives along the
side lot lines and to the rear of buildings, a single lane shared drive through the
courtyard, or a single-lane loop drive around the perimeter of the courtyard.
b. Any vehicle access or parking within the courtyard shall be excluded from the
required courtyard area or lot open space requirements.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-9
City of Lansing
5.03 COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Intent and Applicability. The commercial design standards are intended to promote high-quality
design that relates buildings to the public realm and streetscape, promoting enduring investments
in Lansing. The following standards apply to new development, rehabilitation, or expansion of any
commercial (B) property, and enhanced standards may apply to any property abutting a
walkable street type (Article 3.01-C.2), as defined by the Director.
B. Frontage Types. Frontage design establishes the relationship of the building to the public realm
based upon the context, the character of the district or area, the streetscape design, and the
specific buildings and uses permitted on a block. Table 5-5 identifies the permitted and preferred
frontage types based on the appropriate Street Type from Article 3.
Table 5-5: Frontage Types and Street Types
FRONTAGE TYPES STREET TYPES ZONING DISTRICT
Activity Street A Activity Street B B-1 B-2 B-3
Buffer ? ? ? ? ?
Terrace ? ? ? ? ?
Streetfront ? ? ? ? ?
? Preferred Type
? Limited Type, based on surrounding development pattern, specific street section designs, and site plan.
Buffer
A heavily landscaped and/or bermed open area used to separate the site
from the streetscape or adjacent development. It is designed to screen
views or noise or otherwise improve the aesthetic appeal of the site and
building.
Front Setback:
30+
Applicability
Appropriate for large format buildings or more intense uses; or where surface
parking or elements of site design could have a negative impact on the public
realm or adjacent property.
Design Elements
 At least one pedestrian connection per lot should be provided where streets have sidewalks or trails; alternatively, one connection per block
may be provided where the project includes internal pedestrian circulation system.
 May include a trail / greenway along the streetscape per Section 3.02.
 Landscape design focuses mainly on softening or screening at the street edge, and is primarily landscape/xeriscape.
 See Articles 6 for specific buffer design requirements.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-10
City of Lansing
Terrace
A shallow open area that creates a continuous landscape area along
a streetscape. Buildings are setback moderately from the
streetscape but still maintain a formal relationship to shape this
space. It can include a mix of hardscape or landscape, as is
appropriate for the specific street or building.
Front Setback:
10 to 30
Applicability
Appropriate for any building with a setback of 10 to 30, or for streets
situated on a grade where the terrace can serve to coordinate access
to buildings along the block.
Design Elements
 Vehicle access and drives through this area should be limited to 20% of the lot width, and no wider than 24 unless providing internal
access to the block for more than one lot.
 Direct pedestrian connections to the sidewalk along the street should occur at frequent intervals; at least one per building or building
entrance.
 Pedestrian amenities should include street trees, outdoor seating or informal gathering places, public art, and small ornamental
plantings.
 Allocation of space should be: 0% to 50% turf; 20% to 80% landscape/xeriscape; and 20% to 80% hardscape. Turf should be limited
only to formal spaces. More hardscape is appropriate for Terraces on commercial frontages and more landscape is appropriate for
Terraces on residential frontages.
Street Front
An area designed for high pedestrian amenity along the entire frontage,
with buildings and entrances fronting directly on this space. It may be
public, and dedicated as part of the right-of-way standards for Local
Activity streets, or common areas at the extensions of other streets.
Front Setback:
0 to 10
Applicability:
Appropriate for any building with a setback of 0 to 10, or any building
located on a Local Activity street.
Design Elements
 Vehicle access and drives through this area should be limited to 15% of the lot width, and no wider than 12 unless providing internal
access to the block for more than one lot.
 Surface parking should be setback at least 30 from the frontage and screened.
 Pedestrian amenities should include street trees, outdoor seating or informal gathering places, public art, and small ornamental
plantings.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-11
City of Lansing
C. Design Standards. Table 5-6 establishes design standards applied to the massing and facade
composition of non-residential buildings. The standards relate building design to the context of
defined walkable activity streets, or are based upon the setback of any building in a commercial
district. The sub-sections following the table specify the standards that apply to each element in
the table.
1
.
Buil
di
n
1. Faade Composition. Frontage design establishes the relationship of the building to the
public realm based upon the context, the character of the district or area, the streetscape
design, and the specific buildings and uses permitted on a block.
a. Primary Entry Features. Entrances create a human-scale relationship of buildings
to the street and shall be clearly defined and emphasized with any of the
following:
i. A single-story architectural emphasis such as canopies, awning,
porticos, pediments, arches, or arcades.
ii. Architectural details such as transom or display windows, ornamental tile
accents, columns, moldings or other similar accents and material
changes.
iii. Railings, wing walls or plantings integral to the entry structure that
incorporate landscaping and/or places for sitting.
iv. Recesses of the building mass of at least 3 feet deep.
b. Entry Feature Encroachment. Primary entry features such as porticos, stoops, or
unenclosed porches may extend up to 12 feet into the required front setback
provided:
i. No encroachment shall be closer than 5 feet from the right-of-way or
encroach on any easement.
ii. Roof structures associated with an entry feature shall be single-story.
iii. Entry features shall include usable space, typically a depth of at least 8
feet and a width of at least 12 feet.
iv. Any enclosure is limited to no more than 100 square feet.
v. All primary entry features are integrated into the overall building design
including materials, architectural style and details, and roof structures
c. Orientation. All principle buildings shall be oriented as follows:
i. Facing a public street with the primary entrance on the front facade;
Table 5-6: Massing & Facade Composition  Commercial Frontages
Front Setback Primary Entry
Feature
First Story
Transparency
Upper Story
Transparency
Wall Plane
Limits
Blank Wall
Limits
0-10 on A Street 1 per 50 40% - 90% 15% - 40%
100 linear feet;
and
1,000 s.f.
50 linear feet; and
500 s.f.
0-10 on B Street OR
10-30 on any
commercial property
1 per 100 40% - 90% 15% - 40%
100 linear feet;
and
1,000 s.f.
100 linear feet; and
1,000 s.f.
30 or more on any
commercial property 1 per 200 25% -90% w/in 25
of entry 15% - 40% 150 linear feet;
and 2,000 s.f.
100 linear feet; and
1,000 s.f.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-12
City of Lansing
ii. Facing a public street with an entry forecourt accessed on the front
facade; or
iii. Facing a courtyard or other common open spaces where permitted by
these regulations or by application of a planned district.
d. Transparency. Buildings shall have the percentage of openings on street-facing
facades as specified in Table 5-6, based on the following:
i. Where expressed as a first-story requirement, the percentage shall be
measured between 2 and 8 feet above the street level, or above the firstfloor
elevation if the building is set back more than 10 feet from the
street.
ii. Where expressed as an upper story requirement, the percentage shall
be measured between the floor level and ceiling of each story.
iii. All street level windows required shall have transparent glazing and
provide direct views to the buildings interior or to a lit display area
extending a minimum of 3 feet behind the window.
2. Massing & Modulation. Larger facades shall be broken into smaller components by one
or a combination of the following techniques at intervals specified in Table 5-6:
a. Use structural bays that emphasize vertical breaks in interior components of the
building, with visible features such as columns, pillars, or pilasters, and material,
color changes or other details and accents associated with the massing element
that project between 4 and 12 inches off the facade.
b. Differentiate massing with projections, balconies, cantilevers or step backs from
the main mass associated with different stories. Massing shall create deviations
in the wall plane of at least 2 feet if projecting from the facade and at least 4 feet
if recessed from the facade.
c. Horizontal differentiation of a base, body and top of all buildings.
(1) For buildings less than 3 stories, this can be a distinct foundation, a main
faade, and an embellished roof structure, such as eaves and fascia for
pitched roofs, or cornices and parapets for flat roofs.
(2) For buildings 3 stories or more, the first floor should be clearly
differentiated from upper stories to establish the base.
d. Any other blank wall areas in excess of the requirements of Table 17-20-2 shall
be broken up by ornamental architectural details complimentary to the materials
and architectural style of the building.
Figure 5-4 Faade Composition
A combination of transparent
windows and vertical and horizontal
faade elements break up a
building faade, adding interest
along the street.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-13
City of Lansing
2. Tenancy. The area of freestanding
building footprints and
ground level tenancies of mixeduse
buildings shall comply with
Table 5-7:
3. Materials. Selection and application of materials add depth, texture, and color to the
composition of walls. Design and detailing of materials should create an integrated
relationship between different architectural elements of buildings, complement context,
and signify enduring investment in the community. Applicants shall submit a color palette
and building materials board as part of their development plan application. In selecting
exterior building materials, consideration should be given to the appropriateness of the
materials to the scale of the proposed building.
a. Primary Materials. All primary buildings shall be constructed or clad with
materials that are durable, economically maintained, and of a quality that will
retain their appearance over time. The predominant surfaces on building walls
shall incorporate one or more of the following building materials:
i. Brick
ii. Stone
iii. Cast stone
iv. Synthetic stone
v. Stucco
vi. Water-managed EIFS (synthetic stucco)
vii. Prefinished non-corrugated metal (nonresidential only)
viii. Glass
ix. Integrally colored, textured or glazed concrete masonry units
x. Synthetic material with appearance of wood
xi. Split shakes, rough sawn or board and batten wood (residential only)
xii. Vinyl siding (residential only)
xiii. Standard single or double tee concrete systems.
b. Prohibited Building Materials. Predominant surfaces on building walls shall not
include any of the following building materials:
i. Natural wood or wood paneling
ii. Barrier-type EIFS
iii. Painted metal
iv. Wood shakes (as roofing materials)
v. Smooth-faced gray concrete block, painted concrete block, tilt-up
concrete panels
vi. Field painted or pre-finished standard corrugated or ribbed metal
siding
a. Transitioning. Where materials are stacked (i.e. one above another), the
transition between materials should include a sill, cap, frame, roof (if at ceiling
height), or similar element to separate the two materials. Where materials are
side-by-side, the transition between materials should occur at interior corners or
at the trim line where the change is emphasizing different structural bays for a
building.
Table 5-7: Commercial Tenants and Street Types
Street Type Max. Building Footprint or
Ground-Level Tenancies
A Local Activity 8,000
B Local Standard 15,000
Other n/a
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-14
City of Lansing
5.04 R-5  RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME PLANNED DISTRICT
A. Intent and Applicability. The R-5 district is intended for planned developments that provide
smaller-format manufactured or modular homes that include common amenities in a
neighborhood or community setting, designed in a manner that is compatible with the surrounding
community. The R-5 district is a specific form of a planned district requiring review and approval
as provided in Section 2.04 Planned Development procedures.
B. Permitted Uses. The uses allowed in the R-5 are specified in Table 4-2, and this district is
specifically enabled for:
1. Single family homes consisting of modular homes, manufactured homes or other similar
small, detached dwellings.
2. Accessory buildings and uses incidental to those listed above and which support the
residential community, including offices, recreation buildings or other community
services.
C. Development Standards.
1. Project Intensity:
a. The minimum project area shall be at least 5 acres and the minimum frontage
along a public street shall be 300 feet; except that a plan for as small as 2.5
acres and 150 feet of public street frontage may be approved if the plan
demonstrates exceptional community design and layout for the common areas
within the community, and for integration and relation of the project to
surrounding areas.
b. The maximum project intensity shall be no more than 2,500 square feet per
dwelling unit, including any common areas, landscape buffers and internal
circulation systems supporting the community.
2. Height. The maximum structure height is 35 feet.
3. Home Site Standards:
a. Area: The minimum area for an individual home site shall be 1,500 square feet,
and all home sites shall front on a public street or private internal access street,
or front on common space with street access at the rear of the home site.
b. Setbacks: Dwellings shall meet the following setbacks from lot or home site
boundaries.
c. Home Site Open Space. Each home site shall have a private patio, courtyard,
porch, stoop or similar outdoor amenity of at least 200 square feet and which
orients the home site to the internal street or common space it fronts on.
d. Parking Standards: 2 off-street spaces for each dwelling unit; common lots
within 300 feet of dwelling units. Parking spaces on a home site shall be located
Table 5-8: Dwelling Setbacks
Front 15 feet, except home sites fronting on courtyards or other civic space of the common areas of
the plan may have dwellings located 5 from the front lot line.
Side 10 feet; 15 feet for sites on corner of internal or public streets
Rear 20 feet, except home sites backing to buffers, common open space or alleys may have a 10
foot rear setback
All dwellings shall be at least 30 feet from any public street or other boundary of the community
with adjacent property.
All dwellings shall have at least 20 feet between other dwellings, or at least 30 feet between the
dwelling and accessory buildings, except accessory structures serving the home site.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-15
City of Lansing
to the side or rear of the dwelling. Tandem parking must be constructed at least
25 from the front property line.
e. Anchor: All dwellings shall be attached to a permanent foundation according to
the building code, or:
(1) Be anchored by tie downs and piers in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Code, K.S.A.
75-1211 et. seq. and Manufactured Housing Act, 58-4201 et. seq.;
(2) Be fully skirted within 30 days of placement with durable commercial
grade skirting designed to create a barrier protecting utilities from
extreme temperatures, protect home from pests or animals, hide
structural elements and give the dwelling a finished appearance; and
(3) Be located on a solid surface pad with a solid surface with minimum 5-
inch gravel or stone base capable of carrying the weight and controlling
weeds.
D. Common Areas. All common areas not dedicated as home sites according to the development
standards in C., shall be designed as part of the Public Realm Plan for the community (See
Section 2.04 Planned Development Procedures). This space shall be allocated to:
1. Streets and Circulation. An internal street and pedestrian network shall be laid out
subject to the following:
a. Internal access streets or private drives shall be at least 24 feet wide. Streets
shall align with surrounding public streets where practical, and be laid out in
association with the common areas to arrange home sites in a system of lots and
blocks. Streets and drives shall be constructed of asphaltic concrete or Portland
cement at least 4-inches thick over a 6-inch compacted rock base.
b. Sidewalks at least 5 feet wide shall be included on all streets constructed of
portland cement at least 4 inches thick on compacted earth, or at equal or
greater intervals through a trail or path system that connects all home sites to
community facilities. All off street pedestrian routes shall be at least 5 feet wide,
with all-weather, dust-free, stabilized surfaces.
c. At least one parking space shall be on each home site. Additional required
parking or visitor parking may be concentrated at remote locations, or on-street
within internal street designs. Parking shall be an all-weather, dust-free
stabilized surface.
2 Perimeter Buffer. All areas around the project shall include a minimum 20 feet buffer,
with landscape materials according to Article 7.
3. Common Areas and Open Space. At least 15% of the total area shall be usable open
space. All common areas not dedicated as home sites, streets or perimeter buffer shall
be designed and allocated as courtyards, greens, or parks meeting the design standards
of Section 3.02. Other internal circulation or open space such as walkways, landscape
buffers or other site design amenities shall be designed and located in a manner that
improves the quality of the community and its relationship to surrounding areas.
4. Storm Shelter. Each new manufactured home park plan or any expansion of an existing
park by 10 units or more shall provide a storm shelter. The shelter shall be located in
central and convenient locations, and may be included with recreation facilities, laundry
facilities or other similar common community amenities.
5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-16
City of Lansing
E. Utilities and Services.
1. All communities shall be connected to a public water supply, and each home site shall
have individual water service connections according to the 2003 International Plumbing
Code (IPC).
2. All communities shall be connected to the public sewer system. Individual sewer
connections shall be provided for each home site and installed in accordance with 2003
International Plumbing Code (IPC) and City of Lansing regulations regarding sewer taps.
3. Each home site shall be provided with an individual electric outlet supply with a minimum
of 100 amperes service, hardwired in conduit and underground from the home to the
service, and sized and installed according to the city electrical code.
4. Natural gas hookups, where provided, shall be installed according to all applicable codes.
LP gas shall not be permitted as a source of utility for a dwelling. Only public natural gas
and electricity are permitted sources of heat and hot water within the community.
Containers for ancillary uses such as outdoor grills are permitted as long as they are
used and stored as per the manufacturers requirements and the International Fuel Gas
Code.
4. Storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be designed, located and provided in a
manner that creates no health hazards, no odor or unsanitary conditions, minimal
visibility to both the home sites and any surrounding property, and is properly managed
and maintained in this condition.
5. Telephone and cable television service lines shall be installed underground and shall be
in accordance with City codes and utility company specifications.
6. The park shall provide appropriate drainage per the subdivision standards and all other
grading and permitting standards of the City. Each individual home site shall be located
on a well-drained site and graded to insure rapid drainage and the removal of any
stagnant water.
F. Landscape, Parking Design, and Signs. The standards of Articles 7, 8, and 9 are generally
applicable to the R-5 district, except as modified through a development plan based on the
criteria in Section 2.04.
G. Subdivisions. Each home site may be individually platted or otherwise independently sold if:
1. All home sites shall have public utility access and provided in Article 3, including public
easements for access to each home site, and otherwise ensure appropriate metering and
billing for services;
2. All dwellings are on a permanent foundation; and
3. There are covenants and restrictions and associations assuring that these provisions for
the Development Standards, Common Areas and Utilities and Services, as demonstrated
on an approved plan, will be maintained through a management entity or common
association that has an organizational structure and financing mechanism to ensure
continued operation according to the plan.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-1
City of Lansing
6
ARTICLE 6. SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
6.01 INTENT & APPLICABILITY
6.02 OPEN SPACE DESIGN
6.03 LANDSCAPE DESIGN
6.04 BUFFERS & SCREENING
6.05 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
6.01 INTENT & APPLICABILITY
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to:
1. Promote the aesthetic character of the community with natural landscape materials, and
in particular emphasize distinct areas throughout the community as reflected in the
comprehensive plan or any specific plans.
2. Improve the relationship of buildings and sites to the streetscape, and coordinate the
designs of multiple sites and buildings along a block through consistent frontage designs.
3. Coordinate landscape and design amenities across multiple sites, with special attention
to the relationship between lots and streetscapes along frontages.
4. Encourage efficient site design where the layout of sites and buildings can allow open
space to serve multiple aesthetic or screening, environmental, and recreational or
functions.
5. Enhance the environmental and ecological function of un-built portions of sites, including
reduced air or water pollution and reduced heat gain from large expanses of blank walls
or paved surfaces.
6. Screen and mitigate the visual, noise or other impacts of high-intensity areas of sites,
buildings and land uses.
B. Applicability. A landscape plan is required in association with a site plan, according to the
application requirements in Article 2. Specifically, it is required for:
1. New uses and buildings in any zoning district except district A-1. In districts where Site
and Landscape Standards are not required, use of this Article for guidance is strongly
encouraged;
2. Any addition to an existing building, structure or site where site grading occurs, but the
requirements of this section shall be pro-rated to that portion of the site affected by
development.
Site and landscape standards may be specifically modified through the planned zoning process in
Article 2.
C. Enforcement. All elements of an approved landscape plan, including plant materials shall be
considered elements of the project in the same manner as parking, buildings or other details.
Plant material which exhibits evidence of insect pests, disease, and/or damage shall be
appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next planting
season. The applicant and future successors or owners are responsible for the continued
maintenance of these features for the period of two years from the issuance of the first building
permit. Failure to maintain these features is a violation of the terms of approvals or subsequent
permits and shall carry with it the same notification and violation penalty established for a public
nuisance.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-2
City of Lansing
6
6.02 OPEN SPACE DESIGN
All lots shall have access to Open and Civic Space systems as provided in Section 3.02. Where such
spaces are not existing, or are not provided through platting of development plans, additional open spaces
should be incorporated into site plans to best meet the intent of this Article. Landscape materials for these
areas shall be in addition to standards of this Article, however efficient site design and strategic location of
open spaces on a site may meet both Article 3 standards and the standards of this Article.
6.03 LANDSCAPE DESIGN
A. Site Elements and Planting. The required landscape shall be based on different elements of
the site, according to Table 6-1.
Table 6-1: Plant Requirements
Site Element Trees Evergreen Shrubs
Streetscape and Frontage: The
area between the front building
line and the street, including any
plantings required in the ROW,
used to create a relationship
between the site and the public
realm.
1 large tree per 40 of lot
frontage;
2 large trees per 40 if buildings
setback more than 30.
n/a n/a
Corner lots shall meet this requirement on side lot lines at a rate of 50% of the streetscape and frontage
rate.
Foundation. Areas along the
building frontage (within the first
10  30) used to provide accents
and soften larger expanses of
buildings.
1 ornamental tree per 25 of
building frontage.
Evergreens may be substituted
for ornamental trees at a rate of
1 for 1 for up to 50% of the
requirement.
5 shrubs for 25 of building
frontages.
Side elevations on corner lots shall provide this standard on at least 50% of the building.
Parking. Areas on the perimeter,
or interior of parking where
landscape is used to soften the
appearance, mitigate heat gain
and infiltrate stormwater.
1 large tree per 40 of parking
perimeter; and
1 large tree per 40 parking
spaces in internal islands.
Ornamental trees may be
substituted for large trees at a
rate of 2 for 1 for up to 50% of
the internal islands
Evergreens may be substituted
for perimeter trees at a rate of 2
for 1, for up to 50% of the
perimeter requirement that does
not face a front lot line.
5 shrubs for 25 of perimeter.
Any parking near the right of
way or adjacent to lots may
require buffers per Article 8.
Buffers. Areas of a site that
require additional landscape to
mitigate potential impacts on
streetscape or adjacent property.
See Section 6.04.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
6.03 LANDSCAPE DESIGN
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-3
City of Lansing
6
Table 6-2: Site Elements
Streetscapes, Internal Access Streets & Walkways Applies to lot boundaries along public streets; internal access streets; any
trails and walkways connecting different areas of the site to the buildings.
Frontage & Foundation Planting Applies to building frontages; any building faade within 50 of right-of-way, open or civic spaces;
and other high-visibility building facades.

Parking Lot Planting Applies to any parking lot with more than15 spaces.
Other Open Spaces Planting requirement applies to all other open spaces, required lot open space in
Article 5, except that spaces designed according to the standards in Section 3.02.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
6.03 LANDSCAPE DESIGN
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-4
City of Lansing
6
B. Credits for Existing Vegetation. Preservation of existing landscape material that is healthy and
of a desirable species may count towards these requirements provided measures are taken to
ensure the survival of the vegetation through construction and all other location and design
standards are met. Credits shall be on a 1 for 1 basis provided existing trees shall be at least 4-
inch caliper to count. Landscape material that is of exceptional quality due to size, maturity and
health may be credited on a 2 for 1 basis. Trees or other existing landscape that contributes to
the standard shall be protected by a construction fence installed for the entirety of construction
and at least 15 feet from the trunk of any tree.
C. Design. The required landscape material shall be arranged and designed on a particular site in a
way that best achieves the intent expressed in Section 6.01, with regard to the specific context,
street frontage, property adjacencies and other elements proposed on the site.
D. Location. Required plantings shall be planted in the following specific locations and open
spaces on the lot.
1. Street Trees & Frontage Trees. Street trees and frontage trees shall be located in line
with other trees along the block to create a rhythm along the streetscape and enclosure
of the tree canopy. In the absence of a clearly established line along the block, trees
may be planted at the following locations, where applicable and in order of priority.
a. On center between the sidewalk and curb where at least 6 feet of landscape area
exists;
b. 4 feet from the back of curb where no sidewalk exists; or
c. Within the first 5 feet of the front lot line where any constraints on the lot or in the
right-of-way would prevent other preferred locations.
d. Where the depth of the frontage between the building and streetscape require
additional trees per Table 6-1, they shall be located between the front building
line and the street.
e. Ornamental trees may be substituted for street trees only in situations where no
other alternative is available due to constraints of the site and right-of-way
conditions.
2. Foundation Trees & Shrubs. Foundation plantings shall be located in open spaces within
20 of the building, or within planting beds at least 8 deep and along at least 50% of the
building.
3. Parking Perimeter & Island Planting. Parking lot perimeters shall be permeable vegetated
ground cover meeting the following size and dimension requirements.
a. Parking lot perimeters shall be at least 8 feet wide except for locations where
walkways are necessary to provide access to the building or to a public sidewalk
in the streetscape. Any parking located in front of the front-building line shall
have a 15 feet wide buffer along the lot frontage.
b. Parking lot islands shall be at least 120 square feet and at least 8 feet wide in all
directions. Parking lots under 80 spaces shall not require islands; parking lots 80
spaces or more shall require at least 1 island per 40 spaces. Islands may stand
alone within the parking lot or may project into the parking area from the
perimeter buffer, but should generally be spaced equally throughout the parking
lot.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
6.03 LANDSCAPE DESIGN
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-5
City of Lansing
6
E. Tree Diversity. The required trees planted shall promote diversity with the following species
selection criteria.
Table 6-3: Tree Diversity
Required Trees Diversity
1 - 4 No specific requirement, but trees should be diversified from those
existing trees in the vicinity.
5 - 10
At least 2 genus
No more than 50% of any one species
11 - 20
At least 3 genus; AND
At least 5 species
No more than 33% of any one species
21 or 50
At least 3 genus ; AND
At least 5 species
No more than 20% of any one species
F. Plant Specifications. Required planting shall meet the following specifications at planting.
Table 6-4: Plant Specifications
Type Specification
Large or Medium Tree 2 caliper
Small Tree 1.5 caliper
Evergreen 5 minimum height
Shrub 18 minimum height
Ground Cover
50% coverage at planting;
Full coverage within 2 growing seasons
Turf All proposed or required turf areas shall be sodded.
All landscape materials shall meet the American Standards for Nursery Stock, published by the
American Nurserymens Association, and be selected for its native characteristics or survival in
the climate for the Kansas City region, and be planted and maintained to ASNS specifications.
All trees shall be selected using Great Trees for the Kansas City Region, incorporated in
Appendix B, or an updated version of this list, or a similar regionally appropriate list approved by
the Director.
6.04 BUFFERS & SCREENING
A. Design Objectives. Intense land uses, or site elements shall be buffered or screened from
streetscapes and adjacent property using the following strategies and techniques, which may
require additional landscape materials beyond what is required in Table 6-1.
1. Areas of parking or circulation near streets or property lines may require physical barriers
or landscape transitions to soften impacts, and low-level headlight screening.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
6.04 BUFFERS AND SCREENING
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-6
City of Lansing
6
2. Commercial uses or parking service areas of other allowed uses abutting residential
property may require a screen and buffer combination, using a combination of dense
vegetation, or fences and walls compatible with the buildings on the site.
3. Areas along streetscapes or that transition to different uses or building scale, or areas
where building or site elements may not relate well to the street frontage may require
landscape areas to soften transitions.
4. Areas designed as gathering places, for social function or as civic amenities to support
the site or area may require enhanced landscape to create appropriate transitions to
adjacent areas or less intense uses.
5. Electrical and mechanical equipment such as transformers, air conditioners, or
communication equipment and antennas, whether ground, wall or roof mounted shall be
screened with architectural features, fences or landscape to limit visibility or noise from
adjacent property or streetscapes.
6. Delivery and vehicle service bays, trash enclosures; permanent or temporary outdoor
storage areas or other site utility areas shall be located on remote areas of sites, and
shall be screened or buffered from any adjacent property with less intense zoning.
B. Buffer Planting. The following planting requirements shall be used to buffer and screen more
intense uses and to design effective transitions according to the design objectives of this section.
The buffer width exists independent of and may include any setback, parking perimeter buffer or
other open space requirement with efficient site design. The plant requirement is in addition to
plants required by Table 6-1.
Table 6-5: Buffer Planting Requirements
Type and Applicability Buffer Planting Requirement
Type I  A low-level screen and physical
separation used for aesthetic purposes,
particularly around site utility elements or parking
areas along pedestrian oriented streetscapes.
Width: 6 min.
Planting: 1 large tree per 40 or 1 ornamental per 20
1 shrub per 2.5 feet or a combination of shrubs and a 2.5 to 4
decorative wall or fence that provides low screening and
physical separation.
Type II  A moderately planted area used to
separate and soften transitions between more
intense portions of sites between generally
compatible land uses, or where buffers are
necessary along collector or arterial streets.
Width: 10 min.
Planting: 1 large tree per 40 or 1 ornamental per 20
1 shrub per 5
1 evergreen per 30
Type III  A densely planted area intended to
mitigate noise and create a visual barrier between
intense site conditions or potentially incompatible
land use adjacencies.
Width: 20 min.
Planting: 1 large tree per 60 and 1 ornamental per 30
Any combination of shrubs, evergreens, understory plantings,
berms or fences or walls that provide a visual barrier.
C. Fencing. All fencing for screening, security, or privacy shall meet the following standards.
1. Front and Street-side Fencing. All fencing in front of the front building line, or on the
street-side on corner lots shall:
a. Be limited to no higher than 4 feet; and
b. Have a void of at least 33% up to four feet (for example, wrought iron, a solid wall
or fence of 2.7 feet high, or a 4-foot high picket fence with picket to void ratio of
2:1).
c. Fences and walls shall be setback at least 6 feet from any perimeter public
sidewalk and such area shall be landscaped with a mix of turf, shrubs and/or
trees as deemed acceptable by the Planning Commission.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
6.04 BUFFERS AND SCREENING
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-7
City of Lansing
6
d. Any fence or wall constructed within 15 feet of the street right-of-way shall be
limited to decorative or ornamental fencing and screening, with materials
complimenting the architectural style and materials of the principle building.
e. On corner lots, street-side fencing more than six feet from a pedestrian facility in
the public right-of-way and behind the front building line may meet the standards
for rear and side fencing in Sub-Section 2 below.
2. Rear and Side Fencing. All rear and interior side fencing located behind the front building
line shall:
a. Be limited to no higher than 6 feet, or up to 8 feet in all non-residential districts.
b. May have a solid screen.
3. Other Fencing Design Standards.
a. Walls or fences shall be consistent in architectural character, materials and
appearance with the architecture of the building(s). Walls and fences should be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials and colors of the principal
building on the same lot.
b. Any fencing that could potentially create a sight obstruction for vehicles crossing
pedestrian areas or entering the street may require greater transparency or
additional location restrictions to allow for safe sight distances for the vehicle.
c. All fencing located along adjacent lot lines shall be constructed so that either:
(1) The face of the fence is on the property line; or
(2) The face of the fence is at least three feet from the property line. Any
areas set back three feet or more from the property line, which could
become enclosed by other similarly located fences, shall provide at least
one gate for access and maintenance equipment.
d. All fences shall be constructed so that the finished side faces adjacent property
or any public right-of-way.
e. Fences shall be constructed out of any of the following materials:
(1) Wood or vinyl simulating wood;
(2) Wrought iron or aluminum simulating wrought iron;
(3) Stone, brick, concrete with stone or brick veneer, or pre-cast concrete
simulated stone or brick; or
(4) Chain link or vinyl clad chain link:
(a) In all residential districts, in the rear or side yard only with a
maximum height of six feet;
(b) In the I-1 and I-2 districts, in the rear and side only, but no closer
than 30 feet from any public street;
(c) Prohibited in all commercial districts
D. Visibility at Intersections. Screens and buffers shall be located and designed to maintain
proper lines of sight at all intersections of streets, streets with alleys or driveways, and internal
access streets as provided in Section 3.01-F.
SITE & LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
6.05 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-8
City of Lansing
6
6.05 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
A. Mounting Height. All exterior lighting shall be limited to the mounting heights specified in the
following table:
TABLE 6-6: MAXIMUM LIGHTING MOUNTING HEIGHT
Driveways and Parking Areas 37.5 in B-2, B-3, I-1, or I-2 districts
25 in all other districts
Pedestrian Walkways, Plazas or Courtyards 16
Facade Lights Below the eave or cornice line, provided the light is
directed downward
Other Site Lighting 12
B. Shielding. All exterior lighting shall be shielded as specified in the following table:
TABLE 6-7: REQUIRED SHIELDING
WATTAGE OR MOUNTING HEIGHT
SHIELD TYPE
FULL CUTOFF a CUTOFF b SEMICUTOFF
c
All lights mounted above 25; or
All lights above 450 Watts
R P P
All lights Between 100 Watts and 450 Watts P R P
All Lights Between 55 Watts and 99 Watts; or
Any Light Mounted Between 12 and 25
P P P
All Lights Mounted below 12 AND Less than 55
Watts
No shielding is required; all shielding
types permitted.
a Full cutoff fixtures emit 0% of its light above 90 degrees and 10% above 80% from horizontal.
b Cutoff fixtures emit no more than 2.5% of its light above 90 degrees and 10% of its light above 80% from horizontal.
c Semi-cutoff fixtures emit no more than 5% of its light above 90% and 20% of its light above 80 degrees.
R (Required) P (Prohibited)
C. General Standards. In addition to the mounting height and shielding standards, exterior site
lighting shall meet the following general standards:
1. Light fixtures attached to the exterior of buildings should be compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the building and the general character of the adjacent
buildings.
2. All lighting shall be designed and located to not provide direct light or glare onto any
adjacent property. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking and loading areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to interfere with
the residential use.
3. All lighting shall be reduced to levels necessary only for security purposes within one
hour after closing of the business.
4. All facade lighting and or other externally illuminating lights shall use shielded, directional
fixtures, designed and located to minimize uplighting and glare.
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-1
City of Lansing
7
ARTICLE 7. ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
7.01 INTENT & APPLICABILITY
7.02 ACCESS & CIRCULATION
7.03 REQUIRED PARKING
7.04 PARKING LOT DESIGN
7.05 LOADING
7.01 INTENT & APPLICABILITY
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to:
1. Emphasize the importance of site access for a variety of modes of transportation.
2. Preserve streetscapes and street functions by coordinating access along and internal to
blocks.
3. Create access and parking standards appropriate to the context of the project,
considering street designs and surrounding development patterns.
4. Provide the optimal amount of vehicle parking for individual sites, recognizing that too
much and too little parking each have negative impacts.
5 Ensure appropriate site and design features that mitigate the impact of parking on
surrounding sites, including visual impacts on streetscape, physical impacts on adjacent
property and proper stormwater management.
6. Reduce the need to dedicate areas of individual, adjacent sites to underutilized or
redundant surface parking.
B. Applicability. An access and parking plan is required in association with a site plan, according
to the application requirements in Article 2. Specifically it is required for:
1. A change of use for an existing site or building, but only where the new use would require
125% or more parking than exists.
2. An expansion of a building or use of a site by more than 20%.
3. All new development of a site.
4. Where additional parking is required for an existing site or building, the landscape and
design standards shall only apply to the newly constructed parking, except when more
than 50% of a parking area is added to, resurfaced or otherwise impacted, all parking and
access shall comply with this section.
7.02 ACCESS & CIRCULATION
A. Driveways.
1. Location and Spacing. Driveway location and spacing shall be limited based on the
functional class of streets in Table 7-1. Spacing distance between accesses shall be
measured from the center of the access points, and from the perpendicular curb face of
intersecting streets to the closest access point for intersection distances.
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-2
City of Lansing
7
Table 7-1: Access Location and Spacing
Functional Class
Arterial* Collector Local
Residential***
100 min. separation
200 + corner
250 + signalized intersection
75 min. separation
125 + corner
250 + signalized intersection
No min. separation except as controlled by
Frontage Types for any particular building in
Article 6
75 + corner
250 + signalized intersection
Non-Residential****
200 min. separation
200 + corner
250 + signalized intersection
150 min. separation
125 + corner
250+ signalized intersection
100; min. separations
75 from lot corner
150 + signalized intersection
* Direct access to an arterial street shall be permitted only when the subject property has no other reasonable access to the street system,
and only if the Director of Public Works determines that the proposed access point is safe and is subject to the limits of this table.
** The Director of Public Works may allow averaging of the separation of access points along any block face provided there are no adverse
impacts on the transportation network, and the Intent of this section is equally or better served.
*** No more than 35% of the front yard may be covered with driveways or as otherwise controlled by Frontage Types for any particular building in
Article 6. No parking area other than driveways shall be allowed in the front yard of any lot located in a residential district.
2. Width. Driveway widths shall generally be limited based on Table 7-2, with consideration
of the streetscape design, development pattern, and degree of travel patterns in and
around the site for all modes of transportation. Where application of the width limits or
these spacing standards appears to constrain access, different driveway configurations
identified in Section 7.02B shall be used.
Table 7-2: Driveway Width
Functional Class
Arterial Collector Local
Residential
24 maximum* 24; maximum*
24 maximum, except as controlled by
Frontage Types for any particular building in
Article 6
Non-Residential** 24  36 24  36 24
* Residential driveway access for residential lots on arterial or collector streets may be designed as a circle drive or one-way entrance/exits
with a maximum of 12 wide, and any access to 20 or more dwelling units may be designed as an internal access street per Article 3.
** Any non-residential access point wider than specified shall be designed as an internal access street according to Article 3, and may require
cross-walk treatments and median separation based on the streetscape and context. Non-residential access on Activity Streets shall require
greater limits based on the streetscape standards and Frontage Design standards in Article 6. Industrial property or any use that requires
frequent truck or large vehicle access may have wider driveway access as authorized by the Director of Public Works and the Director of
Community and Economic Development.
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-3
City of Lansing
7
3. Setbacks. Except for where shared or common access is permitted and executed
through easements, driveways shall be set back from all lot lines based on Table 7-3:
Driveway Side Setbacks:
Table 7-3: Driveway Side Setbacks
Access Type Side Setback
Residential Access: < 6 dwelling units 3 minimum
Residential Access: 6  12 dwelling units 6 minimum
Non-residential access or Residential access for 13+ dwelling units 10 minimum
4. Sight Distances. All driveways and parking entrances to public streets or internal access
streets shall meet sight distance requirements as measured by Section 3.01.D.
B. Internal Access Streets. Any single block, lot or site greater than five acres shall provide a
system of internal access streets that establish access and circulation within the site. Internal
Access Streets:
1. Shall be laid out to organize the site into smaller internal blocks between one and four
acres.
2. Shall be designed to mimic public street cross sections in Article 3, including sidewalks,
landscape amenities, on-street parking and travel lanes.
3. May be treated as public streets for determining the proper location, orientation and
design of sites and buildings within the project.
C. Sidewalks.
1. Generally. Development sites shall include direct sidewalk connections and circulation at
the same or greater frequency as provided by vehicles. Sidewalks connect public
entrances and sites, in the most direct manner possible, with the following:
a. Sidewalks in the public streetscape or along internal access streets.
b. Parking areas, and any walkways or cross-walks within the parking areas
c. Any civic open space designed for active use.
d. Adjacent sites, where pedestrian connections through public streetscapes or
internal access is remote.
2. Sidewalk Width. Internal sidewalks shall meet the following requirements:
Table 7-4: Internal Sidewalk Widths
Location Minimum Width
Generally 5
 Along any building faade abutting a parking area;
 Along any parking with vehicle overhangs; OR
 A primary route between the street or parking area and the
building entrance.
8
Along any building faade with a primary entrance 10
Along any internal access street
Width based on the
specifications for the most
applicable street cross-section
in Article 3.
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-4
City of Lansing
7
3. Pedestrian Amenities. Site plans shall include amenities that enhance safety and
convenience and promote walking or bicycling as an alternative means of transportation.
Site amenities may include bike racks, drinking fountains, canopies and benches.
Sidewalks and internal circulation shall be separated from moving vehicles to the extent
feasible with curbs, landscape buffers, curbside parking, and limited cross-walks.
4. Crossings. All driveways and alleys shall generally intersect with sidewalks on the
perimeter of the block at the sidewalk grade, and the material and construction of the
sidewalk shall continue across the drive. For drive aisles and internal access streets, the
vehicle grade may interrupt the sidewalk. Where the pedestrian crossing exceeds 24
feet, cross-walks or other features to identify pedestrian crossings may be required.
Design features such as bump outs, raised crossings, medians or other landscape and
urban design amenities that emphasize the pedestrian crossing and shorten the distance
pedestrians cross dedicated vehicle ways may be considered.
D. Traffic Impacts. Wherever the Director of Public Works determines that the above requirements
will adversely impact the function of the transportation network in the vicinity of the site, either due
to traffic impacts of the proposed use, or the design of the access in relation to the street scape,
alternative access standards may be required to better meet the intent of this section. In addition,
any specific access management study or plan for a portion of the city may alter the application of
these standards and guidelines.
7.03 REQUIRED PARKING
A. Vehicle Parking Rates. Table 7-5: Required Parking provides general minimum requirements
and applies for rates of all similar uses. Where the classification of the use is not determinable
from the table, the Director shall determine the appropriate classification based on industry
guides and the most similar use in terms of scale, function and operation. The follow criteria shall
be used in interpreting the table:
1. A rate based on employees shall consider maximum number of employees likely to be
on-site at one time.
2. A rate based on square footage shall consider the service area open to the public or
patrons, or leasable floor area. Where this number is not easily or readily determined,
85% of gross floor area may be used.
3. A rate based on seating shall consider total number of seats. Where this number is not
easily or readily determined, or is otherwise flexible it may be based on capacity of
common formats and layouts of buildings based on industry standards.
4. A rate based on capacity shall be the maximum permitted under public safety and
building codes
5. Where a rate results in a fraction, round up to highest whole number.
6. Where uses or sites have components of different uses (i.e. hotel with a restaurant), each
component calculated under most applicable rate.
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-5
City of Lansing
7
Table 7-5: Required Parking
Residential Dwellings
Boarding or Rooming House 1 per bedroom
Hotel or Motel 2 per unit
Mobile Home Parks 2 per unit
Nursing Homes, Rest Homes 1 per 5 beds
Single Family Home 2 per unit
Multi-Unit Residential 2 per unit
Civic / Institutional
Religious Institutions 1 per every 6 seats
Elementary, Junior High and Equivalent
Parochial and Private Schools
2 per classroom
High Schools, Colleges, Universities and
Other Similar Public or Private Institutions
of Higher Learning
8 per classroom
Hospitals 1 per every 1.5 beds
Nursery Schools and Day Care Centers,
Public or Private
1 per employee; AND
1 per 500 sq. ft. floor area
Fraternal Associations 1 per every 4 seats
Commercial / Industrial
Automobile, Truck, Recreational Vehicle
and Mobile Home Sales and Rental Lot
1 per 3,000 sq. ft. lot
Automobile Salvage Yards 1 per employee AND;
10,000 sq. ft. storage area
Laundromats 1 per every 2 machines
Financial, Business, and Professional
1 per 300 sq. ft. gross floor area
Minimum 3 spaces
Bowling Alleys 4 per bowling lane
Cartage, Express, Parcel Delivery and
Freight Terminal Establishments
1 per 2 employees* AND;
Vehicles maintained
Automobile Wash 3 per washing stall
Funeral Homes and Mortuaries 1 per 4 seats
Furniture and Appliance Stores, Household
Equipment or Furniture Repair Shop
1 per 400 sq. ft. floor area
Adult Entertainment Uses 1 per every 2 occupants
Manufacturing, Production, Processing,
Assembly, Disassembly, Cleaning,
Servicing, Testing or Repairing of Goods,
Materials, or Products
1 per 3 employees
Medical and Dental Clinics or Offices 1 per 100 sq. ft. floor area
Restaurants, Private Clubs and Taverns 1 per 2.5 seats
Retail Stores and Shops 1 per 300 sq. ft. floor area
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-6
City of Lansing
7
Table 7-5: Required Parking
Service Stations 1 per employee
2 per service bay
Theaters, Auditoriums, and Places of
Assembly with Fixed Seats
1 per 4 seats
Warehouse, Storage and Wholesale
Establishments
1 per 2 employees
All Other Business and Commercial
Establishments Not Specified Above
1 per 300 sq. ft. floor area
B. Maximum Parking. No use shall provide more than 20% more than the minimum required
parking without documented evidence of actual parking demand based on studies of similar uses
in similar contexts. In addition, any parking permitted over 20% shall require mitigating potential
impacts of more parking through one or more of the following strategies:
1. Provide shared parking for other uses on the block or adjacent blocks according to
Section 7.03.D.
2. Design all parking areas over the minimum as dual purpose space, such as plazas,
playgrounds, event areas for regular use of the space during non-peak times (see civic
space design standards).
3. Use alternative surface areas designed to infiltrate stormwater.
4. Provide additional buffers and site open spaces to screen parking and provide more
active usable outdoor spaces for people in relation to the streetscape, of at least a 10%
increase in the open space or buffers and at least a 25% increase in the amount of
landscape material required for the parking.
C. Parking Reductions. The parking required by Table 7-5 may be reduced depending on context,
and according to the following strategies:
1. Walkable Commercial Contexts. In the B-1 and B-2 districts, any use under 2,000 square
feet is exempt from providing on-site parking, and all other uses in the B-1 and B-2
districts may reduce the required on-site parking by 30% provided the project is designed
in a compact, walkable format with smaller blocks and walkable streets as specified in
Article 3.
2. On-street Parking Credit. All on-street parking within 600 feet of any lot frontage shall
count towards the parking requirement at a rate of one space for every three on-street
spaces. However, any on-street parking in front of residential lots shall not count for nonresidential
uses in the area.
3. Bicycle Parking Credit. All on-site bicycle parking designed and located according to
Section 7.03.E may reduce the required vehicle parking at a rate of one space for every
four bicycle parking spaces up to a maximum of 15% of the required vehicle parking.
4. Public Parking Credit. Any site within 600 feet of a public parking area may reduce the
required vehicle parking at a rate of one space for every two public parking spaces.
5. Deferral of Parking Space Requirements. A portion of the required parking may remain
unimproved until the Planning Commission or the Governing Body deems it necessary to
adequately serve parking demand. The Planning Commission or Governing Body,
whichever is charged with granting final approval, shall determine that the initial
occupancy of the premises will be adequately served by the lesser number of spaces and
a site plan shall indicate the location, pattern and circulation to and from the deferred
parking spaces. Any approval shall specifically indicate what event will trigger the
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-7
City of Lansing
7
construction of any deferred parking. The area reserved for future parking shall be
brought to finished grade and shall be landscaped, and it shall not be used for any
permanent purpose or structure unless a revised site plan and parking plan is approved.
D. Shared Parking. Required parking may be reduced for any site containing multiple uses, or for
adjacent sites with different uses according to Table 7-6. Any shared parking arrangement shall
require an agreement among all landowners participating in the agreement to ensure access,
joint use, maintenance, and other operational issues. A reduction program that differs from Table
7-6 may also be approved in association with the agreement upon preparation of the joint parking
study for the sites and uses.
Table 7-6: Shared Parking
Percentage of Required Parking by Time Period
Weekday Weekend All
Use 6 AM to 5 PM 5 PM to 1 AM 6 AM to 5 PM 5 PM to 1 AM 1 AM to 6AM
Employment 100 % 10 % 5 % 5 % 5 %
Retail or Service 75 % 75 % 100 % 90 % 5 %
Restaurant 50 % 100 % 75 % 100 % 25 %
Entertainment & Recreation 30% 100 % 75 % 100 % 5 %
Church 5 % 25 % 100 % 50 % 5 %
School 100 % 10 % 10 % 10 % 5 %
Dwellings 25 % 90 % 50 % 90 % 100 %
Lodging 50 % 90 % 75 % 100 % 100 %
E. Bicycle Parking. All non-residential or multifamily uses within 1,000 feet of a designated bicycle
route or trail shall provide bicycle parking spaces according to Table 7-7. For convenience and
security, bicycle parking facilities shall be located near building entrances, shall be visible from
the land uses they serve, and shall not be in remote automobile parking areas.
Table 7-7: Bicycle Parking
Activity Required Spaces
Primary or secondary School 25% of the number of students; AND 10% of number of employees
Retail or office uses 10% of the required vehicle spaces.
Other Institutional or Entertainment uses 5% of the required vehicle spaces.
Industrial Uses 3% of the number of employees.
Residential 1 per dwelling unit
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-8
City of Lansing
7
7.04 PARKING LOT DESIGN
A. General Standards
1. All minimum required parking shall be reserved and used for that purpose except for what
may be permitted through a Conditional Use Permit or Temporary Use Permit.
2. All required parking shall be on-site except as specifically provided in Credits or Shared
parking sections. Additionally, the Planning Commission may allow for a portion of
required parking to be located off site through a site plan review, provided it is within 300
feet of the subject site, it is in a comparable zoning district, and an agreement
demonstrating rights and control of the off-site property is provided.
3. All on-site parking lots shall provide a sufficient amount of barrier free accessible spaces,
meeting the Americans with Disabilities Act guidelines for quantity, design and location.
4. All parking and access areas shall be designed to adequately address drainage and
runoff, including curb, gutters and inlets, or any other drainage strategy approved by the
Director of Public Works to support best management practices to minimize runoff and
encourage infiltration of storm water.
5. All parking and access lighting shall meet the site design standards in Article 7.
6. All parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced with a permanent bituminous or
portland cement concrete pavement meeting the standards and specifications of the City
of Lansing, except that the Director of Public Works may approve alternate surfaces that
demonstrate superior stormwater management performance and sufficient durability and
long-term maintenance is demonstrated.
B. Location. On-site parking shall be designed and located in a manner that mitigates negative
impacts on streetscapes and adjacent property. Table 7-8 provides general location, size and
landscape requirements. These requirements may be modified by specific standards applicable
to specific zoning districts in Article 5 and Article 6.
* Where individual sites require or provide parking requirements larger than the maximum size, parking lots shall be
broken into parking blocks meeting the size, location, and landscape requirements of this table. These parking blocks
shall be arranged around Internal Access Streets meeting the standards of Section 7.02.B.
Table 7-8: Parking Location, Size, and Landscape Requirements
Spaces per
Block Front Side Rear
200 or more * Must be broken into smaller parking
blocks.
* Must be broken into smaller parking
blocks.
10% Internal Landscape
Islands; AND
12 Perimeter Buffer.
150 - 199 * Must be broken into smaller parking
blocks
10% Internal Landscape Islands; AND
12 Perimeter Buffer.
8% Internal Landscape Islands;
AND
10 Perimeter Buffer.
100 - 199
8% Internal Landscape Island
10 Perimeter Buffer; AND
20 Front Setback Buffer
8% Internal Landscape Islands; AND
10 Perimeter Buffer.
5% Internal Landscape Islands;
AND
8 Perimeter Buffer
50-99
8% Internal Landscape Islands;
10 Perimeter Buffer; AND
20 Front Setback Buffer
5% Internal Landscape Islands; AND
8 Perimeter Buffer 8 perimeter buffer
20-49
5% Internal Landscape Islands; AND
8 Perimeter buffer;
5% Internal Landscape Islands; OR
8 Perimeter Buffer
No requirement other than 6
setback
Under 20
5% Internal Landscape Islands; OR
8 Perimeter Buffer No requirement other than 6 setback No requirement other than 6
setback
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-9
City of Lansing
7
Independent of any landscape buffer required by Table 7-8, the following parking front setbacks
apply to specific districts:
Table 7-9: Parking Lot Front Setback
Front Setback
Residential 25, except parking permitted in driveways of detached houses, duplexes or town houses shall
not count as a parking lot.
Non-residential 20
B-1; B-2 In compact, walkable formats or on Activity Streets specified in Article 3, parking shall be
behind the front building line if applicable; or at least 30 back for all others
C. Landscape & Buffers. Landscape areas required by Table 7-8 shall be arranged to achieve the
following results:
1. Parking pods of no more than 40 spaces without landscape islands either through end
caps or center strips.
2. No landscape island shall be less than eight feet in any dimension and no smaller than
150 square feet.
3. The maximum distance in any direction between landscape areas and surrounding
parking block edges or buffers shall be 180 feet.
4. All buffers and islands shall have the property allocation of landscape materials required
by Article 7, and be arranged to provide shade, infiltrate runoff, soften large expanses of
pavement and screen parking from adjacent streets and property.
5. Any parking otherwise permitted within 15 feet of any right of way or district shall be
screened with a continuous hedge, or decorative wall or fence compatible with the design
of buildings, or a combination of both. The hedge, wall, or fence shall provide a
continuous screen between two and one-half and four feet high, except at access points
or pedestrian entrances.
6. Any non-residential parking permitted within 30 feet of a residential lot, or any parking
area greater than 10 spaces located within 30 feet of property zoned R-3 or a lesser
district shall be screened with a combination of a landscape buffer and 6-foot high solid
fence or decorative wall.
D. Specifications. Parking areas shall be designed to meet the dimension specifications in Table
7-10: Parking Dimensions.
Table 7-10: Parking Dimensions
Parking Angle Width Length Depth to
Curb
Curb
Width
Aisle
Width 
One-way
Aisle
Width 
Two-way
Bumper
Overhang*
0 8.0 22 8.0 22 12 20 n/a
30 8.5 20 18 17 15 20 1.5
45 8.5 20 20 12 15 20 1.5
60 9.0 19 21 10.5 18 24 2.0
90 9.0 19 19 9.0 20 24 2.0
* Amount of Depth to Curb dimension that may overhang landscape area or expanded sidewalk area or other wheel stop block.
ACCESS & PARKING STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-10
City of Lansing
7
7.05 LOADING
A. General Standards.
1. Location. Loading and unloading space shall be provided off-street, unless the principal
building is located within a zoning district designed to promote pedestrian activity. The
loading and unloading space or spaces shall be located so as to avoid undue interference
with public use of streets, alleys and walkways.
2. Mixed-Use Buildings or Districts. In any area, project or zoning district designed to promote
pedestrian activity, or for buildings and sites where more compact building and site design is
required, alternate loading standards shall be permitted, which may include sharing of loading
spaces among multiple smaller tenants, using side streets or alleys  particularly during off
hours for loading or deliveries, or other similar strategies that avoid designing sites simply for
large vehicle access.
3. Loading, Storage and Service Areas. No off-street loading, storage or service areas shall be
provided adjacent to the same wall containing the main building entrance. In cases where a
building abuts multiple public streets and contains entrances on two sides, off street loading,
storage or service areas may be located between the building and the secondary abutting
street.
B. Loading Requirements. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided according to Table 7-11.
The total number of loading spaces provided shall be limited to not more than 10% above that
which is required, without exhausting all opportunities to share loading areas or otherwise
configure sites in efficient ways. For buildings in compact, walkable formats or on Activity Streets
per Article 3, at least two loading areas may be accounted for through on-street parking or other
similar access, where uses demonstrate the ability to manage loading for low-peak times.
Table 7-11: Off-Street Loading
Use or Use Category Floor Area Required Loading Spaces
Retail, restaurant, wholesale, warehouse, general service,
manufacturing or industrial uses
2,000  10,000 s.f. 1
10,000  20,000 s.f. 2
20,000  40,000 s.f. 3
40,000  60,000 s.f. 4
Each 50,000 over 60,000 s.f. 1 additional
Apartment, hotel, office, institution and public assembly
5,000  10,000 s.f. 1
10,000  100,000 s.f. 2
100,000  200,000 s.f. 3
Each 100,000 over 200,000 s.f. 1 additional
Funeral home or mortuary
2,500  4,000 s.f. 1
4,000  6,000 s.f. 2
Each 10,000 over 6,000 s.f. 1 additional
C. Design Standards. Loading areas shall be at least 12 feet by 35 feet with vertical clearance of
at least 14 feet, except that loading spaces for funeral homes may be reduced to 10 feet by 25
feet with eight feet vertical clearance.
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-1
City of Lansing
ARTICLE 8. SIGN STANDARDS
8.01 INTENT & APPLICABILITY
8.02 EXEMPT SIGNS
8.03 SIGN TYPES
8.04 SIGN ALLOWANCES
8.05 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS
8.06 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES
8.07 PLANNED DISTRICTS
8.01 INTENT & APPLICABILITY
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to:
1. Enhance the visual quality of the community reflected in the visual priority of buildings,
open spaces, streetscapes, and landscape.
2. Preserve the unique character of the city as reflected in distinct areas and districts within
the City by ensuring signs contribute to an appropriate sense of place.
3. Ensure safety of pedestrians, motorists or other users of the public rights-of-way and
open spaces by ensuring signs are maintained and structurally safe, and do not distract
or reduce the effectiveness of public safety signs.
4. Promote economic viability by assuring that the city will be a visually pleasant place to
visit, conduct business, and live.
5. Provide effective and efficient identification and communication for businesses without
excessive competition for visual attention.
6. Encourage the innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and proper
maintenance.
7. Protect property values by minimizing adverse effects of signs on adjacent property,
which can occur from conditions such as light trespass, obstructing the views and
access, or visual blight.
B. Applicability. All new signs and replacement of existing signs visible to the public shall require a
sign permit demonstrating compliance with these sign standards. Ordinary maintenance, care or
repair of existing signs or change of copy without altering the essential construction elements of
an existing sign shall not require a permit for zoning and design standards, but any electrical or
building code issues may require permitting.
8.02 EXEMPT SIGNS
The following signs are exempt from the permit process provided they meet all other applicable
requirements of this Code, and unless specifically noted do not count towards the size allocation
standards in this ordinance.
A. Address or Memorial Signs. Signs clearly indicating the property address, and/or dates of
assembly and/or professional name plate, are encouraged to enhance the ability of public safety
and emergency services personnel to locate the property. One wall per address up to four square
feet each, provided the following standards are met.
a. Address signs on buildings shall be mounted between four feet and nine feet high to enhance
visibility.
b. Freestanding address signs shall be located at the primary access point and shall be no more
than three and one-half feet high to minimize sight obstruction.
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-2
City of Lansing
B. Public Safety or Traffic Control. Signs not exceeding eight square feet in area designed and
located to control internal traffic movement and safety of vehicles and pedestrians according to
the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices standards, or otherwise required to support any
official action of a federal, state or local government.
C. Flags. Up to three non-commercial flags per lot, mounted to the building and below the building
height or mounted on a permanent pole subject to the height restrictions of the zoning district and
setback from the property line a distance equal to the height. Total flag area per property shall not
exceed 120 square feet and no more than 60 square feet per flag. Flags exceeding this may be
permitted subject to sign standards and permits.
D. Window Signs. Signs mounted to the interior of any first-floor windows in non-residential
districts, provided the sign does not exceed more than 33 percent of all first floor window area
measured between 2 feet and 10 feet above the first floor elevation, and at least 50 percent of the
entire window area remains clear of any visual obstructions including the sign area.
E. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs not exceeding 8 square feet in residential districts and 16
square feet in non-residential districts are exempt from the sign permit, but do count toward the
total size allocation per lot for all temporary signs. These signs are exempt from permits, but do
count toward the total size allocation per lot for all temporary signs.
F. Minor Signs. Signs less than two square feet intended to convey messages to internal users of
the site, and generally not visible from or intended to convey messages to people in the right-ofway,
such as parking instructions, security warnings, or other similar minor signs that are
accessory to the use of the site and building. Grouping or arranging minor signs to have the
effect of a larger permitted sign makes these signs ineligible for this exemption.
G. Agricultural Business Signs. Business signs no larger than 350 square-feet in size located on
property used for agricultural purposes and pertaining to the sale of agricultural products
produced on the premises.
H. Home Occupation Signs. Wall signs not exceeding 4 square-feet pertaining to permitted
business uses in a residential district.
I. Construction Signs. Signs associated with a temporary construction project and erected to
promote public safety or public information regarding the scope and nature of the project may be
exempt from these standards if limited to:
1. One sign per public street frontage;
2. No more than 32 square feet per sign;
3. Signs shall be mounted on a trailer, building or fence, or if mounted on the ground it shall
include a lattice or similar base material to give the appearance of a monument base and
limited to no more than 10 feet high; and
4. The duration shall only be during a valid permit associated with the project.
J. Grand Opening. Temporary signs associated with the opening of a new business are exempt
from the sign permit for up to 30 days (1 month), but do count toward the total size allocation per
lot for all signs.
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-3
City of Lansing
Figure 8-1 Sign Types in Development Contexts
Particular sign types or arrangements are often associated with the development context of a site. For example,
pedestrian signs may be most prominent in compact, walkable places; whereas entrance signs and monuments
signs are typically desired for large suburban centers.
8.03 SIGN TYPES
The following sign types are distinguished for the purposes of the sign requirements in this Section.
Sign Types
A. Wall Sign
B. Freestanding
Sign
C. Entrance Sign
D. Pedestrian Sign
E. Temporary Sign
F. Internal Ground
Sign
Conventional Development (Suburban Contexts)
Traditional Development (Walkable Contexts)
A
A
B
C
D
E
F
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-4
City of Lansing
Table 8-1: Sign Types
Type Description
A. Wall Sign A sign painted, printed or attached to the exterior surface of a building, awning, canopy or
other fixed building surface in a permanent manner with a scale and design legible to
vehicles in the public right-of-way or pedestrians at a distance from the building. Wall
signs must not extend more than 12 inches from the face of the building.
B. Freestanding Sign A detached sign that is mounted to the ground independent from any building with a scale
and design legible primarily to vehicles in the public right-of-way. Free-standing signs
encompass two specific sign types:
Monument Sign: A type of Free-standing Sign mounted on an enclosed, solid base or
ornamental surface structure.
Pole Sign: A type of Free-standing sign constructed on one or more columns, poles or
similar structures so the bottom edge of the sign surface is elevated above the ground.
C. Pedestrian Signs A sign with a design and scale to be legible to pedestrians in front of or immediately
adjacent to the building, or to be legible to individuals internal to a site containing multiple
buildings. Pedestrian signs may be located in a permanent manner hanging below a
canopy or awning, projecting from a wall, mounted on a wall, door or window, or freestanding.
D. Temporary Sign A portable sign which is not permanently embedded in the ground or permanently affixed
to a building or structure, and designed or intended to be used for a brief period of time.
Does not include permanent signs with temporary or changeable messages.
E. Internal Ground Sign A sign with a design and scale to be legible to pedestrians or vehicles navigating the
internal portions of a site.
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-5
City of Lansing
8.04 SIGN ALLOWANCES
The following sign allowances apply to zoning districts or groups of zoning districts as the basic
standard. Other restrictions in this Section, or other regulations may operate to further reduce the
basic sign allowances within each zoning district.
Table 8-2: Sign Allowances
A-1 and R-1 - R-5/6 B-1 and B-2 compact, walkable
formats
B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 & I-2
Wall Signs
Permitted principal non-residential or multifamily
uses:
? Number: 2 per faade.
? Total Area: Allowance: 5% of faade area
maximum.
? Size: 24 s.f. per sign maximum.
? Number: 1 sign per tenant with exterior
entrance (multi-tenant building)  otherwise
3 signs per faade maximum.
? Total Area Allowance: 2 s.f. for each 1
linear foot of building frontage.
? Size: 32 s.f. per sign maximum.
? Number: 2 signs per tenant with exterior
entrance (multi-tenant building)  otherwise 3
per faade maximum.
? Total Area Allowance: 10% of faade area
maximum.
Freestanding Signs
For permitted non-residential uses, or any
residential project over 5 acres:
? Number: 1 monument sign per street
frontage for non-residential uses OR per
entrance for residential projects over 5
acres.
? Size: 24 s.f. per sign maximum at the
minimum of 10 from property line.
Additional 8 s.f. per each additional 10
setback, to maximum of 48 s.f. per sign.
? Height: Monument design required; 6
high maximum.
Exception: any residential project more than
10 acres may allocate this allowance into
multiple signs, 8 s.f. or less, provided it is part
of streetscape plan / public amenity program
with signs integrated into streetscape
structures in common areas at intersections
throughout neighborhoods.
? Number: 1 per lot.
? Size: 25 s.f. maximum.
? Height: Monument design required; 6 high
maximum.
? 10 minimum setback from all right-of-way
and lot lines.
? Number: 1 sign per each 200 of street
frontage; maximum of 3 on any lot; 100
minimum separation between signs.
? Total Area Allowance: 1 s.f. for each 2 linear
feet of street frontage.
? 10 minimum setback from all right-of-way and
lot lines.
? Size: 25 s.f. maximum; and additional 20
square feet for each additional 5 setback up to
150 s.f. maximum per sign.
? Height: Monument - 6 high maximum; and an
additional 2 in height for each additional 5
setback up to 15 maximum height. Pole  20
high with a 10 setback, and 1 additional height
for each additional 1 setback, up to 35 high.
Exception: Signs fronting on K-7 pole signs up to
300 s.f., if used en lieu of one other Wall or
Freestanding sign, and if limited to a monument
sign design.
Temporary Signs
? Freestanding 
o Total Area Allowance: 1 s.f. for each 5
linear feet of frontage.
o Size: 9 s.f. maximum per sign.
o At least 25 between signs.
? Wall -
o Number: 2 per faade.
o Total Area Allowance: 5% of faade
area maximum.
o Size: 8 s.f. maximum per sign.
? Total combined display time 90 days per
calendar year per lot.
Exemption from permit: 8 s.f. maximum, but
still counts to sign allowance and must meet all
other temporary standards.
? Freestanding -
o Total Area Allowance: 1 s.f. for each 5 linear feet of lot street frontage.
o Size: 32 s.f. maximum per sign.
o At least 70 between signs.
? Wall 
o Number: 2 per faade.
o Total Area Allowance: 5% of faade area maximum.
o Size: 32 s.f. maximum per sign.
? Total combined display time 90 days per calendar year per lot.
Exemption from permit: 16 s.f. maximum, but still counts to sign allowance and must meet all other
temporary standards.
Exception: Temporary signs may exceed these limits if it is in place of any other permitted sign to allow
for a new business during an interim period not to exceed 90 days, and subject to all other limits of the
substituted sign type.
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-6
City of Lansing
Table 8-2: Sign Allowances
A-1 and R-1 - R-5/6 B-1 and B-2 compact, walkable
formats
B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 & I-2
Pedestrian Sign
For permitted non-residential use
? Number: 1 per public entrance
? Height: 6 high maximum and within 30
of entrance, if mounted on the ground
? Size: 6 s.f. maximum
? Number & Size: 1 for each public building entrance up to 8 s.f. and within 20 feet of entrance.
AND
? Number & Size: 1 for each 25 linear feet of building frontage; 6 s.f. max
Exemption: Portable pedestrian signs or any pedestrian sign mounted on a building that projects into
the right-of-way are exempt from right-of-way prohibition in B-1 and B-2 district on any street designed
to Activity Street standards per Article 3. Portable pedestrian signs shall meet Section 8.06.B.
Internal Ground Sign
Not applicable
 Number: 1 for each 5,000 square feet of lot;
 Size: 4 square feet maximum; up to 12 square feet for lots or parcels over 5 acres and if set back
at least 50 from public right-of-way or lot lines.
 Height: 3 maximum height; up to 5 for lots or parcels over 5 acres and if set back at least 50
from the right-of-way or lot lines
8.05 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS
A. No sign shall be attached to any public utility pole or shall be installed within the right-of-way of a
public road or street, except as permitted by the applicable road authority or where specifically
exempt from the right-of-way prohibition by this Section.
B. No sign shall be erected without the property owners permission.
C. No sign shall imitate or resemble government signs for traffic direction or any other public safety
symbol.
D. No sign shall be placed in any sight triangle applicable to public streets, internal access streets,
or driveway access points using the sight distance provisions of Section 3.01D.
E. No sign shall be placed on any vehicle or trailer, when such vehicle or trailer is placed or parked
visible from the right-of-way, and the primary purpose of the sign is to deviate from the standards
or criteria of this Section.
F. No sign attached to any building shall extend vertically above the highest portion of the roof line
or parapet, whichever is less.
G. Any sign projecting over a walkway or other active area in front of a building or other active area
where people may walk shall maintain at least 8 vertical clearance.
H. No sign shall include balloons, streamers, pennants or other air activated elements and
animated elements, whether animated by mechanical, electrical, or environmental means,
except as authorized through any temporary use or special event permit. This limit shall not
apply to pedestrian signs, provided any animated element shall apply to the overall pedestrian
sign allowances.
I. Any illumination shall be designed to eliminate negative impacts on surrounding rights-of-way
and properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall not flash or oscillate, or create a negative
impact on residential uses in direct line-of-sight to the sign.
J. External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other
than the sign.
K. Any sign with a business message shall be located on the site of the business activity.
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-7
City of Lansing
8.06 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES
A. Monument Signs
1. Monument signs shall be located within a landscape area as required by the site design
standards of this code, OR shall include at least three feet of landscape area on all sides
of the sign base.
2. Monument signs shall have a base at least 75% of the width of the widest part of the
sign.
3. The base and sign shall include ornamental architectural details and materials that
complement the overall design of the site and building.
B. Portable Pedestrian Signs. Portable pedestrian signs (A frame, sandwich board or Tframe)
may be placed in the public right-of-way for retail and service uses in the B-1 and B-2
district, provided:
1. The sign is placed within 20 feet of the main entrance of the building.
2. The sign is no larger than eight square feet and no taller than four feet high.
3. The sign is placed on or near a sidewalk, and maintain at least six feet clear passage for
pedestrians on the sidewalk, and is otherwise not put in any location that creates visual
obstructions or safety hazards for users of the right-of-way.
4. The sign is removed and brought inside during non-business hours.
5. The sign is designed with durable materials and quality aesthetics for use on a recurring
basis. Although changeable copy can be included as part of the design, such as
chalkboards, signs designed as temporary signs are not eligible as a portable
pedestrian signs, and the allowance for signs in the right-of-way specifically does not
apply to any temporary sign.
C. Electronic Message Signs. Electronic message signs are subject to the following additional
limitations:
1. Limited to B-3, I-1 and I-2 districts, or for a permitted institutional or civic use in all other
districts.
2. Limited to one per lot.
3. The visible sign face shall be setback at least 250 feet from any adjacent residentially
zoned property.
4 The electronic portion shall be limited to no more than 50% of the allowable sign area.
5. Automatic dimming controls shall limit the illumination to no more than 500 nits at the sign
surface at night or during low light times, and no more than 5,000 nits at the brightest
daylight period.
6. Only static display is permitted with at least 10 seconds between changes in display and
no more than two seconds for transitions. No scrolling, flashing or animated transitions
shall occur.
D. Changeable Message. Any sign may be designed with a manual changeable message portion,
provided the changeable portion is limited to no more than 50% of the sign area.
E. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are subject to the following additional limitations:
1. It shall be the responsibility of the person who causes the temporary sign to be erected
to see that the temporary sign placed with the permission of the property owner is
removed when the display time has exceeded the applicable regulatory time limit.
2. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated or painted with a light-reflecting paint.
3. Temporary signs shall be constructed of rigid material, and securely anchored so as not
to pose a distraction or hazard to drivers. Non-rigid materials (such as banners) which
are secured by a support or frame to avoid distraction of flapping may be used as a
freestanding temporary sign if set back at least 30 feet from the pavement edge of the
fronting roadway.
8 SIGN STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-8
City of Lansing
4. The Director or Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to extend the duration of
display time for temporary signage pertaining to the sale of that property once per
calendar year, until such time as the property is sold.
5. The Director or Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to require the removal of
any temporary sign that pertains to an expired event.
F. Pole Signs
1. Pole signs shall be located within a landscape area that is at least equal to the area of
the sign, and which is in addition to any landscape area required by the site design
standards of this Code.
2. The additional landscape area shall be included in the calculation for minimum planting
specifications and planted with materials required by the landscape section.
8.07 PLANNED DISTRICTS
Projects proposed and approved through the planned district process may propose a specific sign
package. The sign package shall be based on the intent, types of signs, and standards of this Article, but
the City may approve deviations to these standards through the review process and criteria of planned
districts. Any planned district not proposed and approved with a sign plan noting specific deviation shall
be subject to these standards.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-1
City of Lansing
ARTICLE 9. DEFINITIONS
All terms used in these regulations shall have their commonly accepted meaning based upon the context
of their use within this code. The following terms shall have the meaning given below, unless more
specifically described, limited or qualified within the standards of this Code.
A
Accessory building: A subordinate building having a use customarily incident to and located on the same
lot occupied by the main building. A building having an accessory use is considered an integral part of the
main building when it has any part of a wall in common with the main building, or is under an extension of
the main roof and designed as an integral part of the main building.
Accessory use: A use of building or land which is customarily incident to and located on the same lot or
premises as the main use of the premises.
Agricultural use: The use of a tract of land for the growing of crops, pasturage, nursery, or the raising of
poultry, including the structures necessary for carrying out farming operations and the residence or
residences of those owning or operating the premises, a member of the family thereof, or persons
employed thereon, and the family thereof, but such use shall not include feedlots as defined by the
Kansas Statutes Annotated.
Alley: A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
Alteration: Alteration, as applied to a building or structure, is a change or rearrangement in the structural
parts of an existing building or structure. Enlargement, whether by extending a side, increasing in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another shall be considered as an alteration.
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-dwelling intended or designed for use as a residence by
a single family.
Arcade: A covered passageway open on one or both sides, especially one with arches along the open
side(s). A porch may function as an arcade.
Architectural element: Unique details and component parts that together form the architectural style of
buildings and structures.
B
Basement: A story of a building having more than one-half of its height below grade and which serves as
substructure or foundation for the remainder of the building. A basement is counted as a story for the
purpose of height regulation if subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes other than by a
janitor employed on the premises.
Bed and Breakfast: An existing residential building used for short-term lodging with one or more meals for
compensation and shared living space between the primary occupants and patrons.
Berm: An earthen mound used for decorative, screening, or buffering purposes.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-2
City of Lansing
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In
cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Codes Administrator shall determine the
outline of the block.
Board of Zoning Appeals: A board created by the Governing Body having jurisdiction and authority to
hear and determine appeals and variances to the zoning regulations.
Buffer: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to
physically and visually separate one use or property from another in order to mitigate the impacts of
noise, light, or other nuisance.
Building: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter or
enclosure of individuals, animals, or materials of any kind.
Building, Height: The vertical dimension measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at
the front of the building to the highest point of ceiling of the top story in the case of a flat roof; the deck
line of a mansard roof; and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel
roof.
Building Inspector: The person or persons authorized and empowered by the City Administrator to
administer the requirements of these zoning regulations.
Building line: The line at which the outward most portion of the building is established.
Building, Principal: A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which it is situated.
Bulb outs, or Bump outs: A projection of the curb and pedestrian area of the streetscape at an
intersection, or occasionally at mid-block crossings, designed to add landscape or pedestrian amenities,
calm traffic turning movements, and shorten pedestrian crossing distances.
C
Caliper: The diameter of a tree, measured at 6 inches above ground level unless otherwise specified.
Cargo containers, or Storage containers: An industrial, standardized reusable vessel that was:
a. Originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or
transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities; and/or
b. Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car; and/or
c. Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by truck trailer,
train or loaded on a ship.
Cellar: A story having more than one-half of its height below grade. A cellar is not included in computing
the number of stories for the purpose of height regulations.
Centerline: The center of a street right-of-way as shown on the recorded plat or survey.
Common Open Space: An area of land or water or combination thereof planned for passive or active
recreation, which does not include areas utilized for streets, alleys, driveways or private roads, off-street
parking or loading areas. However, the area of recreational activities such as swimming pools, tennis
courts, shuffleboard court, etc., may be included as common open space.
Conditional Use: Uses which, due to their nature, are dissimilar to the normal uses permitted within a
given zoning district or where product, process, mode of operation, or nature of business may prove
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-3
City of Lansing
detrimental to the health, safety, welfare or property values of the immediate neighborhood and its
environs. Within the various zoning districts specific uses may be permitted only after additional
requirements are complied with as established within this section.
Condominium: A single dwelling unit under individual ownership within a multiple dwelling unit structure. A
multiple-family structure with two condominiums shall be considered a two-family dwelling and a structure
with more than two condominiums shall be considered a multiple-family dwelling.
D
Disability: A condition, with respect to a person, which means: (1) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; (2) a record of having such an
impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment. Such terms do not include current,
illegal use of or addition to a controlled substance, as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substance
Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
District: A section of the city of Lansing for which the regulations governing the use of land and buildings
are uniform.
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed and used primarily for human habitation. (Ord. 454,
Sec. 4)
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms designed and intended for occupancy as a separate living
quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of maintaining a
household.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A residential building designed for and occupied by one family.
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached: A portion of a residential building designed for and occupied by
one family, and which is located on a separate lot of record apart from the remaining portions of
the building. Each such dwelling may be sold independently of other portions.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A residential building designed for and separately occupied by two
families. A two-family dwelling is a duplex.
Dwelling, Multiple: A residential building designed for and occupied by more than two families,
independently, but does not include townhouses.
E
Earth Sheltered Residence: A residence designed as a complete structure below or partially below
ground level, whose perimeter walls comply with the yard requirements of the district in which it is located.
Easement: An area of land reserved, conveyed, or dedicated for a specialized or limited purpose without
the transfer of fee title, generally established in a real estate document or on a recorded plat. Examples of
such purposes may include, but are not limited to, utilities, access, and storm water drainage.
Encroachment: Any architectural or structural feature which projects into the setback and is measured at
grade; i.e., chimneys, balconies, roof overhangs, etc.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-4
City of Lansing
F
Faade: All visible exterior elements of a building that face a common direction, extending across the
entire width and height of the building.
Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single
housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than 4 unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit, plus in either case, usual domestic servants. A family shall under no circumstances be
construed as a boarding house, fraternity, or sorority house, club, lodging house, hotel, motel or
commune.
Fence: A protective, confining or decorative barrier separate from any building and not including any living
plant material.
Floor area: The gross area of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the centerline of walls separating two buildings and shall include the following area:
a. The area of each story of the structure;
b. The area of any below-grade story or half-story that is used or finished for a principal or
accessory use of the building (i.e. not storage or mechanical space).
Front building line: The forward most point on a lot at which the principal building has been established,
extended across the front to each side.
Frontage: The area that establishes the relationship between the building or site and the public realm or
street upon which the lot fronts.
G
Garage, Porch or Yard Sales: All general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential
premise in any residential district for the purpose of disposing of personal property. Garage sales shall
include "lawn", "yard", "attic", "porch", "room", "back yard", "patio", and "rummage" sales.
Governing Body: The Mayor and City Council of Lansing, Kansas.
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR): The maximum operating weight of a vehicle specified by the
manufacturer including the chassis, body, engine, engine fluids, fuel, accessory, drivers, passengers and
cargo, but excluding that of any trailers.
Ground Cover: A continuous vegetative cover no more than one foot tall that is comprised of living plants
that spread across the ground to connect with other similar plants.
Group Home: Any dwelling occupied by not more than 10 persons, including 8 or fewer persons with a
disability who need not be related by blood or marriage and not to exceed 2 staff residents, who need not
be related by blood or marriage to each other or to the residents of the home, which dwelling is licensed
by a regulatory agency of this State. For purposes of these regulations, group homes shall be considered
single-family dwellings.
H
Hedge: A solid and unbroken visual screen of self-supporting living plant material, typically comprised of
closely planted shrubs forming a linear boundary.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-5
City of Lansing
Hospital: A building, or group of buildings, having room facilities for one or more abiding patients, used for
providing services for the inpatient, medical or surgical care of ill or injured humans, and which may
include related facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices; provided, however, that such related
facility must be incidental and subordinate to the main use and must be an integral part of the hospital
operation.
Hotel: A building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings, used as a transient abiding place which may
or may not service meals and whether such establishments are designated as a hotel, inn, automobile
court, bed and breakfast, motel, motor inn, motor lodge, motor court, tourist cabin, tourist court, tourist
home, or other similar designation.
Household: One or more persons who are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together and
occupying a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than five people living together by joint
agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit.
I
J
K
L
Landscape area: An area that is designed and maintained for landscape plantings. Landscape areas may
include non-plant landscape features and be surfaced with mulch or rock; however, areas without living
plants shall not be considered landscape areas.
Boarding House: A dwelling or part thereof where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation for
two or more persons, not transients, and where there are not more than 12 sleeping rooms, nor sleeping
spaces for more than 24 people.
Lot: An area of land designated by plat, subdivision, or otherwise permitted by law, to be separately
owned.
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same
street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a
corner lot.
Lot, Interior: A lot whose side lines do not abut upon any street.
Lot line, Front: The boundary between a lot and the street on which it fronts. In cases where it is not clear
on which street a lot fronts, it shall generally be the street of address or street of clear orientation of the
building and site. In cases of further uncertainty the Director shall determine the front lot line.
Lot line, Rear: The boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line; except that
in the case of uncertainty the Director shall determine the rear lot line.
Lot line, Side: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a
line bordering on an alley or place, or a side street line.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-6
City of Lansing
Lot of Record: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds of Leavenworth County; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the
deed to which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this
regulation.
Lot, Zoning: A parcel or tract of land used, developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership or
control. Said parcel or tract may consist of one or more lots of record, one or more portions of a lot or lots
of record, or any combination thereof.
M
Manufactured Home: A factory-built structure that is manufactured or constructed under the authority of
42 U.S.C. 5403, administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or normally
equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of
moving to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any
wheels or axles. A mobile home is not a manufactured home. (Ord. 495, Sec. 1)
Manufactured Home Lot: A plot of ground within a mobile home park which can accommodate one
manufactured home, and which provides the necessary utility services for water, sewerage, and
electricity.
Mobile home: A mobile home shall be defined as a structure, transportable, in one or more sections,
which has a body width of 8 or more feet, and a body length of 36 or more feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and includes, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein. Mobile home does not include any structure which is subject to Federal Mobile Home
Construction Safety Standards established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. ' 5403. (Ord. 495, Sec. 1) The term
mobile home shall not include any trailer home, camp van, or any vehicle lawfully operated on fixed
rails. A modular home which can meet local building codes shall not be considered a mobile home.
Modular home: A manufactured housing unit that is designed to be located on a permanent foundation
and is factory-certified that it conforms to local building, housing, electrical and plumbing codes.
Motel: A building or group of buildings including either separate units or a row or rows of units which (1)
contain living or sleeping accommodations primarily for transient occupancy, and (2) provide one offstreet
parking space on the same lot for each individual living or sleeping unit.
N
Nonconformance: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is situated. This shall include, but is not limited to, failure to conform to use, height,
area, coverage, or off-street parking requirements.
O
Overlay District: A broad zoning category to which special land use standards and design guidelines
shall apply in addition to or in lieu of the land use standards and design guidelines of the underlying
district.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-7
City of Lansing
P
Parapet: The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
Parking Area: An area devoted to off-street parking on any one lot for public or private use.
Parking block: A grouping of parking spaces with edges that are defined by landscape areas. Parking
blocks may include a variety of different configurations of parking spaces.
Parking Space: An area either within a structure or in the open used for the parking of a motor vehicle.
Party wall: A common wall that is a dividing partition between two adjoining buildings or units in a
structure that is intended to accommodate separate ownership of each unit and serve as a property
boundary.
Public realm: The spaces between buildings that are designed to shape the character and appearance of
the area and influence the experience of the public or people using and accessing sites and buildings.
This area is primarily made up of public lands and rights-of-way, common areas serving as extensions of
the public lands, and private lands that serve as transitions from these areas.
Q
R
Rain garden: A planted depression designed to improve the aesthetics of a site with screening or
seasonal color, but which has a primary purpose of allowing rainwater and runoff to infiltrate into the
ground.
Retail: The sale of goods, commodities or merchandise to the general public.
S
Salvage/Junk Yard: A place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, handled or prepared for recycling, which shall include
automobile/salvage yards, but shall not include retail secondhand furniture stores or the purchase and
storage of used or salvage materials as a part of manufacturing operation.
Seasonal: Relating to or varying in occurrence according to the season, but shall not mean for a period
exceeding 180 days (6 months).
Sexually-Oriented Business: See Adult Entertainment Business
Sharrow: An outside lane of a roadway that is designed and marked to allow bicycles and cars to share
the lane area for travel.
Shrub: Any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally grows to an overall mature height of
15 feet or less in this region.
Sight Triangle: A triangular area at the intersection of two streets, an alley, drive, etc., in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision
between 1  feet and 10 feet above the elevation of the curb at the intersection. The area included in the
sight triangle shall be bounded by the triangle described as 15 feet back perpendicular from the edge of
the curb line of the abutting street, to a point 140 feet along the curb line of the street.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-8
City of Lansing
Sign: Any device displaying or including any letter, word, model, insignia, device, or representation used
as, or which is in the nature of, an advertisement or announcement which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
Storage or Stored: The keeping of items, equipment, vehicles, trailers or materials for a period of time
longer than would be involved in the normal day-to-day use or consumption of the same, or the keeping
of items, equipment, vehicles, trailers or materials on a regular basis when said items, equipment,
vehicles, trailers or materials are not in use.
Street: A public or private vehicular corridor which connects to other such vehicular corridors and/or
affords principal means of access to property abutting thereon.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to
something having a location on the ground, except customary utility poles, retaining walls and boundary
fences.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. For the
purpose of this regulation, the following shall not be considered a structural alteration:
o Attachment of new front where structural supports are not changed.
o Addition of fire escapes where structural supports have not changed.
o New windows where lintels and support walls are not materially changed.
o Repair or replacement of non-structural members.
Subdivision: The voluntary division of a lot, parcel or tract of land into 2 or more lots for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including resubdivision.
Swale: A low tract of land designed with vegetation and permeable surfaces to manage water runoff,
filter pollutants and infiltrate rainwater.
T
Target Speed: The speed intended for cars on a specific section of a street based on context,
streetscape, and surrounding development patterns.
Tavern: An establishment in which the primary function is the public sale and serving of alcoholic and
cereal malt beverages for consumption on the premises.
Townhouse: A single-family house of two or three stories, usually connected to a similar house by a
common sidewall.
Tree, Large: A deciduous tree that sheds its leaves annually and typically grows to an overall mature
height of more than 50 feet in this region.
Tree, Medium: A deciduous tree that sheds its leaves annually and typically grows to an overall mature
height between 30 and 50 feet in this region.
Tree, Small: A deciduous tree that sheds its leaves annually and typically grows to an overall mature
height of 30 feet or less in this region.
Tree Lawn: The area between the curb and sidewalk or trail (where they exist) that accommodates
planting of street trees.
9 DEFINITIONS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-9
City of Lansing
Tree Well: The area beyond the curb but within the sidewalk and amenity area of the streetscape that
accommodates planting of street trees.
Turf: Grass of a species suitable for a permanent lawn in this region.
U
V
W
X
Y
Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In
measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the
depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the building shall be used.
Yard, Front: A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the main building to the
front lot line.
Yard, Rear: A yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building and the side lot lines.
Yard, Side: A yard between the main building and the adjacent side lot line, and extending entirely from a
front yard to the rear yard.
Z
Zone or District: A section of the Zoning Area for which uniform regulation governing the use, height,
area, size, and intensity of use of buildings, land, and open space are herein established.
Zoning Area: The area to be zoned as set out on the official Zoning District Map filed of record.
Zoning Regulations: The term zoning regulations or this or these regulations shall mean the requirements
stipulated in the regulations herewith attached.
APPENDICES
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE APPENDICIES-1
City of Lansing
LANSING, KANSAS
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A - RESOURCES, GUIDES & INDUSTRY STANDARDS
APPENDIX B - GREAT TREES FOR THE KANSAS CITY REGION
APPENDIX A
RESOURCES, GUIDES & INDUSTRY STANDARDS
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE APPENDICIES-2
City of Lansing
APPENDIX A  RESOURCES, GUIDES & INDUSTRY STANDARDS
In accordance with Section 1.02.I of the Unified Development Code, the Director of Community &
Economic Development has determined that the policies, guidance and standards in the following
documents are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the purpose, intent and design objectives of
the Unified Development Code. They may be used to help interpret and apply the standards of the code,
or be used to guide any discretion in approval included in the code. Nothing in these guides may be
interpreted to change any specific standard or replace any official policy or plan of the City.
Publication Name Author Publication
Date
Date of Dept.
Endorsement
APPENDICES
GREAT TREES FOR THE KANSAS CITY REGION
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE APPENDICIES-3
City of Lansing
C
APPENDIX B  GREAT TREES FOR THE KANSAS CITY REGION
This guide shall be used to choose street tree and landscape materials. This list can be managed and
supplemented by City Staff from time to time and administered through more specific landscape, street
scape and site design recommendation through the development review process.
T H E T R E E L I S T
GR E AT T R E E S FOR TH E K ANS A S CI T Y R EGION
AS RATED BY METROPOL ITAN AREA EXPERTS
December 2013 revision
Study by Robert Whitman, ASLA, AICP, LEED AP
robert.whitman@gouldevans.com
ABOUT THIS STUDY:
Kansas City area tree experts were asked to provide numerical opinions (0-5 ratings) for 378 trees in four categories (Landscape Value, Street Tree Value,
Cultural Adaptability, and Useful Lifespan). These ratings were averaged to determine the highest rated trees for each category.
PARTICIPANTS:
Michael Dougherty, Tree Management Company (913)894-8733 Kevin Smith, Forester, Johnson County Parks & Recreation (retired)
Dennis Patton, Johnson County Extension Agent Cheryl Boyer, Assistant Professor, K-State Extension
Tory Schwope, KAT Nurseries, (913)856-5288 Ivan Katzer, Consulting Arborist, (816)765-4241
Alan Branhagen, Director of Horticulture, Powell Gardens Tim McDonnell, Forester, Kansas Forest Service
Chris Casebeer, Green Valley Nursery, (913)206-6598 Scott Reiter, Linda Hall Library
Bob Haines, Arborist, Shade Masters (913)522-1810 Chip Winslow, FASLA, KSU Department of Landscape Architecture
Dan Simmons, Show-Me Horticulture,(816)277-6601 Susan Mertz, Loma Vista Nursery, (913)897-7010
Mark Young, Country Club Tree Service (816)333-7220 Robert Whitman, Landscape Architect, gouldevans
Chuck Conner, Forester, Missouri Department of Conservation
 2013 Robert Whitman | gouldevans
Study by Robert Whitman, ASLA, AICP, LEED AP
December 2013 revision
LARGE TREES FOR THE LANDSCAPE ( IN ORDER OF PREFERENCE OUT OF 218 TREES)
1. Quercus alba White Oak
2. Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
3. Acer saccharum Autumn Splendor Caddo Sugar Maple
4. Gymnocladus dioicus Expresso Kentucky Coffeetree
5. Acer x truncatum Warrenred Pacific Sunset Maple
6. Acer saccharum John Pair John Pair Caddo Maple
7. Ginkgo biloba Autumn Gold Autumn Gold Ginkgo
8. Acer saccharum Fall Fiesta Fall Fiesta Sugar Maple
9. Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
10. Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak
11. Acer miyabei Morton State Street Miyabe Maple
12. Taxodium distichum Shawnee Brave Bald Cypress
13. Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood
14. Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress
15. Acer saccharum Legacy Legacy Sugar Maple
16. Nyssa sylvatica Blackgum
17. Taxodium ascendens Pond Cypress
18. Ulmus propinqua JFS Bieberich Emerald Sunshine Elm
19. Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak
20. Quercus rubra Red Oak
21. Ginkgo b. Princeton Sentry Princeton Sentry Ginkgo
22. Acer x Keithsform Norwegian Sunset Maple
23. Tilia tomentosa Sterling Sterling Silver Linden
24. Quercus x wareii Long Regal Prince Columnar Oak
25. Tilia americana DTR 123 Legend American Linden
26. Ulmus x Frontier Frontier Elm
27. Quercus pagoda Cherrybark Oak
28. Quercus x Crimschmidt Crimson Spire Col. Oak
29. Tilia tomentosa Silver Linden
30. Quercus stellata Post Oak
31. Zelkova serrata Musashino Columnar Zelkova
32. Acer saccharum Green Mountain Green Mt. Sugar Maple
33. Carpinus betulus European Hornbeam
34. Cladrastis kentukea Yellowwood
35. Ulmus parvifolia Emerald Prairie Em. Prairie Lbk. Elm
36. Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak
37. Acer miyabei Miyabe Maple
38. Quercus prinus Chestnut Oak
39. Ulmus parvifolia Allee Allee Lacebark Elm
40. Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam
41. Magnolia x acuminata Butterflies Butterflies Magnolia
42. Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak
43. Ulmus amer. New Harmony New Harmony Amer. Elm
44. Eucommia ulmoides Hardy Rubber Tree
45. Ulmus americana Princeton Princeton American Elm
46. Ulmus americana Valley Forge Valley Forge Amer. Elm
47. Carpinus betulus Frans Fontaine Columnar Hornbeam
48. Zelkova serrata Village Green Village Green Zelkova
49. Maclura pomifera White Shield Seedless Osage Orange
50. Aesculus x carnea ONeills Red Red Horsechestnut
51. Ulmus parvifolia Athena Athena Lacebark Elm
52. Zelkova serrata Green Vase Green Vase Zelkova
53. Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
54. Tilia americana McKSentry American Sentry Linde
55. Ulmus x Morton Glossy Triumph Elm
56. Fagus sylvatica Atropunicea Purpleleaf Beech
GR E AT T R E E S FOR T H E K A N S A S C I T Y R EGION
AS RATED BY METROPOLITAN AREA EXPERTS
PAGE 1 OF 4  2013 Robert Whitman
*Please distribute freely*
LARGE STREET TREES ( IN ORDER OF PREFERENCE OUT OF 218 TREES)
1. Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
2. Tilia tomentosa Sterling Sterling Silver Linden
3. Tilia americana DTR 123 Legend American Linden
4. Acer miyabei Morton State Street Miyabe Maple
5. Taxodium d. Shawnee Brave Col. Bald Cypress
6. Ulmus prop. JFS Bieberich Emerald Sunshine Elm
7. Ulmus x Frontier Frontier Elm
8. Ginkgo biloba Autumn Gold Autumn Gold Ginkgo
9. Acer x trunc. Keithsform Norwegian Sunset Maple
10. Acer x truncatum Warrenred Pacific Sunset Maple
11. Gymnocladus dioicus Expresso Kentucky Coffeetree
12. Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak
13. Ginkgo b. Princeton Sentry Princeton Sentry Ginkgo
14. Quercus buckleyi Texas Red Oak
15. Quercus x wareii Long Regal Prince Col. Oak
16. Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak
17. Ulmus americana Princeton Princeton Amer. Elm
18. Quercus alba White Oak
19. Ulmus americana New Harmony New Harmony Elm
20. Acer saccharum Autumn Splendor Caddo Sugar Maple
21. Quercus rubra Red Oak
22. Maclura pomifera White Shield Seedls. Osage Orange
23. Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak
24. Eucommia ulmoides Hardy Rubber Tree
25. Platanus x acerifolia Bloodgood Bloodgood Planetree
26. Ulmus a. Valley Forge Valley Forge American Elm
27. Zelkova serrata Musashino Columnar Zelkova
28. Zelkova serrata Green Vase Green Vase Zelkova
29. Quercus x Crimschmidt Crimson Spire Columnar Oak
30. Ulmus parvifolia Emerald Prairie Lacebark Elm
31. Quercus texana Nuttall Oak
32. Tilia americana McKSentry American Sentry Linden
33. Ulmus parvifolia Allee Allee Lacebark Elm
34. Ulmus x Morton Glossy Triumph Elm
35. Ulmus x Patriot Patriot Elm
36. Taxodium ascendens Pond Cypress
37. Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
38. Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak
39. Gleditsia triacanthos Imperial Imperial Honeylocust
40. Ulmus parvifolia Athena Athena Lacebark Elm
41. Acer saccharum John Pair John Pair Caddo Maple
42. Gleditsia triacanthus Skyline Skyline Honeylocust
43. Zelkova serrata Village Green Village Green Zelkova
44. Acer saccharum Fall Fiesta Fall Fiesta Sugar Maple
45. Acer saccharum Legacy Legacy Sugar Maple
46. Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood
47. Quercus prinus Chestnut Oak
48. Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress
49. Ulmus x Morton Accolade Elm
50. Acer miyabei Miyabe Maple
LOWEST RATED COMMONLY USED TREES ( IN ORDER OF LEAST PREFERENCE OUT OF 371 TREES)
1. Pyrus calleryana Bradford Bradford Pear
2. Acer saccharinum Silver Maple
3. Prunus cerasifera Newport Newport Plum
4. Populus deltoides Cottonwood
5. Fraxinus Green & White Ash
6. Acer ginnala Amur Maple
7. Crataegus viridis Winter King Green Hawthorn
8. Robinia pseudoacacia Purple Robe Black Locust
9. Liquidambar styraciflua Rotundiloba Sweetgum
10. Acer rubrum Red Maple
GR E AT T R E E S FOR T H E K A N S A S C I T Y R EGION
AS RATED BY METROPOLITAN AREA EXPERTS
PAGE 2 OF 4  2013 Robert Whitman
*Please distribute freely*
MOST CULTURALLY ADAPTABLE TREES FOR KC (OUT OF 371 TREES)
1. Ulmus americana New Harmony New Harmony Elm
2. Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
3. Ulmus x Morton Glossy Triumph Elm
4. Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
5. Ulmus propinqua JFS Bieberich Emerald Sunshine Elm
6. Ulmus x Patriot Patriot Elm
7. Maclura pomifera White Shield Fruitless Osage Orange
8. Quercus x wareii Long Regal Prince Columnar Oak
9. Taxodium d. Shawnee Brave Columnar Bald Cypress
10. Plataus occidentalis Sycamore
11. Gymnocladus dioicus Expresso Kentucky Coffeetree
12. Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress
13. Ulmus x Morton Accolade Elm
14. Acer truncatum Shantung Maple
15. Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak
16. Ginkgo biloba Autumn Gold Autumn Gold Ginkgo
17. Tilia tomentosa Sterling Sterling Silver Linden
18. Ulmus x Frontier Frontier Elm
19. Acer x trunc. Keithsform Norwegian Sunset Maple
20. Acer x truncatum Warrenred Pacific Sunset Maple
21. Tilia americana DTR 123 Princeton Amer. Linden
22. Acer x freemanii Autumn Blaze Autumn Blaze Maple
23. Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak
24. Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak
25. Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
26. Ginkgo b. Princeton Sentry Princeton Sentry Ginkgo
27. Platanus x acerifolia Bloodgood Bloodgood Planetree
28. Acer x freemanii Armstrong Armstrong Col. Maple
29. Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak
30. Acer miyabei Morton State Street Miyabe Maple
31. Malus Coral Burst & Adirondack Crabapple
32. Quercus buckleyi Texas Red Oak
33. Euonymus bungeanus Winterberry Euonymus
34. Taxodium ascendens Pond Cypress
35. Malus Japanese & Professor Springer Crabapple
36. Quercus rubra Red Oak
37. Ulmus a. Valley Forge Valley Forge American Elm
38. Gleditsia triacanthos Honeylocust
39. Acer campestre Hedge Maple
40. Corylus colurna Turkish Hazel
41. Malus Donald Wyman & Mary Potter Crabapple
42. Acer saccharum A.S. Autumn Splendor Caddo Maple
LONGEST LIVED TREES ( IN ORDER OF USEFUL LIFESPAN, OUT OF 371 TREES)
1. Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
2. Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak
3. Quercus alba White Oak
4. Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
5. Quercus rubra Red Oak
6. Quercus stellata Post Oak
7. Juglans nigra Black Walnut
8. Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak
9. Taxodium dist. Bald Cypress
10. Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo
11. Ulmus americana Amer. Elm cultiv.
12. Platanus x acer. London Planetree
13. Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
14. Maclura pomifera Osage Orange
15. Quercus prinus Chestnut Oak
16. Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak
17. Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak
18. Gymnocladus dioicus K. Coffeetree
19.Metasequoia glyp. Dawn Redwood
20.Quercus palustris Pin Oak
21.Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak
22.Carya Hickory & Pecan
23.Quercus pagoda Cherrybark Oak
24.Quercus robur English Oak
25.Ulmus X Elm Hybrids
26.Acer Pac. & Nor. Sunset Maples
27.Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa
GR E AT T R E E S FOR T H E K A N S A S C I T Y R EGION
AS RATED BY METROPOLITAN AREA EXPERTS
PAGE 3 OF 4  2013 Robert Whitman
*Please distribute freely*
SMAL SMALL TREES FOR THE LANDSCAPE ( IN ORDER OF PREFERENCE OUT OF 153 TREES)
1. Acer griseum Paperbark Maple
2. Acer truncatum Shantung Maple
3. Cornus kousa Kousa Dogwood
4. Chionanthus virginicus White Fringetree
5. Aesculus pavia Red Buckeye
6. Hamemalis virginiana Witch Hazel
7. Acer palmatum Bloodgood Red-leaf Jap. Maple
8. Chionanthus retusus Chinese Fringetree
9. Cercis reniformis Oklahoma Oklahoma Redbud
10. Syringa reticulata Ivory Silk Japanese Tree Lilac
11. Acer buergerianum Trident Maple
12. Acer triflorum Three-Flowered Maple
13. Malus sargentii Sargent Crabapple
14. Malus Royal Raindrops Royal Raindrops Crab
15. Cercis canadensis Redbud
16. Cornus florida White Flowering Dogwood
17. Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay Magnolia
18. Amelanchier Autumn Brilliance Apple Serviceberry
19. Heptacodium miconiodes Seven-son Flower
20. Cornus controversa June Snow June Snow Dogwood
21. Parrotia persica Persian Parrotia
22. Magnolia x Jane Jane Magnolia
23. Malus Adirondack Adirondack Crabapple
24. Malus Velvet Pillar Columnar Crabapple
25. Cornus mas Corneliancherry Dogwood
26. Ostrya virginiana Ironwood/Hophornbeam
SMALL STREET TREES ( IN ORDER OF PREFERENCE OUT OF 153 TREES)
1. Acer truncatum Shantung Maple
2. Zelkova serrata Schmidtlow Wireless Zelkova
3. Acer buergerianum Trident Maple
4. Syringa reticulata Ivory Silk Japanese Tree Lilac
5. Malus Velvet Pillar Columnar Crabapple
6. Maakia amurensis Amur Maackia
7. Ostrya virginiana Ironwood/Hophornbeam
8. Koelreuteria paniculata Golden Raintree
9. Syringa pekinensis China Snow Chinese Tree Lilac
10. Acer griseum Paperbark Maple
11. Malus Adirondack Adirondack Crabapple
12. Acer tartaricum Tartarian Maple
13. Parrotia persica Persian Parrotia
14. Prunus padus Drietree Merlot Bird Cherry
15. Malus Royal Raindrops Royal Raindrops Crab
16. Crataegus ambigua Russian Hawthorn
PARTICIPANTS:
Michael Dougherty, Tree Management Company (913)894-8733 Kevin Smith, Forester, Johnson County Parks & Rec.reation
Dennis Patton, Johnson County Extension Agent Cheryl Boyer, Assistant Professor, K-State Extension
Tory Schwope, KAT Nurseries, (913)856-5288 Ivan Katzer, Consulting Arborist, (816)765-4241
Alan Branhagen, Director of Horticulture, Powell Gardens Tim McDonnell, Forester, Kansas Forest Service
Chris Casebeer, Green Valley Nursery, (913)206-6598 Scott Reiter, Linda Hall Library
Bob Haines, Arborist, Shade Masters (913)522-1810 Chip Winslow, FASLA, KSU Department of Landscape Architecture
Dan Simmons, Show-Me Horticulture,(816)277-6601 Susan Mertz, Loma Vista Nursery, (913)897-7010
Mark Young, Country Club Tree Service (816)333-7220 Robert Whitman, Landscape Architect, gouldevans
Chuck Conner, Forester, Missouri Department of Conservation
GR E AT T R E E S FOR T H E K A N S A S C I T Y R EGION
AS RATED BY METROPOLITAN AREA EXPERTS
PAGE 4 OF 4  2013 Robert Whitman
*Please distribute freely*
