


CHAPTER I. ADMINISTRATION

Article 1.    General Provisions

Article 2.    Governing Body

Article 3.    Officers and Employees

Article 4.    Personnel Policy and Employee Benefits

Article 5.    Oaths and Bonds

Article 6.    Open Records

Article 7.    Investment of Idle Funds

Article 8.    Policy Against Discrimination


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS


1-101. CODE DESIGNATED.

The chapters, articles and sections herein shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Tonganoxie City Code." (Code 2004)


1-102. DEFINITIONS.

In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body or the context clearly requires otherwise:

(a)    City shall mean the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

(b)    Code shall mean "The Code of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas."

(c)    Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.

(d)    County means the County of Leavenworth in the State of Kansas.

(e)    Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the head of a department or officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise.

(f)    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.

(g)    Governing Body shall be construed to mean the mayor and city council of the city, or those persons appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor or the council as provided in this code.

(h)    In the city shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

(I)    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

(j)    Month shall mean a calendar month.

(k)    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular.

(l)    Oath includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the word "swear" is equivalent to the word "affirm."

(m)    Officers, Departments, Etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

(n)    Owner applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of the whole but any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.

(o)    Person includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.

(p)    Property includes real, personal and mixed property.

(q)    Real Property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all rights thereto and interest therein, equitable as well as legal.

(r)    Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.

(s)    Sidewalk means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

(t)    Signature, subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write, when his or her name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his or her own name as a witness.

(u)    State shall be construed to mean the State of Kansas.

(v)    Street means and includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city.

(w)    Tenant or occupant applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

(x)    Tenses. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.

(y)    Writing or written may include printing, engraving, lithography and any other mode of representing words and letters, except those cases where the written signature or the mark of any person is required by law.

(z)    Year means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.

(Code 2004)


1-103. EXISTING ORDINANCES.

The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are in substance the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Code 2004)


1-104. EFFECT OF REPEAL.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive an ordinance previously repealed, nor shall such repeal affect any right which has accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred or any proceeding commenced under or by virtue of the ordinance repealed, except as shall be expressly stated therein. (Code 2004)


1-105. CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.

The catchlines of the sections of this code printed in capital letters are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted. (Code 2004)


1-106. PARENTHETICAL AND REFERENCE MATTER.

The matter in parenthesis at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the code.

Citations indicate only the source and the text may or may not be changed by this code. This code is a new enactment under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015. Reference matter not in parenthesis is for information only and is not a part of this code. (Code 2004)


1-107. AMENDMENTS; REPEAL.

Any portion of this code may be amended by specific reference to the section number as follows: "Section ______ of the code of the City of Tonganoxie is hereby amended to read as follows: (the new provisions shall then be set out in full). . ." A new section not heretofore existing in the code may be added as follows: "The code of the City of Tonganoxie is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) which reads as follows: . . . (the new provisions shall be set out in full). . ." All sections, or articles, or chapters to be repealed shall be repealed by specific reference as follows: "Section (or article or chapter) ___________ of the code of the City of Tonganoxie is hereby repealed." (Code 2004)


1-108. ORDINANCES.

The governing body shall have the care, management and control of the city and its finances, and shall pass all ordinances needed for the welfare of the city. All ordinances shall be valid when a majority of all the members-elect of the city council shall vote in favor. Where the number of favorable votes is one less than required, the mayor shall have power to cast the deciding vote in favor of the ordinance. (K.S.A. 12-3002; Code 2004)


1-109. SAME; SUBJECT AND TITLE; AMENDMENT.

No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no section or sections of an ordinance shall be amended unless the amending ordinance contains the entire section or sections as amended and the section or sections amended shall be repealed. (K.S.A. 12-3004; Code 2004)


1-110. SAME; PUBLICATION.

No ordinance, except those appropriating money, shall be in force until published in the official city newspaper by the city clerk. One publication of any such ordinance shall be sufficient unless additional publications are required by statute or ordinance. The publisher of the newspaper shall prefix such published ordinance by a line in brackets stating the month, day and year of such publication. (K.S.A. 12-3007; Code 2004)


1-111. SAME; ORDINANCE BOOK.

Following final passage and approval of each ordinance, the city clerk shall enter the same in the ordinance book of the city as provided bylaw. Each ordinance shall have appended thereto the manner in which the ordinance was passed, the date of passage, the page of the journal containing the record of the final vote on its passage, the name of the newspaper in which published and the date of publication. (K.S.A. 12-3008; Code 2004)


1-112. RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS.

Except where a state statute or city ordinance specifically requires otherwise, all resolutions and motions shall be passed if voted upon favorably by a majority of a quorum of the city council. (Code 2004)


1-113. CITY RECORDS.

The city clerk or any other officer or employee having custody of city records and documents shall maintain such records and documents in accordance with K.S.A. 12-120 to 12-121 inclusive, which is incorporated by reference herein as if set out in full and as provided in the state open records act and the city policy regarding open public records. (K.S.A. 12-120:121; Code 2004)


1-114. ALTERING CODE.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Tonganoxie to be misrepresented thereby. This restriction shall not apply to amendments or revisions of this code authorized by ordinance duly adopted by the governing body. (Code 2004)


1-115. SCOPE OF APPLICATION.

Any person convicted of doing any of the acts or things prohibited, made unlawful, or the failing to do any of the things commanded to be done, as specified and set forth in this code, shall be deemed in violation of this code and punished in accordance with section 1-116. Each day any violation of this code continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 2004)


1-116. GENERAL PENALTY.

Whenever any offense is declared by any provision of this code, absent a specific or unique punishment prescribed, the offender shall be punished in accordance with this section.

(a)    A fine of not more than $1,000; or,

(b)    Imprisonment in jail for not more than 179 days; or,

(c)    Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed (a) and (b) above.

(Code 2004)


1-117. SEVERABILITY.

If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid or unenforceable, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 2. GOVERNING BODY


1-201. GOVERNING BODY.

The governing body shall consist of a mayor and councilmembers to be elected as set out in Chapter 6 of this code. (Code 2004)


1-202. SAME; POWERS GENERALLY.

All powers exercised by cities of the third class or which shall hereafter be conferred upon them shall be exercised by the governing body, subject to such limitations as prescribed by law. All executive and administrative authority granted or limited by law shall be vested in the mayor and council as governing body of the city. (K.S.A. 12-103; Code 2004)


1-203. MEETINGS.

(a)    Regular meetings of the governing body shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. In the event the regular meeting day shall fall on any legal holiday or any day observed as a holiday by the city offices, the regularly scheduled meeting shall be set over to the following Tuesday. If the Tuesday following the regularly scheduled meeting cannot be accommodated by the required forum or for any other reason it cannot be used, the governing body shall fix a new date and time as close as possible to the scheduled day not observed as a holiday as a meeting day.

(b)    Special meetings may be called by the mayor or acting mayor, on the written request of any three members of the council, specifying the object and meetings of the council in the absence of the mayor. In the absence of both the mayor and the president of the council, the council shall meet and elect one of its members as “acting president of the council.” The president and acting president, when occupying the place of mayor, shall have the same privileges as other council members but shall exercise no veto.

(Ord. 1367, Sec. 1)


1-204. SAME; QUORUM.

In all cases, it shall require a majority of the councilmembers-elect to constitute a quorum to do business. (K.S.A. 15-106; Code 2004)


1-205. POWERS OF THE MAYOR.

The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the governing body. The mayor shall have the tie-breaking vote on all questions when the members present are equally divided. The mayor shall:

(a)    Take care that the ordinances of the city are complied with;

(b)    Sign the commissions of mayoral appointments;

(c)    Endorse the approval of the governing body on all official bonds;

(d)    From time to time communicate to the city council such information and recommend such measures as he or she may deem advisable;

(e)    Have the power to approve or veto any ordinance as the laws of the state shall prescribe;

(f)    May sign all orders and drafts drawn upon the city treasury for money.

(K.S.A. 15-301:302, 305:306, 308:309; Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Secs. 1:2)


1-206. MAYOR PRO-TEM.

The mayor shall have the discretion to designate a mayor pro-tem that will preside at all meetings of the council in the absence of the mayor. In the absence of both the mayor and the mayor pro-tem, the council shall elect one of its members as “acting mayor pro-tem.” The mayor pro-tem and acting mayor pro-tem, when occupying the place of mayor, shall retain the same privileges and responsibilities of councilmember but shall exercise no veto. 

(K.S.A. 15-301:311; Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Sec. 3)


1-207. ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS.

The governing body may designate whether the administration of a policy or the carrying out of any order shall be performed by a committee, an appointive officer, or the mayor. If no administrative authority is designated it shall be vested in the mayor.

(Code 2004)


1-208. VACANCIES IN GOVERNING BODY; HOW FILLED.

In case of a vacancy in the council occurring by reason of resignation, death or removal from office or from the city, the governing body shall appoint an elector to be council member for the balance of the unexpired term. Any member of the governing body may nominate a candidate to fill the vacancy, and the successful candidate shall be approved by a majority vote of the governing body. Such vacancy shall be filled within 60 days or such vacancy shall be filled by a special election. 

In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the mayor pro tem shall become mayor until the next regular election for that office and a vacancy shall occur in the office of the councilmember becoming mayor.  

(K.S.A. 15-201, Code 2004; Ord. 1434, Sec. 1)


1-209. COMPENSATION.

Members of the governing body shall receive as compensation such amounts as may be fixed by ordinance.

(Code 2004)


1-210. EXPENSES.

Each member of the governing body shall receive for his or her services and as reimbursement for his or her expenses, compensation as follows:

(a)    Mileage at the same rate as is established by law by the state of Kansas for state employees for each mile traveled by the shortest route upon the performance of duties assigned by the mayor and/or council.

(b)    Reimbursement for actual food and lodging expenses upon the performance of duties assigned by the mayor and/or council, provided such expenses shall be documented by proper receipts.

(Code 2004)


1-211. RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS.

The following shall constitute guidelines for the rules and order of business of the city.

Rule 1. Adjourned Meetings. Adjourned meetings of the governing body may be held at such time and place as the governing body may determine in the motion to adjourn.

Rule 2. Special Meetings. Special meetings may be held at any time upon a call signed by a majority of the governing body. The call of a special meeting shall be in substantially the following form.

REQUEST FOR SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETING

321 South Delaware, Tonganoxie, KS 66086

To the Honorable Mayor _____________________, of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, we, the undersigned, Councilmembers of the City of Tonganoxie, hereby respectfully request you to call a Special Meeting of the Governing Body, to be held at the City Hall, 321 S. Delaware, on ______________, 200___, at ______o’clock for the object and purpose of:

____________________________________________________________

____________________________________________________________

____________________________________________________________



 

	Signed:	_______________________

	 	_______________________

	 	_______________________

	 	_______________________

Rule 3. Order of Business. At the hour appointed for meeting, the governing body shall be called together by the mayor, and in his or her absence by the acting mayor. The city clerk shall call the roll and note the absentees and announce whether a quorum be present. Upon the appearance of a quorum the governing body shall proceed to business, which shall be conducted in the following order:

(1)    Reading of the minutes of the last regular meeting and intervening special meetings, which if no corrections are offered, shall stand approved;

(2)    Presentation of petitions, memorials, and remonstrances;

(3)    Presentations of claims and appropriation ordinance;

(4)    Unfinished business;

(5)    New business;

(6)    Reports of other city officers.

Rule 4. Order. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of order subject to an appeal to the council.

Rule 5. Decorum. Every member previous to his or her speaking shall address himself or herself to the chair and shall not proceed until recognized by the chair. He or she shall indulge in no personalities and confine his or her remarks to the matter under debate.

Rule 6. Point of Order. A member called to order shall immediately suspend until the point of order raised is decided by the chair.

Rule 7. Certain Motions in Writing. Every motion except to adjourn, postpone, reconsider, commit, lay on the table, or for the previous question, shall be reduced to writing if the chair or any member requires it; when made and seconded, it shall be stated by the chairperson or being written shall be read by the clerk, and may be withdrawn before decision or amendment, or any disposition thereof has been made, or a vote thereon had.

Rule 8. Resolutions. All resolutions must be in writing.

Rule 9. Motions During Debate. When a question is under debate no motion shall be entertained except:

(1)    To adjourn;

(2)    To lay on the table;

(3)    To take the previous question;

(4)    To postpone;

(5)    To amend;

which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are named, and the first three shall be decided without debate.

Rule 10. Division. Any member may call for a division of a question when the same will admit thereof.

Rule 11. Voting: Abstaining From Voting. For those questions for which a abstention is permitted, such a vote shall be counted as a vote cast with the majority of those persons present and voting.

Rule 12. Precedence of Questions. All questions shall be put in the order in which they are moved, except in case of privilege questions, and in filling blanks the longest time and the largest sum shall be first.

Rule 13. Previous Question. The previous question shall be put in these words: "Shall the main question now be put?" It shall be admitted on demand of any member and until decided shall preclude all amendments and debate of the main question.

Rule 14. Passing of Ordinances. All ordinances shall be read by sections, at which time amendments, if any, may be offered, but the reading of any section shall not preclude the offering of an amendment to any preceding one. If amendments are made the chair shall so report, and each section shall be read as amended before the vote on the passage of the ordinance is taken. After reading and amendment (if any) of the ordinance, the question shall be: "Shall the ordinance pass?" The vote on the final passage of an ordinance shall be taken by yeas and nays, which shall be entered on the journal by the clerk; and no ordinance shall be valid unless a majority of (or otherwise as required by law) the members of the council vote in favor thereof: Provided, That no ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no section or sections of an ordinance shall be amended unless the amending ordinance contains the entire section or sections as amended and the section or sections amended shall be repealed. (K.S.A. 12-3002, 12-3004)

Rule 15. Signing and Engrossing Ordinances. After an ordinance shall have passed it shall be correctly entered in the original ordinance book and the original and the book copy shall be signed by the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor by the acting mayor, and attested by the clerk, who shall secure publication of the ordinance as required by law.

Rule 16. Clerk Reads Communications. Petitions and other papers addressed to the governing body shall be read by the clerk under proper order of business upon presentation of the same to the board.

Rule 17. Robert’s Rules of Order. In all points not covered by these rules the governing body shall be governed in its procedure by Robert’s Rules of Order.

(Code 2004)


1-212. CODE OF ETHICS.

(a)    Declaration of Policy - The proper operation of our government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in the proper channels and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of those goals, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city.

(b)    Responsibilities of Public Office - Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state, and city and thus to foster respect for all government. They are bound to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the long term public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach.

(c)    Dedicated Service - All officials and employees of the city should be responsive to the political objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain those objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rule of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.

Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work.

(d)    Fair and Equal Treatment - (1) Interest in Appointments. Canvassing of members of the city council, directly or indirectly, in order to obtain preferential consideration in connection with any appointment to the municipal service shall disqualify the candidate for appointment except with reference to positions filled by appointment by the city council.

(2)    Use of Public Property - No official or employee shall request or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as city policy for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business.

(3)    Obligations to Citizens - No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen.

(e)    Conflict of Interest - No elected or appointive city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties. Personal as distinguished from financial interest includes an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or political association.

Specific conflicts of interest are enumerated below for the guidance of officials and employees:

(1)    Incompatible Employment - No elected or appointive city official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties.

(2)    Disclosure of Confidential Information - No elected or appointive city official or employee, shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the city. Nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself, herself or others.

(3)    Gifts and Favors. No elected or appointive city official or employee shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the city; nor shall any such official or employee (a) accept any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to influence him or her in the discharge of his or her duties or (b) grant in the discharge of his or her duties any improper favor, service, or thing of value. The prohibition against gifts or favors shall not apply to: (a) an occasional nonpecuniary gift, of only nominal value or (b) an award publicly presented in recognition of public service or (c) any gift which would have been offered or given to him or her if not an official or employee.

(4)    Representing Private Interest Before City Agencies or Courts - No elected or appointive city official or employee whose salary is paid in whole or in part by the city shall appear in behalf of private interest before any agency of this city. He or she shall not represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the interest of the city in any litigation to which the city is a party.

(Code 2004)


ARTICLE 3. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES


1-301. APPOINTMENT.

At the first regular meeting in May of each year the mayor, by and with the consent of the council, shall appoint a city clerk and city treasurer, and may appoint a city attorney, municipal judge, chief of police and such other officers as may be deemed necessary for the best interest of the city. Such officers shall hold their respective offices until their successors have been appointed and qualified. All such appointments shall be entered on the journal of proceedings of the governing body. The duties and salaries of all appointed officers shall be fixed by ordinance. (K.S.A. 15-204; Code 2004)


1-302. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 825; Code 2004; Ord. 1381, Sec. 1) 


1-303. REMOVAL.

(a)    A majority of all members elect of the governing body may remove any appointed officer.

(b)    For good cause, the mayor may suspend at any time any appointed officer.

(K.S.A. 15-204; Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Sec. 4)


1-304. VACANCY IN OFFICE.

Whenever a vacancy occurs in any appointive office for whatever reason, the vacancy shall be filled by the governing body. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve only until the next regular time for appointment. 

(K.S.A. 15-209; Code 2004)


1-305. CITY CLERK.

The city clerk or deputy city clerk shall:

(a)    Be custodian of all city records, books, files, papers, documents and other personal effects belonging to the city and not properly pertaining to any other office;

(b)    Carry on all official correspondence of the city;

(c)    Attend and keep a record of the proceedings of all regular and special meetings of the governing body;

(d)    Enter every appointment of office and the date thereof in the journal;

(e)    Enter or place each ordinance of the city in the ordinance books after its passage;

(f)    Publish all ordinances, except those appropriating money, and such resolutions, notices and proclamations as may be required by law or ordinance.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Sec. 5)


1-306. SAME; FISCAL RECORDS.

The city clerk or deputy city clerk shall:

(a)    Prepare and keep suitable fiscal records according to generally accepted accounting principles or Kansas law;

(b)    Assist in preparing the annual budget;

(c)    Audit all claims against the city for goods or services rendered for the consideration of the governing body. His or her accounts shall properly show the amounts paid from any fund of the city and the cash balance existing in each fund;

(d)    Keep an accurate account of all bonds issued by the city;

(e)    Keep a record of all special assessments.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Sec. 6)


1-307. SAME; SEAL; OATHS.

The city clerk or deputy city clerk shall:

(a)    Have custody of the corporate seal of the city and shall affix the same to the official copy of all ordinances, contracts, and other documents required to be authenticated;

(b)    Have power to administer oaths for all purposes pertaining to the business and affairs of the city;

(c)    Keep suitable files of all such oaths required to be deposited in his or her office.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Sec. 7)


1-308. SAME; WITHHOLDING AGENTS.

The city clerk is designated as the withholding agent of the city for the purposes of the Federal Revenue (Income) Act, and shall perform the duties required of withholding agents by said act or any other act requiring withholding from the compensation of any city officer or employee. The clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing body or the Kansas statutes. 

(Code 2004)


1-309. DEPUTY CITY CLERK.

(a)    The office of deputy city clerk is hereby established. The mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the city council, the deputy city clerk. The person so appointed and confirmed shall hold the office for a term of one year and until a successor is appointed and confirmed.

(b)    The deputy city clerk shall perform those duties assigned to that office by the city clerk.

(c)    Whenever a vacancy occurs in the position of city clerk and the city is without a person appointed, confirmed or qualified to hold that office, the deputy city clerk shall become the acting city clerk and fulfill the duties of that office.

(d)    Compensation of the deputy city clerk shall be in accordance with the annual pay plan adopted.

(Ord. 1107; Code 2004)


1-311. CITY MANAGER.

The position of city manager shall be under the direct supervision of the governing body. The city manager will be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city manager shall be appointed on the basis of qualifications, merit, fitness, and ability and shall live in Leavenworth County or an adjoining county.

(Ord. 825, Sec. 1; Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Sec. 8)


1-312. SAME; POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.

Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance of the city, the city manager shall:

(a)    Provide executive management of the departments and services of the city.

(b)    The city manager shall have the authority to appoint, promote, hire, transfer, assign, demote, discipline, lay off, suspend, discharge, and remove all heads of departments, all subordinate officers and employees of the municipality, except the municipal judge of the municipal court and the city attorney. 

(c)    Prepares and submits the annual budget to the governing body. Completely and timely advises the governing body of the financial condition of the city and provides basis for any annual audit.

(d)    Keep the governing body advised of all possible grants or other benefits and of any and all changes and improvements which the administrator feels may be of benefit to the municipality.

(e)    Assist in the preparation of all forms authorized or required by the state and federal government.

(f)    Exercise general supervision and control over all city purchases and expenditures in accordance with the budget and such policies as established by the governing body.

(g)    Recommend to the governing body a schedule of salaries for all officers and employees on a yearly basis.

(h)    Have the care and management of all city-owned land, property, buildings and equipment.

(i)    Develop and prepare, in conjunction with the council and planning commission such planning, short-range as well as long-range, as the governing body shall request and shall submit such planning to the governing body of action.

(j)    Attend all meetings of the governing body, planning commission, and such other meetings of commissions and other organizations as the governing body shall designate and shall regularly report on the status of the city and its services to the governing body.

(k)    Make such recommendations to the governing body as are deemed necessary for effective administration of all city services.

(l)    Be responsible for the proper and efficient discharge of the duties of all city administrative officers and employees.

(m)    Perform such other duties as the governing may direct. 

(Ord. 825, Secs. 2:3; Code 2004; Ord. 1329; Ord. 1381, Sec. 2; Ord. 1405, Secs. 9:10)


1-313. CITY TREASURER.

The city treasurer shall:

(a)    Keep a full and accurate record of all money received and paid out in a ledger book provided by the governing body;

(b)    Publish an annual financial statement;

(c)    Deposit all public moneys and sign all checks of the city;

(d)    Pay out city funds only upon orders or warrants properly signed by the mayor and city clerk;

(e)    Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing body or the Kansas statutes.

(K.S.A. 10-803; K.S.A. 12-1608; Code 2004)


1-314. CITY ATTORNEY; OFFICE; DUTIES.

There is hereby established the office of city attorney. No person shall be eligible for the office of city attorney who is not an attorney at law admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of the State of Kansas. The city attorney shall be charged with the general direction and supervision of the legal affairs of the city. The city attorney shall:

(a)    Attend meetings of the city council when so directed to attend by the council;

(b)    Advise the city council and all officers of the city upon such legal questions affecting the city and its offices as may be submitted to him or her;

(c)    When requested by the city council, give opinions in writing upon any such questions;

(d)    Draft such ordinances, contracts, leases, easements, conveyances and other instruments in writing as may be submitted to him or her in the regular transaction of affairs of the city;

(e)    Approve all ordinances of the city as to form and legality;

(f)    Attend planning commission and board of zoning appeals meetings when so directed by the boards;

(g)    Appear and prosecute all violations of city ordinances in municipal court when his or her services shall be required;

(h)    Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the governing body and the Kansas statutes.

(Code 2004)


1-315. ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY.

(a)    The office of assistant city attorney of the city is hereby created by the governing body of the city and the appointment of an assistant city attorney may be made by the mayor of said city, with the consent of the governing body all as provided by K.S.A. 15-204 and K.S.A. 15-209.

(b)    It may be the duty of the assistant city attorney to attend all council meetings, both regular and special; to prepare all ordinances and resolutions for the city; to advise and counsel the city and perform other usual acts necessary and relating thereto whenever the city attorney is unable to perform these duties.

(c)    The assistant city attorney may be removed from office in the same manner as heretofore prescribed by ordinance for all appointive officers.

(Ord. 633, Secs. 1:3; Code 2004)


1-316. CITY ENGINEER.

The city engineer shall be a licensed professional engineer in the State of Kansas. He or she shall be responsible for:

(a)    The design and specifications for all city streets, sewers, water lines, public buildings and other public facilities;

(b)    The inspection of all public works projects including streets, sewers, water lines and other public facilities;

(c)    The general supervision of the maintenance and repair of all public facilities.

(Code 2004)


1-317. BUILDING INSPECTOR.

(a)    The position of building inspector of the city is hereby created by the governing body of the city as a public employee. The building inspector shall be hired by the city manager and any vacancy shall be filled by the city manager’s selection. The building inspector may be removed from the position in the same manner as prescribed for any public employee.

(b)    It shall be the duty of the building inspector to administer and perform the duties of the provisions of the Flood Plain Management Code, Chapter 16, Article 3, of the city.

(c)    It shall be the duty of the building inspector to administer and perform the duties and provisions of IBC or any other standard building code adopted by the city to ensure safe structures in the city.

(Ord. 1191; Ord. 1405, Sec. 11)


1-318. APPOINTMENT OR EMPLOYMENT IN MORE THAN ONE POSITION.

The same person may be appointed to more than one appointive office, or employed in more than one department, except that the same person shall not be appointed to incompatible offices. Salaries or wages of such persons shall be prorated between the proper funds of the several offices or departments. 

(Code 2004)


1-319. CONFLICT OF INTEREST.

(a)    No city officer or employee shall be signatory upon, discuss in an official capacity, vote on any issue concerning or otherwise participate in his or her capacity as a public official or employee in the making of any contract with any person or business:

(1)    In which the officer or employee owns a legal or equitable interest exceeding $5,000 or five percent, whichever is less, individually or collectively with his or her spouse; or

(2)    From which the officer or employee receives, in the current or immediately preceding or succeeding calendar year, any salary, gratuity, other compensation or a contract for or promise or expectation of any such salary, gratuity or other compensation or remuneration having a dollar value of $1,000 or more; or

(3)    In which he or she shall hold the position of officer or director, irrespective of the amount of compensation received from or ownership held in the business.

(b)    The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following:

(1)    Contracts let after competitive bidding has been solicited by published notice; and

(2)    Contracts for property or services for which the price or rate is fixed by law.

(K.S.A. 75-4301; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 4. PERSONNEL POLICY AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS


1-401. PERSONNEL POLICIES AND GUIDELINES.

There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of establishing employee personnel rules and regulations the document entitled "Personnel Policies for the City of Tonganoxie." No fewer than three copies of said document shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as adopted by the Code of the City of Tonganoxie" and which there shall be attached a copy of this section. Said official copies shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. All departments of the city shall be supplied with copies of such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary. (Res. 4-00-1; Code 2004)


1-402. DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.

There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating and defining harassment and discrimination for the City of Tonganoxie, that certain policy known as the "Discrimination and Harassment Policy." Not less than three copies of the policy shall be filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 1090, Sec. 1)


1-403. RECRUITMENT POLICY.

There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating the recruitment of human resources the document entitled “Recruitment Policy for the City of Tonganoxie.” Not less than three copies of the policy shall be filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 1381, Sec. 3)


ARTICLE 5. OATHS AND BONDS


1-501. OATH.

All officers and employees of the city, whether elected or appointed, either under the laws of the State of Kansas or ordinances of the city, shall before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation as follows:

"I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Kansas and faithfully discharge the duties of___________ (here enter name of office or position). So help me God." (K.S.A. 75-4308; Code 2004)


1-502. OATHS FILED.

All officers and employees required to take and subscribe or sign an oath or affirmation shall be supplied the forms for the purpose at the expense of the city and upon taking and subscribing or signing any such oath or affirmation, the same shall be filed by the city clerk. (Code 2004)


1-503. BONDS REQUIRED.

(a)    The following city officers shall each, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a good and sufficient corporate surety bond to the city. The bond shall be in the following amount, to wit:

(1)    City treasurer - $10,000;

(2)    City clerk - $10,000;

(3)    Clerk of municipal court - $1,000;

(4)    Judge of municipal court - $1,000.

(b)    The governing body may provide for the coverage by blanket bond of such officers and employees and in such amounts as the governing body may, by resolution, designate.

(Code 2004)


1-504. SAME; PREMIUMS.

All premiums on surety bonds shall be paid by the city. (K.S.A. 78-111; Code 2004)


1-505. CONDITION OF BONDS.

Each of the bonds required in section 1-503 of this article shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of duty and all acts required by the laws of Kansas and of the city, and for the application and payment over to the proper persons of all moneys or property coming into the hands of each such officer by virtue of his or her office. (Code 2004)


1-506. APPROVAL OF BONDS.

All bonds given to the city shall be approved as to their form by the city attorney and as to surety and sufficiency by the governing body, unless otherwise provided by the laws of the State of Kansas. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 6. OPEN RECORDS


1-601. POLICY.

(a)    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that all public records which are made, maintained or kept by or are in the possession of the city, its officers and employees, shall be open for public inspection as provided by, and subject to the restrictions imposed by, the Kansas Open Records Act.

(b)    Any person, upon request, shall have access to such open public records for the purpose of inspecting, abstracting or copying such records while they are in the possession, custody and control of the appointed or designated record custodian thereof, or his or her designated representative.

(Code 2004)


1-602. RECORD CUSTODIANS.

(a)    All city officers and employees appointed or designated as record custodians under this article shall: protect public records from damage and disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the city; provide assistance and information upon request; insure efficient and timely action and response to all applications for inspection of public records; and shall carry out the procedures adopted by this city for inspecting and copying open public records.

(b)    The official custodian shall prominently display or distribute or otherwise make available to the public a brochure in the form prescribed by the Local Freedom of Information Officer that contains basic information about the rights of a requester, the responsibilities of a public agency, and the procedures for inspecting or obtaining a copy of public records under the Kansas Open Records Act. The official custodian shall display or distribute or otherwise make available to the public the brochure at one or more places in the administrative offices of the city where it is available to members of the public who request public information in person.

(Code 2004)


1-603. LOCAL FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICERS.

The Local Freedom of Information Officer shall:

(a)    Prepare and provide educational materials and information concerning the Kansas Open Records Act;

(b)    be available to assist the city and members of the general public to resolve disputes relating the Kansas Open Records Act;

(c)    respond to inquiries relating to the Kansas Open Records Act;

(d)    establish the requirements for the content, size, shape and other physical characteristics of a brochure required to be displayed or distributed or otherwise made available to the public under the Kansas Open Records Act. In establishing such requirements for the content of the brochure, the Local Freedom of Information Officer shall include plainly written basic information about the rights of a requester, the responsibilities of the city, and the procedures for inspecting and obtaining a copy of public records under the Act.

(Code 2004)


1-604. PUBLIC REQUEST FOR ACCESS.

All city offices keeping and maintaining open public records shall establish office hours during which any person may make a request for access to an open public record. Such hours shall be no fewer than the hours each business day the office is regularly open to the public. For any city office not open Monday through Friday, hours shall be established by the record custodian for each such day at which time any person may request access to an open public record. (Code 2004)


1-605. FACILITIES FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.

All city offices keeping and maintaining open public records shall provide suitable facilities to be used by any person desiring to inspect and/or copy an open public record. The office of the city clerk, being the principal recordkeeper of the city, shall be used as the principal office for providing access to and providing copies of open records to the maximum extent practicable. Requesters of records shall be referred to the office of the city clerk except when the requested records are not in that office and are available in another city office. (Code 2004)


1-606. PROCEDURES FOR INSPECTION.

Any person requesting access to an open public record for purposes of inspecting or copying such record, or obtaining a copy thereof, shall abide by the procedures adopted by the governing body for record inspection and copying, including those procedures established by record custodians as authorized by the governing body. Such procedures shall be posted in each city office keeping and maintaining open public records. (Code 2004)


1-607. APPOINTMENT OF OFFICIAL CUSTODIANS.

The following city officers are hereby appointed as official custodians for purposes of the Kansas Open Records Act and are hereby charged with responsibility for compliance with that Act with respect to the hereinafter listed public records:

(a)    City Clerk - All public records kept and maintained in the city clerk’s office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this section.

(b)    City Treasurer - All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the city treasurer’s office.

(c)    Chief of Police - All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the city police department.

(d)    Fire Chief - All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the city fire department.

(e)    City Attorney - All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the city attorney’s office.

(f)    Clerk of the Municipal Court - All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the municipal court.

(Code 2004)


1-608. APPOINTMENT OF LOCAL FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICER.

The city clerk is hereby appointed as the local freedom of information officer and charged with all of the duties as set forth in section 1-603. (Res. No. 06-00-01; Code 2004)


1-609. DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL RECORD CUSTODIANS.

(a)    Each of the official custodians appointed in section 1-607 is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record custodian. Such record custodians shall have such duties and powers as are set out in the Kansas Open Records Act.

(b)    Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a record custodian he or she shall notify the city clerk of such designation and the city clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations.

(Code 2004)


1-610. REQUESTS TO BE DIRECTED TO CUSTODIANS.

(a)    All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public record in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas Open Records Act, shall address their requests to the custodian charged with responsibility for the maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or copied.

(b)    Whenever any city officer or employee appointed or designated as a custodian under this article is presented with a request for access to, or copy of, a public record which record the custodian does not have in his or her possession and for which he or she has not been given responsibility to keep and maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record. Further, the person making the request shall be informed as to which custodian the request should be addressed to, if such is known by the custodian receiving the request.

(Code 2004)


1-611. FEE ADMINISTRATION.

The city clerk is hereby authorized to provide the clerk’s office, and the office of each record custodian, with sufficient cash to enable the making of change for record fee purposes. Each custodian shall transmit all record fee moneys collected to the city treasurer not less than monthly. Each custodian shall maintain duplicates of all records and copy request forms, completed as to the amount of fee charged and collected, which amounts shall be periodically audited by the clerk-finance officer and treasurer of the city. (Code 2004)


1-612. INSPECTION FEE.

(a)    Where a request has been made for inspection of any open public record which is readily available to the record custodian, there shall be no inspection fee charged to the requester.

(b)    In all cases not covered by subsection (a) of this section, a record inspection fee shall be charged at the rate of $10 per hour per employee engaged in the record search. A minimum charge of $2.50 shall be charged for each such request.

(Ord. 759, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


1-613. COPYING FEE.

(a)    A fee of $.25 per page shall be charged for photocopying public records, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials and equipment.

(b)    For copying any public records which cannot be reproduced by the city’s photocopying equipment, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the city, including staff time, in reproducing such records.

(Ord. 759, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


1-614. PREPAYMENT OF FEES.

(a)    A record custodian may demand prepayment of the fees established by this article whenever he or she believes this to be in the best interest of the city. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the inspection and/or copying charges accrued in fulfilling the record request. Any overage or underage in the prepayment shall be settled prior to inspection of the requested record or delivery of the requested copies.

(b)    Prepayment of inspection and/or copying fees shall be required whenever, in the best estimate of the record custodian, such fees are estimated to exceed $2.50.

(c)    Where prepayment has been demanded by the record custodian, no record shall be made available to the requester until such prepayment has been made.

(Ord. 759, Sec. 4; Code 2004)


1-615. PAYMENT.

All fees charged under this article shall be paid to the custodian of the records inspected and/or copied unless the requester has established an account, for purposes of billing and payment, with the city. All fees received shall be paid to the city treasurer whenever the amount of fees collected total $20, but not less than monthly. (Ord. 759, Sec. 5; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 7. INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS


1-701. PURPOSE AND GOALS.

It is the purpose of this statement to set forth the public policies of the city relating to the investment of public moneys, and establish procedural requirements as to investment management practice. The objective of the investment policy and program of the city shall be as follows:

(a)    The safeguarding of all public moneys shall be of the highest priority. Public money shall not be invested or managed in any matter which would jeopardize the safety of the principal.

(b)    Consistent with the requirement of safety, the objective of the investment program shall be to aggressively manage and invest all public moneys to maximize net earnings, consistent with the public responsibility to secure maximum, safe investment return possible from moneys assigned to its stewardship, to relieve demands on the property tax and to otherwise reduce the cost of public services.

(Code 2004)


1-702. INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS.

Temporarily idle moneys of the city not currently needed, may in accordance with the procedure hereafter described be invested:

(a)    In temporary notes or no-fund warrants issued by such investing governmental unit;

(b)    In time deposit, open accounts or certificates of deposit with maturities of not more than two years:

(1)    In commercial banks which have offices located in such investing governmental unit; or

(2)    If the office of no commercial bank is located in such investing governmental unit, then in commercial banks which have offices in the county or counties in which all or part of such investing governmental unit is located;

(c)    In time certificates of deposit with maturities of not more than two years:    (1)    With state or federally chartered savings and loan associations or federally chartered savings banks which have offices located in such investing governmental unit; or

(2)    If the office of no state or federally chartered savings and loan association or federally chartered savings bank is located in such governmental unit, then with state or federally chartered savings and loan associations or federally chartered savings banks which have offices in the county or counties in which all or part of such investing governmental unit is located;

(d)    In repurchase agreements with:

(1)    Commercial banks, state or federally chartered savings and loan associations or federally chartered savings banks which have offices located in such investing governmental unit, for direct obligations of, or obligations that are insured as to principal and interest by, the United States government or any agency thereof; or

(2)(A) If the office of no commercial bank, state or federally chartered savings and loan association or federally chartered savings bank is located in such investing governmental unit; or

(B)    If no commercial bank, state or federally chartered savings and loan association or federally chartered savings bank has an office located in such investing governmental unit is willing to enter into such an agreement with the investing governmental unit at an interest rate equal to or greater than the investment rate, as defined in subsection (I) of K.S.A. 75-4201, and amendments thereto, then such repurchase agreements may be entered into with commercial banks, state or federally chartered savings and loan associations or federally chartered savings banks which have offices in the county or counties in which all or part of such investing governmental unit is located; or

(3)    If no bank, state or federally chartered savings and loan association or federally chartered savings bank which has its office in such county or counties is willing to enter into such an agreement with the investing governmental unit at an interest rate equal to or greater than the investment rate, as defined in subsection (I) of K.S.A. 75-4201, and amendments thereto, then such repurchase agreements may be entered into with commercial banks, state or federally chartered savings and loan associations or federally chartered savings banks which have offices in the State of Kansas;

(e)    In United States treasury bills or notes with maturities as the governing body shall determine, but not exceeding two years. Such investment transactions shall only be conducted with the following, which is doing business within the State of Kansas, any state or national bank, state or federally chartered savings and loan association, or federally chartered savings bank; or with primary government securities dealers which report to the market report division of the federal reserve bank of New York, or any broker-dealer which is registered in compliance with the requirements of section 1 SC of the securities exchange act of 1934 and registered pursuant to K.S.A. 17-1 254, and amendments thereto;

(f)    The municipal investment pool fund;

(g)    The investments authorized and in accordance with the conditions prescribed in Section 2 of the municipal investment pool fund act;

(h)    The trust departments of commercial banks which have offices located in such investing governmental unit or with trust companies which have contracted to provide trust services under the provisions of K.S.A. 9-2107, and amendments thereto, with commercial banks which have offices located in the county or counties in which such investing governmental unit is located. Public moneys invested under this paragraph shall be secured in the same manner as provided for under K.S.A. 9-1402, and amendments thereto. Investments of public moneys under this paragraph shall be limited to those investments authorized under subsection (b) of section 1 of the municipal investment pool fund act.

(I)    The investments authorized in paragraphs (e), (f), (g) or (h) of this section shall be utilized only if the appropriate eligible commercial banks, which have offices located in the investing governmental unit or in the county or counties in which all or a part of such investing governmental unit is located if no such bank has an office which is located within such governmental unit, or the appropriate eligible state or federally chartered savings and loan associations or federally chartered savings banks, which have offices located in the investing governmental unit or in the county or counties in which all or a part of such investing governmental unit is located if no such state or federally chartered savings and loan association or federally chartered savings bank has an office which is located within such governmental unit, cannot or will not make the investments authorized in paragraphs (b) or (c) of this section available to the investing governmental unit at interest rates equal to or greater than the investment rate, as defined in subsection (I) of K.S.A. 75-4201, and amendments thereto.

(K.S.A. 12-1675, as amended; Code 2004)


1-703. PROCEDURES AND RESTRICTIONS.

The city clerk shall periodically report to the governing body as to the amount of money available for investment and the period of time such amounts will be available for investment, and shall submit such recommendations as deemed necessary for the efficient and safe management of city finances. The recommendations of the city clerk shall provide for an investment program which shall so limit the amounts invested and shall schedule the maturities of investments so that the city will, at all times, have sufficient moneys available on demand deposit to assure prompt payment of all city obligations. (Code


1-704. CUSTODY AND SAFEKEEPING.

Purchased pursuant to this article shall be under the care of the city administrator, city clerk and mayor and shall be held in the custody of a state or national bank or trust company, or shall be kept by such officers in a safety deposit box of the city in a bank or trust company. Securities in the original or receipt form held in the custody of a bank or trust company shall be held in the name of the city, and their redemption, transfer, or withdrawal shall be permitted only upon the written instruction of the city officers. Securities not held in the custody of a bank or trust company shall be personally deposited by such officer in a safety deposit box in the name of the city in a bank or trust company, access to which shall be permitted only in the personal presence and under the signature of two of the abovementioned officers. (Code 2004)


1-705. SALE OR TRANSFER.

If, in order to maintain sufficient moneys on demand deposit in any fund as provided in section 1-703, it becomes necessary to transfer or sell any securities of such funds, the officers specified in section 1-704 may transfer said securities to any other fund or funds in which there are temporarily idle moneys, or shall sell such securities, and for such purpose they shall have authority to make any necessary written direction, endorsement or assignment for and on behalf of the city. (Code 2004)


1-706. INTEREST ON TIME DEPOSITS.

The city clerk shall deposit the interest earned on invested idle funds to the general fund, unless otherwise required or authorized by law. (Code 2004)

Ref See K.S.A. 12-1 677, and amendments thereto.


ARTICLE 8. POLICY AGAINST DISCRIMINATION


1-801. ORDINANCE AGAINST DISCRIMINATION; INCORPORATED.

There is hereby incorporated by reference the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, Ordinance Against Discrimination within the corporation limits of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, said Ordinance being known as "The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, Ordinance Against Discrimination," based upon the Kansas Act Against Discrimination and the Kansas Age in Employment Act, as amended, prepared and published in book form by the Commission on Civil Rights, State of Kansas, save and except articles, sections, parts and portions as are omitted, deleted, modified or changed, such incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009 through 12- 3012, including any amendments thereto, and K.S.A. 12-3301 and 12-3302. Not less than three copies of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, Ordinance Against Discrimination shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Incorporated by reference by Ordinance No. 875 of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas" and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours.

All administrative departments of the city charged with enforcement of ordinances shall be supplied, at the cost of the city, such number of official copies of said "City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, Ordinance Against Discrimination" similarly marked, as may be deemed expedient. (Ord. 875, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


CHAPTER II. ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION

Article 1.    General Provisions

Article 2.    Authority to Enforce

Article 3.    Duty of Police

Article 4.    Care of Animals

Article 5.    Good Neighbor Provisions

Article 6.    Abuse to Animals Forbidden

Article 7.    Keeping of Pet Animals Other Than Dogs and Cats

Article 8.    Keeping of Livestock and Certain Other Animals

Article 9.    Keeping of Small Animals and Poultry/Fowl

Article 10.    Dog and Cat Identification

Article 11.    Disposition of Impounded Animals

Article 12.    Animal Bites and Disease Control

Article 13.    Implied Consent to Entry Upon Private Property for Enforcement

Article 14.    Deleted and Reserved by Ord 1317

Article 15.    Penalties

Article 16.    Severability of Chapter

(Ord. 1317)


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS


2-101. DEFINITIONS.

Whenever the following terms are used, each shall have the meaning respectively ascribed in this section:

(a)    Adequate Care. Normal and prudent attention to the needs of an animal, including that care which is normally necessary to maintain good health in a specific species of animal.

(b)    Adequate Control. That control necessary to restrain or govern an animal so that the animal does not injure or pose a threat to itself, any person, any other animal or property.

(c)    Adequate Food. Wholesome foodstuffs suitable for the species provided at suitable intervals in a sanitary manner in quantities sufficient to maintain good health in an animal considering its age and condition.

(d)    Adequate Health Care. The provision to each healthy animal of all immunizations and preventive care required to maintain good health; space adequate to allow the animal rest and exercise sufficient to maintain good health, and, the provision to each sick, diseased or injured animal of necessary veterinary care or humane death.

(e)    Adequate Shelter. A structurally sound, properly ventilated, sanitary and weatherproof shelter suitable for the species, condition and age of the animal which provides access to shade from direct sunlight and regress from exposure to inclement weather conditions.

(f)    Adequate Water. A constant access to or access at suitable intervals to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water provided in a sanitary manner suitable for the species, condition and age of the animal in sufficient amounts to maintain good health in the animal.

(g)    Animal. Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, other than a human.

(h)    Animal Shelter. The facility or facilities operated by the permit authority or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article or state law.

(i)    Cat. The term cat shall apply to any domestic feline animal (Felis domesticus) male, female, sexed or neutered.

(j)    Commercial Animal Establishment. Any petshop, grooming shop, animal exhibit, rodeo, auction, riding school, stable, carriage horse service, cattery, kennel, patrol, sentry or guard dog service, animal trainer, business keeping animals in stock for retail or wholesale trade, or any establishment performing one or more of the principal activities of the aforementioned establishments.

(k)    Dog. The term dog shall apply to any domestic kant animal (Canis familiaris) male or female, sexed or neutered. Any cross or hybrid, which is part dog and part wild animal, shall be considered a wild animal for the purposes of this chapter.

(l)    Farm Animal. An animal raised on a farm or ranch and used or intended for use in farm or ranch production, or as food or fiber.

(m)    Fowl. Any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural.

(n)    Harbor. To feed or shelter an animal at the same location for three or more consecutive days.

(o)    Humane Killing. The destruction of an animal accomplished by a method approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association Committee on Euthanasia.

(p)    Large Animal. Any swine, bovine, goat, sheep, beast of burden or any other domestic or wild animal of similar or larger size.

(q)    Owner. In addition to its ordinary meaning, also means any person who keeps or harbors any animal or professes to be owning, keeping, or harboring any animal.

(r)    Permit Authority. The city clerk or duly designated, by the City of Tonganoxie, animal enforcement officer or the City of Tonganoxie Police Chief.

(s)    Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate or other legal entity.

(t)    Pests. Birds, rabbits or rodents, which damage property or have an adverse effect on the public health.

(u)    Primary Enclosure. Any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage, compartment, pool, hutch or shipping container.

(v)    Private Animal Shelter. Any facility which is used to house or contain dogs or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated or maintained by an incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or other non-profit organizations as well as for-profit organizations devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of such animals.

(w)    Sanitary. Clean and free from infectious or deleterious influences.

(x)    Small Animal. Any animal not within the definition of large animal, but including all dogs without reference to size.

(y)    Wild Animal. Any animal, which is predominately free roaming as opposed to domesticated.

(z)    Veterinarian. A person licensed by the state to engage in the practice of veterinary medicine.

(aa)    Veterinary Medical Care Facility. A facility, which has the primary function of providing medical care for animals and is operated by a currently licensed veterinarian.

(Ord. 892, Art. 1)


ARTICLE 2. AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE


2-201. ENFORCEMENT.

Except where otherwise provided, it shall be the duty of director of the permit authority with the assistance of staff to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 892, Art. 2, Sec. 1)


2-202. OBSTRUCTING PERMIT AUTHORITY.

No person shall willfully obstruct any animal control officer engaged in the performance of official duties from performing such official duties. (Ord. 892, Art. 2, Sec. 2)


ARTICLE 3. DUTY OF POLICE


2-301. ENFORCEMENT.

It shall be the duty of the police to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to assist the director of the permit authority and staff with their enforcement efforts. (Ord. 892, Art. 3, Sec. 1)


ARTICLE 4. CARE OF ANIMALS


2-401. VIOLATIONS.

It shall be a violation for any person owning, keeping, harboring or otherwise in possession or control of any animal to fail to provide any or all of the following to the animal.

(a)    Adequate Care.

(b)    Adequate Control.

(c)    Adequate Food.

(d)    Adequate Health Care.

(e)    Adequate Shelter.

(f)    Adequate Water.

(Ord. 892, Art. 4, Sec. 1)


2-402. CARE.

The parent, guardian or other person having custody of a minor child is responsible for the adequate care of any animal owned by, in the control of or harbored by that minor child. (Ord. 892, Art. 4, Sec. 2)


ARTICLE 5. GOOD NEIGHBOR PROVISIONS


2-501. DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE; PROHIBITED.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat to permit, suffer or allow said dog or cat to run at large within the city. For the purpose of this section, any dog or cat shall be deemed to have been permitted, suffered or allowed by its owner, keeper or harborer to run at large when found outside of the residence structure of the owner, keeper or harborer and not effectively physically restrained on a chain or leash or behind a suitable fence or other proper method of physical restraint from which it cannot escape.

(b)    A legally blind person using a "seeing eye dog" or a deaf person using a "hearing dog" in the customary manner shall be deemed to be in compliance with subsection (a).

(c)    Official use of dogs by any governmental unit shall be deemed in compliance with subsection (a).

(Ord. 892, Art. 5, Sec. 1)


2-502. DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT.

The owner, keeper or person harboring any female dog or cat shall, during the period that such animal is "in heat" (estrus), keep it securely confined and enclosed within a building except when out upon such person’s premises briefly for toilet purposes while on a leash or otherwise effectively physically restrained and under supervision. (Ord. 892, Art. 5, Sec. 2)


2-503. DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS PUTTING PERSONS IN FEAR.

No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or other animal, which by jumping upon or threatening persons upon public streets and sidewalks shall cause persons to be put in fear of injury. This section shall apply to animals while being walked on leashes and the unprovoked attack by an animal on a leash upon any person shall constitute an assault or battery by the person holding the leash and failing to prevent an unprovoked attack by such animal. (Ord. 892, Art. 5, Sec. 3)


2-504. EXCESSIVE ANIMAL NOISE.

No person shall own or keep any animal, which by making excessive noise disturbs a neighborhood. The following definitions and conditions shall be specially applicable to enforcement of the aforesaid prohibitions.

(a)    Excessive Noise shall mean and include any noise produced by an animal, which is so loud, and continuous or untimely as to disturb a neighbor.

(b)    Neighbor shall mean an individual residing in a residence structure which is within 100 yards of the property on which the animal is kept or harbored and who does in writing state that she/he will testify under oath to said animal making excessive noise.

(c)    If a General Ordinance Summons is issued charging violation of this section, a subpoena shall also be issued to the neighbor so disturbed to testify in the matter. (Ord. 892, Art. 5, Sec. 4)


2-505. LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.

(a)    After June 1, 2011, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person in charge of a residence to keep or be allowed to keep two dogs and cats, or any combination of such animals exceeding four in number, over the age of 90 days at such residence unless the residence or all of the dogs and cats kept there are within one or more of the following exceptions:

(1)    The property is zoned for a commercial animal establishment.

(2)    All of the dogs and cats over 90 days of age kept at the residence are licensed as required under this chapter and the person in charge of the residence upon request of any animal control officer or police officer presents for inspection certificates of registry for all such animals showing continuous licensure for all such animals from date, onward to and including present licensure.

(3)    The individual in charge of the residence has a current private breeder permit in the form of a special use permit, in which case the number of animals shall not exceed 25 over the age of 90 days and 25 under the age of 90 days.

(b)    When animals in excess of the limit established in the preceding subsection are found at a residence, all of the animals found at the residence may be removed by the permit authority to be handled as if stray animals except that the person in charge of the residence, if present, may designate and retain up to four licensed animals.

(c)    By keeping any dog or cat in the city the keeper consents to the limit in subsection (a) of this section and to removal as in subsection (b) of this section.

(Ord. 1317)


2-506. DANGEROUS DOGS.

(a)    Confinement. Other than when using a dog as a guard dog or for law enforcement, no other person shall own, keep, harbor or allow to be upon any premises occupied by him or her or under his or her charge or control any dog of a cross, dangerous or ferocious disposition, which shall include, but not be limited to, any dog which has, without provocation, bitten any human within the prior 12 months, without such dog being confined behind a fence from which it cannot escape and being securely chained in such a manner that the animal cannot range within closer than three feet to the property line of the owner, keeper or harborer.

(b)    Placarding Premises. When any dog is required by this section to be confined it shall also be required that a conspicuous notice be posted at the place of confinement of such a nature as to warn the public of the nature of the dog therein confined. The notice shall consist of a sign that is at least 12" in width and 12" in length. Said sign shall have lettering which is clearly legible and at least 3" high. The sign shall be constructed of durable material and firmly affixed or anchored to the place of confinement.

(c)    Guard Dogs. Any guard dog (for purposes of this chapter herein defined as a dog not owned by a governmental unit which dog is used to guard public or private property) used in the city by virtue of such use is hereby declared to be subject to the license requirements of this chapter; must be vaccinated against rabies, distemper, hepatitis, Ieptospirosis and parvo virus by a licensed veterinarian, whose signed certificate of such will be furnished to the permit authority before such dog is put in service; must be controlled by its keeper and must not be used in a manner which, as determined by the director of the permit authority, endangers individuals not on the premises guarded. Any person operating a guard dog service in the city shall have a special use permit and shall register such business with the permit authority and shall list all premises to be guarded with the permit authority before such service begins.

(d)    Violation - Disposition of Dog. Upon conviction of failure to comply with any provision of this section, in addition to the usual judgment of conviction, if it shall appear to the municipal judge that such dog is still living, he/she may order that said dog be humanely killed and direct the permit authority to enforce that order and the police shall assist as may be requested by the permit authority.

(Ord. 892, Art. 5, Sec. 6; Ord. 1317)


2-507. ANIMALS IN GOVERNMENTAL BUILDINGS.

No person except for a blind or deaf person using a trained dog for guidance or a police officer using a dog trained for police work, shall bring any animal into a governmental building except the animal shelter without a specific governmental invitation to bring such animal into such building. Although nothing in this article shall prevent a disabled individual who uses an animal for assistance to bring the animal into any public building. (Ord. 892, Art. 5, Sec. 7)


2-508. ANIMALS IN PARKS.

No animal except a dog or cat properly leashed shall be brought into any municipally owned park except when specifically provided by the park superintendent. Nothing in this article shall prevent an individual who is disabled and relies on an animal for assistance to bring the animal so trained to aid the individual into any municipally owned park. (Ord. 1317; Ord. 1409, Sec. 1)


2-509. RESERVED.

(Ord. 892, Art. 5, Sec. 9; Ord. 1366; Ord. 1409, Sec. 2)


ARTICLE 6. ABUSE TO ANIMALS FORBIDDEN


2-601. INJURY PROHIBITED.

No person shall beat, ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or cause injury or unnecessary pain to any animal. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 1)


2-602. ATTENDANCE AT ANIMAL FIGHTS PROHIBITED.

No person shall attend or solicit attendance at or be an umpire, judge, or other official at a fight staged between any animal and another animal or human. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 3)


2-603. BUSINESS INDUCEMENT GIFTS PROHIBITED.

No person shall offer to give or give a live animal as a prize or as a business inducement or as any other form of gratuity. The offering of live animals as business inducements shall be regulated at the permitting authority’s discretion. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 4)


2-604. MINIMUM SALE OF FOWL/POULTRY REQUIREMENT.

Chickens, ducks, birds and other poultry younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold or offered for sale in quantities of less than 25 birds to an individual purchaser. Vendors of such poultry shall provide and operate breeders or other heating devices as may be necessary to maintain the poultry in good health, and shall keep adequate food and water available to the poultry. Poultry shall not be dyed or colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 5)


2-605. TETHERED ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.

No person shall leave any pet animal or livestock unattended while tethered to any utility pole, parking meter, building, structure, fence, sign, tree, shrub, bench or other object on public property or on private property without the prior permission of the person or agency in charge thereof, nor shall a pet animal be tethered in such a manner as to permit it to intrude upon a public sidewalk or street. No person shall leave any animal unattended on a balcony. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 6)


2-605 (a) TETHERED ANIMALS TO STATIONARY OBJECTS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to tie or tether a dog or other animal to a stationary object for a period of time or in a location so as to create an unhealthy situation for the animal or a potentially dangerous situation for a pedestrian as determined by the Animal Control Officer. (Ord. 1317)


2-606. DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED, EXCEPTIONS.

Except as necessary for (1) human safety; (2) relocation of nuisance animals through the use of box traps; (3) destruction of rats, mice and other pests; (4) veterinary medical practice; (5) termination of suffering; and (6) performance of official duties by public employees, it shall be unlawful to (1) deliberately injure or kill; (2) capture or trap; (3) expose a poisonous substance for; or (4) poison any animal, and further, it shall be an unlawful act to attempt any of the aforesaid unlawful acts. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 7)


2-607. RESCUE FROM VEHICLES.

Whenever any animal is found confined in a motor vehicle in a public place under weather conditions that endanger its life as determined by the director of permit authority the director of permit authority is hereby authorized, with assistance from the police which is hereby authorized, to enter such vehicle to rescue such animal and impound it in accordance with section 2-607. A prominent written notice shall be left on or in the vehicle advising that the animal has been removed under the authority of this section and impounded in accordance with 2-607 at the permit authority’s animal shelter. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 8)


2-608. ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.

It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to abandon any animal. For the purpose of this section, to abandon means for the owner or keeper to leave an animal, without demonstrated or apparent intent to recover or resume custody or to leave an animal for more than 12 hours without providing for adequate food, water and shelter for the duration of the absence. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 9)


2-609. CARELESS TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.

No person shall carry any animal or cause any animal to be carried in or upon any vehicle in a dangerous or careless manner. For the purpose of this section, dangerous or careless shall include but not be limited to the practice of carrying dogs and other animals loose in the open bed of trucks, on top of truck cabs, hanging out of vehicle windows or roped or chained in such manner that the animal can fall or jump from the vehicle and be hung or dragged. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 10)


2-610. ARTIFICIAL STIMULATION PROHIBITED.

No person shall induce or encourage any animal in an animal exhibition, rodeo or circus to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. (Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 11)


2-611. PLACE OF SALE LIMITATIONS.

No person shall display for sale, offer for sale, exchange, barter or give away any animal except in the following places:

(a)    A commercial animal establishment, having a valid permit under this chapter.

(b)    A private kennel or cattery registered under this chapter.

(c)    A private residence.

(d)    A shelter.

(Ord. 892, Art. 6, Sec. 12)


ARTICLE 7. THE KEEPING OF PET ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS


2-701. DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

The keeping and harboring of dangerous animals other than dogs within the city is hereby prohibited. Other than as to dogs which are regulated by Article 5, the director of the permit authority shall have the authority to declare an animal dangerous because of past behavior, violations or the inherently dangerous nature of the animal, as to humans. Such a declaration shall be grounds for the impoundment and destruction of the animal unless, without danger to the public, it can be and is removed from the city within 48 hours. (Ord. 892, Art. 7, Sec. 1)


2-702. SPECIES LIMITATION OF HOUSE PETS.

Within any residential area (for the purpose of this section defined as any area not zoned for commercial, agricultural or industrial purposes) the keeping or harboring of any poisonous or venomous animal or any warm blooded carnivorous or omnivorous animal including but not limited to nonhuman primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes, leopards, panthers, tigers and lions, but excluding fowl, dogs, house cats and small rodents of varieties commonly kept as household pets, such as rats, mice, gerbils, guinea pigs and hamsters is hereby prohibited. Nonpoisonous snakes shall be kept in locked, escape-proof cages except when being handled. No snake shall be permitted by the owner, keeper or handler to escape from a cage or while being handled. (Ord. 892, Art. 7, Sec. 2)


ARTICLE 8. THE KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK AND CERTAIN OTHER ANIMALS


2-801. PASTURING LIVESTOCK.

No livestock (as used herein livestock includes, but is not limited to the following animals: horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, and other farm animals or wild animals) which are not otherwise prohibited, shall be kept, maintained, pastured or fed within 200 feet of the nearest portion of any building in any way used by human beings, other than the dwelling occupied by the owner or keeper of any of such animals. Beyond this limitation of 200 feet, not more than two of the aforesaid animals shall be kept, provided that the limitation of two horses shall not apply to any commercial animal establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter, nor shall the limitation of two such animals apply to any commercial stockyard or land zoned for agricultural use. Stables, coops, pens or other structures for the housing of any of the aforementioned animals shall comply with all zoning restrictions. The pasturing of livestock shall be permitted in any area properly zoned for this purpose. (Ord. 892, Art. 8, Sec. 1)


2-802. RESTRAINT OF LIVESTOCK, ETC.

Livestock and other animals covered by section 2-801 preceding shall not be allowed to run at large and when legally kept must be restrained in a manner and by such means as will prevent such animals from escaping, straying or running at large. Gates used to restrain livestock shall be kept closed with a chain and padlock to minimize vandalism. (Ord. 892, Art. 8, Sec. 2)


2-803. SANITATION.

All manure accumulations in the area where livestock and other animals are kept shall be removed, stored or disposed of in such a manner as to prevent attracting flies or the spread of disease. (Ord. 892, Art. 8, Sec. 3)


2-804. COMPLIANCE WITH LAW IN KEEPING WILD ANIMALS.

Wild animals not prohibited from being kept as pets must be kept in compliance with the statutes, regulations and treaties of the State of Kansas and the Federal Government. (Ord. 892, Art. 8, Sec. 4)


ARTICLE 9. THE KEEPING OF SMALL ANIMALS AND POULTRY/FOWL


2-901. LOCATION AND RESTRAINT REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any chicken coop, dove cote, rabbit hutch or other yard establishment for the housing of poultry/fowl or small animals, except dogs and cats, closer than 75 feet to the nearest portion of any building occupied by or in any way used by human beings, other than the dwelling occupied by the owner or keeper of the animals or poultry/fowl, or closer than 25 feet to the property line of the lot on which such poultry/fowl or animals are kept for sale within a bona fide produce market, commission house or store for purposes of trade and while so kept are humanely confined in small coops, boxes or cages, or where such animals or poultry/fowl are kept for purposes of research in a laboratory. Animals and poultry/fowl so kept or maintained shall be enclosed on all sides and shall not be allowed to run or fly at large except for homing pigeons. (Ord. 892, Art. 9, Sec. 1)


2-902. ODORS.

Every coop, dove cote, rabbit hutch or other yard establishment shall be kept so that no offensive, disagreeable or noxious smell or odor shall arise therefrom to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of any inhabitants of the neighborhood. (Ord. 892, Art. 9, Sec. 2)


2-903. DISPOSAL OF MANURE.

Every coop, dove cote, rabbit hutch or other yard establishment shall be provided with a watertight and fly tight receptacle for manure, of such dimension as to contain all accumulations thereof, which receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent its becoming a nuisance. Such receptacle shall be securely covered at all times, except when open during deposit or removal of manure or refuse therefrom. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate except in the receptacle. All such manure, when removed from the receptacle, shall be buried within covering of not less than six inches of earth, or if used as fertilizer, thoroughly spaded into the ground, or shall be removed from the property. (Ord. 892, Art. 9, Sec. 3)


2-904. POULTRY/FOWL, MAINTENANCE OF ENCLOSURES.

All earthen yards or runways wherein poultry/fowl are kept or permitted to be kept shall be spaded and then lined once every three months from the month of April through the month of December. For the purpose of killing flies and other insects, all structures, pens or coops wherein poultry/fowl are kept or permitted to be kept shall be sprayed with such substances as will eliminate such insects. (Ord. 892, Art. 9, Sec. 4)


2-905. CONDITION OF ENCLOSURE.

Any structure, pen, coop or yard wherein animals are kept or permitted to be kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of all rodents and vermin, and free from objectionable odors. The enclosed area of all such structures shall be constructed in such a way as to be dry at all times on the inside. The person maintaining any aforementioned structure, pen, coop or yard in the city does by such act of maintenance authorize the permit authority to at any time inspect any such structure or premises and issue any such order as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. (Ord. 892, Art. 9, Sec. 5)


2-906. NUMBER OF ANIMALS, POULTRY/FOWL.

Except where poultry/fowl, rabbits or other small animals are kept for sale within a bona fide, produce market, commission house or store for the purpose of trade and while so kept are humanely confined in small coops, boxes or cages; or where such animals or poultry/fowl are kept for purposes of research in a laboratory; or in areas zoned for agricultural use; it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, within 75 feet of the nearest portion of any dwelling or other building occupied by or in any way used by human beings except for a dwelling occupied by the owner or keeper of such animals, more than 15 chickens or other domestic poultry/fowl four months or more of age or 50 chicks or other domestic poultry/fowl under four months or more of age, or more than 10 rabbits, or other small animals over the age of four months, or more than 25 rabbits or other small animals under the age of four months. No rooster which crows shall be kept within 300 feet of any residence or dwelling except that of the owner or keeper. (Ord. 892, Art. 9, Sec. 6)


ARTICLE 10. DOG AND CAT IDENTIFICATION


2-1001. IMPOUNDMENT AND VIOLATION NOTICE.

(a)    Any animal at large in violation of this chapter may be taken by the police or permit authority and impounded in the animal shelter or at a designated holding place and be there confined in a humane manner pending further action pursuant to this chapter or other law. If an owner or keeper is present and able to take control of such animal, in lieu of impoundment a General Ordinance Summons may be issued to that person and the person may retain possession of the animal if it is the belief of the officer issuing such summons that such possession is not in conflict with any other provisions of this chapter.

(b)    Whenever any animal is confined by authority of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the permit authority to release the same upon satisfactory proof that the party claiming the animal is entitled to possession thereof and upon payment to the permit authority of all applicable fees required by this chapter.

(c)    A record of all dogs impounded shall be kept by the city containing the following information: color, sex, weight, height, identifying marks, registration number (if any) and the date of impoundment.

(Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


2-1002. NOTIFICATION OF CAPTURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.

After the impoundment of any animal where a General Ordinance Summons has not been issued to the owner or keeper the permit authority shall promptly notify the owner of such animal of its impoundment if the owner can be determined and located by reasonable investigation; however, no liability shall attach to the city or to the permit authority or staff for failure to give such notice. The owner of an impounded animal who does not redeem his or her animal shall still be proceeded against for violation of any applicable provision(s) of this or any other applicable ordinance. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 2)


2-1003. LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DOGS AND CATS.

It shall be the duty of every person owning, keeping or harboring in the city any dog or cat which is over 90 days old or which is no longer with its dam to procure a license therefore from the permit authority or designee. The receipt issued for the license shall constitute a certificate of registry and evidence of Licensure for the keeping of such dog or cat within the city. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 3)


2-1004. NONRESIDENTS.

Any other section of this chapter notwithstanding, the licensing provision of this article shall not apply to any nonresident owner or keeper of a dog or cat while such nonresident is passing through the city, provided such dog or cat shall remain on a leash or otherwise effectively physically restrained as in a closed vehicle. Dogs and cats of nonresidents need not be licensed during dog or cat shows or exhibitions. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 4)


2-1005. LICENSE FEE, EXCEPTION.

For the issuance of each dog and cat license required by this chapter, the owner or keeper shall pay to the city such license fee in the amount of $15 or as is provided for in this chapter, except that when any such owner, keeper, or other applicant for such license shall submit such proof as may be required by the permit authority that a dog is fully trained, as a "seeing eye dog" or "hearing dog" and is regularly used in the service of a blind or deaf person or that a dog is owned by a governmental unit or other companion animals of disabled individuals, then such license shall be issued without the payment of such fee. If a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian attesting that a dog or cat has been sterilized is submitted to the permit authority, a reduced fee shall be paid in the amount of $10 or as provided for in this chapter. Any animal that is tagged after December 31 of a given year shall receive the partial year license to expire April 30th for half of the regular price or $7 and $5 if sterilized. (Ord. 1317)


2-1006. LICENSING PERIOD.

The licensure evidenced by the certificate of registry shall entitle an owner or keeper to keep the licensed dog or cat in the city until the 30th day of April next following the date of issuance of the dog and cat license and certificate. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 6)


2-1007. CERTIFICATE OF IMMUNIZATION — LICENSURE PREREQUISITE.

Before the permit authority issues any license or tag for a dog or cat, the owner or keeper thereof shall file with the permit authority a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that within 365 days next preceding the issuance of such license, the dog was immunized against rabies, distemper, hepatitis, leptospirosis, parvo virus and that cat was immunized against rabies, distemper, pneumonitis and rhino tracheitis. The owner will also submit a signed certificate from a licensed veterinarian to the permit authority as to whether or not a dog or cat has been sterilized if it is desired to obtain a license at the lower rate applicable to sterilized animals. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 7)


2-1008. DUTIES OF VETERINARIAN.

It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, when vaccinating any dog or cat to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination, in triplicate, for each animal vaccinated. The certificate shall include the following information:

(1)    Owner’s name and address.

(2)    Description of dog or cat (breed, sex markings, age, name).

(3)    Date of vaccination.

(4)    Rabies vaccination tag number.

(5)    Type of rabies vaccine administered.

(6)    Manufacturer’s serial number of vaccine.

Distribution of copies of the certificate shall be: The original will be forwarded to the permit authority; the first copy will be given to the owner and the issuing veterinarian will retain the second copy. Veterinarians shall retain their copies for the interval between vaccinations. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 8)


2-1009. FALSE CERTIFICATE.

It shall be a violation for any veterinarian to prepare a veterinarian’s certificate required under this chapter by use of information known by the veterinarian to be false. It shall be a violation for any person to give false information to a veterinarian for use in the veterinarian’s preparation of any veterinarian’s certificate required under this chapter. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 9)


2-1010. RECORDS OF DOG AND CAT REGISTRATION.

The permit authority shall keep a record giving the name and address of the owner or keeper of each licensed dog or cat and the number of the certificate of registry, together with a general description of the dog and cat. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 10)


2-1011. LICENSE TAGS, REPLACEMENT TAGS.

At the time of the issuance of a license required by this chapter, the permit authority shall deliver therewith a license tag showing the registration number and expiration date of the license. The permit authority shall furnish a replacement license tag to any such owner or keeper upon application satisfactory to the permit authority and payment of $5. Any change in the form of license tag or tags used shall first be approved by the permit authority as suitable for dogs or cats or both. (Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 112)


2-1012. WEARING OF LICENSE OR IDENTIFICATION TAGS REQUIRED.

(a)    No owner or keeper of any licensed dog or cat shall allow or permit such dog or cat to be outside the residence structure of said owner or keeper at any time other than when enclosed on all sides in a cage or covered run without having attached to a collar about the neck of such animal or to a secure body harness the license tag provided for in section 2-1011 or the identification tag provided for in section 21011 except when such dog or cat is being handled in the course or an organized training or exhibition program.

(b)    No person shall remove, or caused to be removed, the collar, harness or the license tag from any registered dog or cat without the consent of the owner or keeper thereof.

(Ord. 892, Art. 10, Sec. 12)


ARTICLE 11. DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS


2-1101. RETENTION PERIOD.

Impounded animals shall be kept for not less than five days, except:

(a)    When given to be disposed of by the owner, keeper or harborer in which case the animal shall be held until the next calendar day before disposition.

(b)    When an animal arrives at the shelter in so sick or injured condition that in the judgement of the permit authority or a licensed veterinarian human compassion requires that the suffering be promptly ended; in such instance said time period shall not apply and the animal will be humanely killed to prevent needless suffering. (Ord. 892, Art. 11, Sec. 1)


2-1102. HUMANE DISPOSITION.

Whenever any animal shall remain in the animal shelter or other place of impoundment for a period longer than five days from the impounding of such animal except those animals impounded for disease control observation, in which case said period shall begin upon the expiration of the applicable observation period the animal shall be disposed of in a humane manner by the permit authority, or handed over to a recognized licensed humane shelter for purposes of adoption. (Ord. 1317)


2-1103. CONFLICT OF INTEREST.

No animal control officer shall dispose of any captured or impounded animal except through the procedures provided for by this chapter. No animal control officer shall hold a commercial animal establishment permit. (Ord. 892, Art. 11, Sec. 3)


2-1104. ADOPTION.

The permit authority may, in lieu of having an unclaimed animal euthanized as provided herein, give such animal into the custody of any adult resident in the city requesting custody animal adoption of such specific animal as a pet after viewing it, providing that in the judgment of the permit authority said person will humanely care for such animal and will not permit its use for breeding, guard, laboratory, experimental or illegal purposes. If more than one qualified person requests an animal, the permit authority may award it to the custody of the person considered best able to care for the animal. (Ord. 1317)


2-1105. ADOPTION ELIGIBILITY.

No animal will be given to the custody of a person who, in the judgment of the permit authority is requesting the animal with the intent to sell it. Not more than two animals may be given into the custody of an individual or family per year. (Ord. 892, Art. 11, Sec. 5)


2-1106. ADOPTION FEES AND DEPOSITS.

After selection of a dog or cat, but prior to delivery of custody of the animal, the permit authority shall:

(a)    Collect a $10 adoption fee and issue a receipt for such which shall constitute a temporary permit to keep the animal without license or tag for 10 days if it is over 91 days old or for 10 days after the animal becomes 90 days old, which date shall be entered on the receipt based on the animal’s age as estimated by the permit authority and such age shall be conclusively presumed correct for the purposes of enforcement of this chapter.

(b)    Collect a $50 deposit for any unneutered or unspayed dog or cat and shall refund this deposit if within 30 days the animal is licensed and satisfactory proof from a licensed veterinarian is submitted that such animal has been spayed or neutered. Failure to have an adopted animal neutered or spayed within 60 days of adoption shall constitute a violation.

(c)    Collect a $25 deposit for any neutered or spayed dog or cat and shall refund this deposit if the animal is licensed and refund is requested within the period the animal may be kept without license or tag as indicated on the aforementioned temporary permit.

(Ord. 1317)


2-1107. DEPOSIT FORFEITURE.

Any deposit provided for in section 2-1106 is forfeited to the city treasury at the expiration of the applicable time limit for claim. (Ord. 892, Art. 11, Sec. 7)


2-1108. IMPOUNDMENT FEES AND OWNER IDENTIFICATION.

A $20 fee shall be charged when any dog or cat is picked up by the permit authority and transported to the animal shelter or other city designated place of impoundment. The fee for the care of any dog or cat during the period of impoundment shall be at the rate of $20 for each day or portion of a day that said dog or cat is impounded; provided, however, that such fee shall be increased by the actual amount of any unusual expenses incurred either in the impoundment or the care of said animal. An owner or keeper must pay these fees in full to obtain custody of his or her animal, but such payment is not required for animal adoption by a person from another household. (Ord. 1317)


ARTICLE 12. ANIMAL BITES AND DISEASE CONTROL


2-1201. DOMESTIC DOG AND CAT BITES RESULTING IN HUMAN EXPOSURE TO RABIES.

Any bite wound exposing an individual to the possibility of rabies or other zoonotic disease (hereinafter "incident") shall be immediately reported to the police by the victim and by the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog or cat if the incident is known to him or her. Any such dog or cat bite which requires medical treatment shall be reported within 24 hours to the Animal Control Officer by the treating physician or hospital caring for the patient. It shall be the duty of the police to promptly notify the Animal Control Officer of any such bite reported to the police.

It shall be the duty of every owner or keeper of any dog or cat upon receiving notice or having knowledge of the involvement of his or her pet in a human exposure to the possibility of rabies or other zoonotic disease by biting to immediately place such animal in a duly licensed veterinary medical facility, or in a location recommended by the permit authority, where such animal shall be isolated and confined for observation for 10 consecutive days from and including the day of the incident.

It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person harboring the animal involved in such incident to release it from his or her custody or to hide or conceal such animal or to take or allow such animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city, unless so authorized by the Animal Control Officer, until the period or confinement and observation here are completed. The owner or keeper of such animal involved in an incident shall be liable for the cost of confinement and observation. The death or any suspicious change in the health or behavior of any such dog or cat undergoing observation shall be reported as soon as possible by the observing authority to the Animal Control Officer or his or her qualified designee. The Animal Control Officer or his or her qualified designee is hereby authorized to authorize confinement other than described above as he or she finds medically appropriate, providing such animal will be controlled and observed in accordance with the owner’s signed agreement, but only if such dog or cat has been vaccinated for prevention of rabies and is duly licensed as provided by this chapter. Unless determined otherwise by the Animal Control Officer or his or her qualified designee, exceptions to the aforesaid confinement may be granted by the permit authority in the following cases:

(1)    Where a female dog is nursing unweaned puppies or a female cat is nursing unweaned kittens.

(2)    If the investigating officer determines both:

(a)    That the incident occurred while the animal involved was confined and legally kept upon the property of the owner.

(b)    That the person injured was upon the property without the express or implied consent of the owner and was not there performing functions of a job.

However, if a person injured in an incident or his or her parent or guardian in the case of a minor, desires that the animal be impounded even though an exception to impoundment has been granted as aforesaid and agrees in writing to pay for its board during the period of confinement, it shall be impounded in the manner and for the period specified earlier, unless determined otherwise by the Animal Control Officer or his or her qualified designee upon review of the facts and circumstances the incident. (Ord. 1317)


2-1202. HUMAN EXPOSURE TO ZOONOTIC DISEASES BY ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS.

Any bite by other than a dog or cat exposing an individual to the possibility of rabies or other zoonotic diseases (herein after "incident") shall be immediately reported to the police by the victim and by the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal if the incident is known to him or her. Any animal bite which requires medical treatment shall be reported within 24 hours to the Animal Control Officer by the treating physician or hospital caring for the patient. It shall be the duty of the police to promptly notify the Animal Control Officer of any such bite reported to the police. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or person harboring the animal involved in such incident to release it from his or her custody or to hide or conceal such animal or to take or allow such animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city unless so authorized by the Animal Control Officer, until an observation period stipulated by the Animal Control Officer for the particular species of animal is over or such period is ruled unnecessary by the Animal Control Officer. It shall be the duty of each owner or keeper upon receiving notice of such incident to immediately place the animal involved in a duly licensed veterinary medical facility, the address of which must be furnished to the permit authority at once, or in the permit authority’s animal shelter, where such animal shall be isolated and confined for observation. The owner or keeper of an animal involved in a biting incident shall be liable for the cost of confinement and observation. The death or any suspicious change in health or behavior of any such animal undergoing observation shall be reported immediately by the observing authority to the Animal Control Officer or his or her qualified designee. In the event that a proper period of observation is undetermined or undeterminable for the species of animal involved in an incident, the director of health is hereby empowered to order whatever laboratory examination of the animal or animals’ tissues is required by prudent medical practice for the protection of the victim and no liability for damages shall arise from any injury to or death of the animal occasioned by said laboratory examination. When an animal involved in an incident is outside the city, the director of health or the permit authority shall forward information concerning the incident to the appropriate authority of the jurisdiction of residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer or the appropriate state health department for coordinated disease prevention. (Ord. 1317).


2-1203. DANGEROUS ANIMAL INVESTIGATION.

If any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog, cat or other animal believed involved in an incident (as the term "incident" is used in sections 2-1201:1202) cannot be safely captured or prevented from escaping by usual means, such animal may be slain by a police officer or animal control officer. In all cases where such animal may have exposed a person to rabies and is slain before the completion of the observation period stipulated for the species by the permit authority, it shall be the duty of the person slaying such animal to forthwith deliver or cause to be delivered all the remains of such animal including the undamaged head to the Animal Control Officer. A departure from this procedure must be requested of and authorized by the permit authority. (Ord. 1317).


2-1204. ANIMALS IN TRANSIT.

For the purpose of disease or injury control, the permit authority is hereby empowered to impound and observe animals in transit through the city at the request of any official animal control agency, health officer or law enforcement agency of another jurisdiction. (Ord. 892, Art. 12, Sec. 4)


2-1205. POWERS OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.

In the event that the Animal Control Officer determines that a rabies or other zoonotic disease control emergency exists, she/he shall so declare, stating the boundaries of the affected area and she/he is hereby empowered to issue emergency regulations and take all necessary steps within the provisions of this chapter and state law to abate the threat. Such emergency steps and regulations shall be in effect only during the period of the declared emergency. The Animal Control Officer is also hereby empowered to issue standing regulations for rabies and zoonosis control that she/he finds necessary to protect the public health which standing regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. Such regulations shall be in keeping with the U.S. Public Health Service guidelines and state law. (Ord. 1317)


2-1206. DISPOSAL OF WASTE.

The owner or keeper of every animal, when such animal is off the property controlled by the owner or keeper, shall be responsible for the removal of any fecal matter before taking an animal from the immediate area where such excretion occurred. (Ord. 892, Art. 12, Sec. 6)


2-1207. DEAD ANIMALS.

(a)    Responsibility. The permit authority shall be responsible for the removal of all dead animals found within the city except as otherwise provided in this section. In this section, dead animal shall mean one not killed for food or no longer fit for food.

(b)    Removal of Large Dead Animals. All large dead animals shall be removed and legally disposed of by the owner or proprietor of the premises within 12 hours after the death of such animal. If not so removed, such animal shall be removed by the permit authority at actual cost to the property owner or proprietor.

(c)    Removal of Small Dead Animals. The removal of small dead animals shall be removed by the owner at the owner’s expense.

(d)    Charges. Charges for dead animal removal as required in subsections (b) and (c) above are due and payable upon billing by the permit authority. The permit authority may refuse to collect dead animals as provided in subsection (c) above for failure to pay previous billings. Failure to pay for dead animal removal provided for in subsections (b) and (c) shall constitute a violation punishable by fine only as hereinafter provided.

(e)    Access. On occupied property, the owner or the tenant thereof shall provide easy access to the subject animal for purposes of its removal.

(f)    Notice. No person owning or having in his or her possession the carcass of any animal not to be used for food shall permit the same to remain in or upon any street, sidewalk, park, public ground, private lot or other place without at once giving notice to the permit authority.

(g)    Burial. Burial of animals shall only be permitted at a pet cemetery and landfills licensed by the city or other governing authority. (Ord. 892, Art. 12, Sec. 8) (Amended by Ord. 1317).


2-1208. PERMIT FOR ELIMINATION OF PESTS.

The permit authority is hereby authorized to issue a permit for the elimination of squirrels, starlings or pigeons to any owner or owner’s authorized agent, lessee or tenant of real estate in the city frequented by squirrels, starlings or pigeons in numbers the Animal Control Officer believes to be sufficient to create a public nuisance on such real estate; or, in cases such permit may be issued to a duly licensed pest control or exterminating company for such district which shall be defined on such permit. No permit shall be issued for a longer period than 30 days. Retention of any such permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with advisory instructions issued and regulations adopted by the director of the permit authority dealing with such activity, which regulations the director of the permit authority is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate and to adopt by filing such with the city clerk which regulations shall govern the elimination and disposal of squirrels, starlings and pigeons and shall be designed to ensure humane and sanitary methods for such and for the protection of human health. (Ord 1317)


2-1209. PARASITE CONTROL.

No person shall offer for sale, sell or give away any dog or cat unless such animal has been dewormed or certified in writing by a duly licensed veterinarian to be free of intestinal helminths in order to prevent the spread of such to other animals and humans. (Ord. 892, Art. 12, Sec. 9)


ARTICLE 13. IMPLIED CONSENT TO ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR ENFORCEMENT


2-1301. RIGHT TO ACCESS.

The city has the right of access and entry upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inquiry and inspection to determine if violation exists. (Ord. 892, Art. 13, Sec. 1)


ARTICLE 14. (RESERVED BY ORD. 1317)


ARTICLE 15. PENALTIES


2-1501. PENALTIES.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction of any such violation shall, unless another specific penalty or specific penalty range be provided by another subsection of this section, be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $2500, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 180 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1317)


2-1502. VIOLATIONS.

Any person violating any of the following sections of these chapters:

	Article 5. Good Neighbor Provisions

	 	Section 2-501, Dogs and Cats Running at Large — Prohibited

	 	Section 2-505, Limitation on Number of Dogs and Cats

	Article 10. Dog and Cat Identification

shall, upon conviction and after the court, subsequent to such conviction, has examined any prior conviction record to determine if the person has previously been convicted of the same offense, be sentenced by the court according to the following schedule of fines with reference to initial or subsequent violation of the particular section:

	First Offense	$ 50

	Second Offense	$ 100

	Third Offense	$ 200

	Fourth Offense	$ 400

	Fifth Offense	$ 1,000

and for the sixth or any subsequent offense -- $ 2,000.

(Ord. 1317)


2-1503. SAME.

Any person violating any of the following sections of these chapters:

	Article 8, The Keeping of Livestock and Certain Other Animals

	Article 9, The Keeping of Small Animals and Fowl

	Article 5, Good Neighbor Provisions

	 	Section 2-502, Dogs and Cats in Heat

	 	Section 2-503, Dogs or Other Animals Putting Persons in Fear

	 	Section 2-504, Excessive Animal Noise

	 	Section 2-506, Sec. 6, Dangerous Dogs

shall, upon conviction and after the court, subsequent to such conviction, has examined any prior conviction record to determine if the person has previously been convicted of the same offense, be sentenced by the court according to the following schedule of fines with reference to initial or subsequent violation of the particular section:

	First Offense	$ 200

	Second Offense	$ 600

	Third Offense	$ 1,000

and for the fourth or any subsequent offense -- $ 2,000.

(Ord. 1317).


2-1503 (a) SAME.

Any person violating any of the following sections of these chapters:

	Article 4, Care of Animals

	Article 6, Abuse to Animals Forbidden

shall, upon conviction and after the court, subsequent to such conviction, has examined any prior conviction record to determine if the person has previously been convicted of the same offense, be sentenced by the court according to the following schedule of fines with reference to initial or subsequent violation of the particular section:

	First Offense	$ 500

	Second Offense	$ 1,000

	Third Offense	$ 1,500

and for the fourth or any subsequent offense $ 2,500.

(Ord. 1317).


2-1504. SAME.

Any person violating any of the following sections of this chapter:

	Article 12, Animal Bites and Disease Control

	 	Section 2-1201, Sec. 1, Domestic Dog and Cat Bites Resulting in Human Exposure to Rabies

	 	Section 2-1202, Human Exposure to Zoonotic Diseases by Animals Other than Dogs or Cats

	Article 10, Dog and Cat Identification

	 	Section 2-1009, Sec. 9, False Certificates

	Article 11, Disposition of Impounded Animals

	 	Section 2-1106(b), Failure to Have an Adopted Animal Neutered

shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor no more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1317).


2-1505. SAME.

Each day’s violation of, or failure, refusal or neglect to comply with, any provision of this chapter, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The same violation for more than one animal shall constitute a separate and distinct offense as to each animal. (Ord. 1317)


ARTICLE 16. SEVERABILITY OF CHAPTER


2-1601. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of chapter are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter, since the same would have been enacted by council without the incorporation of this chapter of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ord. 892, Art. 16, Sec. 1)


CHAPTER III. BEVERAGES

Article 1.    General Provisions

Article 2.    Cereal Malt Beverages

Article 3.    Alcoholic Liquor

Article 4.    Private Clubs

Article 5.    Drinking Establishments

Article 6.    Caterers

Article 7.    Temporary Permits


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS


3-101. DEFINITIONS.

Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section.

(a)    Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol but does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.

(b)    Alcoholic liquor means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include any cereal malt beverage.

(c)    Caterer means an individual, partnership or corporation which sells alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, and provides services related to the serving thereof, on unlicensed premises which may be open to the public, but does not include a holder of a temporary permit selling alcoholic liquor in accordance with the terms of such permit.

(d)    Cereal malt beverage means any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed or made from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute, but does not include any such liquor which is more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.

(e)    Class A club means a premises which is owned or leased by a corporation, partnership, business trust or association and which is operated thereby as a bona fide nonprofit social, fraternal or war veterans’ club, as determined by the State of Kansas, for the exclusive use of the corporate stockholders, partners, trust beneficiaries or associates (hereinafter referred to as members), and their families and guests accompanying them.

(f)    Class B club means a premises operated for profit by a corporation, partnership or individual, to which members of such club may resort for the consumption of food or alcoholic beverages and for entertainment.

(g)    Club means a Class A or Class B club.

(h)    Drinking establishment means premises which may be open to the general public, where alcoholic liquor by the individual drink is sold.

(i)    Enhanced cereal malt beverage means “cereal malt beverage” as that term is defined in K.S.A. 41-2701, and amendments thereto, and such term shall include beer containing not more than 6% alcohol by volume when such beer is sold by a retailer licensed under the Kansas Cereal Malt Beverage Act.

(j)    General retailer means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail.

(k)    Limited retailer means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail only in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises.

(l)    Place of business means any place at which cereal malt beverages or alcoholic beverages or both are sold.

(m)    Temporary permit means a permit, issued in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, which allows the permit holder to offer for sale, sell and serve alcoholic liquor for consumption on unlicensed premises, open to the public.

(n)    Wholesaler or distributor means any individuals, firms, copartnerships, corporations and associations which sell or offer for sale any beverage referred to in this chapter, to persons, copartnerships, corporations and associations authorized by this chapter to sell cereal malt beverages at retail.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1460, Sec. 1)


3-102. RESTRICTION ON LOCATION.

(a)    No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or served by a person holding a license or permit from the city whose place of business or other premises are located within 200 feet of any church, school, nursing home, library, or hospital, said distance to be measured from the nearest property line of such church, school, nursing home, library, or hospital to the nearest portion of the building occupied by the premises.

(b)    The distance location of subsection (a) above shall not apply to a club, drinking establishment, caterer or temporary permit holder when the license or permit applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation from the governing body. The governing body shall grant such a waiver only following public notice and hearing and a finding by the governing body that the proximity of the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or safety.

(c)    No license or permit shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor if the building or use does not meet the zoning ordinance requirements of the city or conflicts with other city laws, including building and health codes.

(Code 2004)


3-103. MINORS ON PREMISES.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to remain on any premises where the sale of alcoholic liquor is licensed for on-premises consumption, or where a caterer or temporary permit holder is serving alcoholic liquor.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for the operator, person in charge or licensee of any premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic liquor or a caterer or temporary permit holder who is serving alcoholic liquor to permit any person under the age of 21 years to remain on the premises.

(c)    This section shall not apply if the person under the age of 21 years is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or if the licensed or permitted premises derives not more than 30 percent of its gross receipts in each calendar year from the sale of alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption.

(Code 2004)


3-104. CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.

No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor on city owned public property. However, this prohibition shall not apply to __________________, which is property owned by the city. (K.S.A. Supp. 41-719; Code 2004)


3-105. PUBLIC SALE; CONSUMPTION.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or dispense any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic beverage in any public place not licensed to sell, serve or dispense such beverage at such public place within or under the jurisdiction of the city.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic beverage in any public place not licensed to sell and serve such beverage for public consumption at such public place within or under the jurisdiction of the city.

(c)    For purposes of this section, the term "public place" shall include upon any street, public thoroughfare, public parking lot or any privately owned parking area made available to the public generally, within any parked or driven motor vehicle situated in any of the aforesaid places or upon any property owned by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless such property is leased to others under K.S.A. 12-1740 et seq. if the property is being used for hotel or motel purposes or purposes incidental thereto or is owned or operated by an airport authority created pursuant to Chapter 27 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated. (K.S.A. 41-719; Code 2004)


3-106. OPEN CONTAINER.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport in any vehicle upon a highway or street any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic beverage unless such beverage is:

(1)    In the original, unopened package or container, the seal of which has not been broken and from which the original cap or cork or other means of closure has not been removed;

(2)    In the locked, rear trunk or rear compartment or any locked outside compartment which is not accessible to any person in the vehicle while it is in motion or;

(3)    In the exclusive possession of a passenger in a vehicle which is a recreational vehicle as defined by K.S.A. 75-1212 or a bus as defined by K.S.A. 81406, who is not in the driving compartment of such vehicle or who is in a portion of such vehicle from which the driver is not directly accessible.

(b)    As used in this section highway and street have meanings provided by K.S.A. 8-1424 and K.S.A. 8-1473 and amendments thereto.

(K.S.A. 8-1599; Code 2004)


3-107. CONSUMPTION WHILE DRIVING.

It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic beverage while operating any vehicle upon any street or highway. (K.S.A. 41-719, 41-2720; Code 2004)


3-108. IDENTIFICATION CARD.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to:

(1)    Display, cause or permit to be displayed, or have in possession, any fictitious, fraudulently altered, or fraudulently obtained identification card for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor.

(2)    Display or represent any identification card not issued to such person as being his or her card for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor.

(3)    Permit any unlawful use of an identification card issued to a person for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor.

(4)    Photograph, photostat, duplicate or in any way reproduce any identification card or facsimile thereof in such a manner that it could be mistaken for a valid identification card or display or have in possession any such photograph, photostat, duplicate, reproduction or facsimile for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to:

(1)    Lend any identification card to or knowingly permit the use of any identification card by any person under 21 years of age for use in the sale, purchase or consumption of any alcoholic liquor.

(2)    Lend any identification card to or knowingly permit the use of any identification card by any person under 21 years of age for use in the sale, purchase or consumption of any cereal malt beverage.

(Code 2004)


3-109. UNDERAGE PURCHASER.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase or attempt to purchase any cereal malt beverage.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic liquor.

(K.S.A. Supp. 41-727; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 2. CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES


3-201. LICENSE REQUIRED OF RETAILERS.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any cereal malt beverage or enhanced cereal malt beverage at retail without a license for each place of business where cereal malt beverages or enhanced cereal malt beverages are to be sold at retail.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person, having a license to sell cereal malt beverages or enhanced cereal malt beverages at retail only in the original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises, to sell any cereal malt beverage or enhanced cereal malt beverage in any other manner.

(K.S.A. 41-2702; Ord. 779, Sec. 1; Code 2004; Ord. 1460, Sec. 2)


3-202. APPLICATION.

Any person desiring a license shall make an application to the governing body of the city and accompany the application by the required license fee for each place of business for which the person desires the license. The application shall be verified, and upon a form prepared by the attorney general of the State of Kansas, and shall contain:

(a)    The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she has resided within the State of Kansas;

(b)    The particular place for which a license is desired;

(c)    The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of business is located;

(d)    The names and addresses of all persons who hold any financial interest in the particular place of business for which a license is desired.

(e)    A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and not less than 21 years of age and that he or she has not within two years immediately preceding the date of making application been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or been adjudged guilty of drunkenness, or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States;

(f)    Each application for a general retailer’s license must be accompanied by a certificate from the city fire chief certifying that he or she has inspected the premises to be licensed and that the same comply with the provisions of chapter 7 of this code.

The application shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by the applicant, authorizing any governmental agency to provide the city with any information pertinent to the application. One copy of such application shall immediately be transmitted to the chief of police of the city for investigation of the applicant. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such applicant to determine whether he or she is qualified as a licensee under the provisions of this chapter. The chief shall report to the city council not later than five working days subsequent to the receipt of such application. The application shall be scheduled for consideration by the governing body at the earliest meeting consistent with current notification requirements. (Ord. 779, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


3-202A. LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.

(a)    All applications for a new and renewed cereal malt beverage license shall be submitted to the city clerk 10 days in advance of the governing body meeting at which they will be considered.

(b)    The city clerk’s office shall notify the applicant of an existing license 30 days in advance of its expiration.

(c)    The clerk’s office shall provide copies of all applications to the police department, and fire department when they are received. The police department will run a records check on all applicants and the fire department will inspect the premises in accord with chapters 7 and 8 of this code. The departments will then recommend approval, or disapproval, of applications within five working days of the department’s receipt of the application.

(d)    The governing body will not consider any application for a new or renewed license that has not been submitted 10 days in advance and been reviewed by the above city departments.

(e)    An applicant who has not had a cereal malt beverage license in the city shall attend the governing body meeting when the application for a new license will be considered.

(Ord. 779, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


3-203. LICENSE GRANTED; DENIED.

(a)    The minutes of the governing body shall show the action taken on the application.

(b)    If the license is granted, the city clerk shall issue the license which shall show the name of the licensee and the year for which issued.

(c)    No license shall be transferred to another licensee.

(d)    If the license shall be denied, the license fee shall be immediately returned to the person who has made application.

(Ord. 779, Sec. 4; Code 2004)


3-204. LICENSE TO BE POSTED.

Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which the license is issued. (Ord. 779, Sec 5; Code 2004)


3-205. LICENSE, DISQUALIFICATION.

No license shall be issued to:

(a)    A person who has not been a resident in good faith of the state of Kansas for at least one year immediately preceding application.

(b)    A person who is not a citizen of the United States.

(c)    A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he or she resides.

(d)    A person who, within two years immediately preceding the date of making application, has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or has been adjudged guilty of drunkenness or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States.

(e)    A partnership, unless all the members of the partnership shall otherwise be qualified to obtain a license.

(f)    A corporation if any manager, officer or director thereof or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock of such corporation would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than nonresidence within the city or county.

(g)    A corporation, if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock of such corporation, has been an officer, manager or director, or a stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock, of a corporation which: (A) Has had a retailer’s license revoked under K.S.A. 41-2708 and amendments thereto; or (B) has been convicted of a violation of the drinking establishment act or the cereal malt beverage laws of this state.

(h)    A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee.

(i)    A person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a retailer’s license for any reason other than citizenship, retailer residency requirements or age, except that this subsection (i) shall not apply in determining eligibility for a renewal license.

(Ord. 779, Sec. 6; Code 2004)


3-206. RESTRICTION UPON LOCATION.

(a)    No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any cereal malt beverage on premises which are located in areas not zoned for such purpose.

(b)    It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense at retail any cereal malt beverage at any place within the city limits that is within a 500-foot radius of any church, school or library.

(c)    Provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment holding a private club license issued by the State of Kansas.

(d)    The distance limitation of subsection (b) above shall not apply to any establishment holding a cereal malt beverage license issued by the city when the licensee has petitioned for and received a waiver of the distance limitation. The governing body shall grant such a waiver only following public notice and hearing.

(K.S.A. 41-2704; Ord. 779, Sec. 7; Code 2004)


3-207. LICENSE FEE.

The rules and regulations regarding license fees shall be as follows:

(a)    General Retailer -- for each place of business selling cereal malt beverages at retail, $75 per calendar year.

(b)    Limited Retailer -- for each place of business selling only at retail cereal malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises, $75 per calendar year.

Full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of the year in which the application is made, and the licensee shall only be authorized to operate under the license for the remainder of the calendar year in which the license is issued. (K.S.A. 41-2702; Ord. 779, Sec. 8; Code 2004)


3-208. SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.

The chief of police, upon five days’ written notice, shall have the authority to suspend such license for a period not to exceed 30 days, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other laws pertaining to cereal malt beverages, which violation does not in his or her judgment justify a recommendation of revocation. The licensee may appeal such order of suspension to the governing body within seven days from the date of such order. (Ord. 779, Sec. 9; Code 2004)


3-209. LICENSE SUSPENSION/REVOCATION BY GOVERNING BODY.

The governing body of the city, upon five days’ written notice, to a person holding a license to sell cereal malt beverages shall permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than 30 days such license for any of the following reasons:

(a)    If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false information in the application therefor;

(b)    If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article or has become ineligible to obtain a license under this article;

(c)    Drunkenness of a person holding such license, drunkenness of a licensee’s manager or employee while on duty and while on the premises for which the license is issued, or for a licensee, his or her manager or employee permitting any intoxicated person to remain in such place selling cereal malt beverages;

(d)    The sale of cereal malt beverages to any person under 21 years of age;

(e)    For permitting any gambling in or upon any premises licensed under this article;

(f)    For permitting any person to mix drinks with materials purchased in any premises licensed under this article or brought into the premises for this purpose;

(g)    For the employment of any person under the age established by the State of Kansas for employment involving dispensing cereal malt beverages;

(h)    For the employment of persons adjudged guilty of a felony or of a violation of any law relating to intoxicating liquor;

(i)    For the sale or possession of, or for permitting the use or consumption of alcoholic liquor within or upon any premise licensed under this article;

(j)    The nonpayment of any license fees;

(k)    If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under this chapter;

(l)    The provisions of subsections (f) and (i) shall not apply if such place of business is also currently licensed as a private club.

(K.S.A. 41-2708; Ord. 779, Sec. 10; Code 2004)


3-210. SAME; APPEAL.

The licensee, within 20 days after the order of the governing body revoking any license, may appeal to the district court of Leavenworth County and the district court shall proceed to hear such appeal as though such court had original jurisdiction in the matter. Any appeal taken under this section shall not suspend the order of revocation of the license of any licensee, nor shall any new license be issued to such person or any person acting for or on his or her behalf, for a period of six months thereafter. (K.S.A. 41-2708; Ord. 779, Sec. 11; Code 2004)


3-211. CHANGE OF LOCATION.

If a licensee desires to change the location of his or her place of business, he or she shall make an application to the governing body showing the same information relating to the proposed location as in the case of an original application. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of $75. If the application is in proper form and the location is not in a prohibited zone and all other requirements relating to such place of business are met, a new license shall be issued for the new location for the balance of the year for which a current license is held by the licensee. (Ord. 779, Sec. 12; Code 2004)


3-212. WHOLESALERS AND/OR DISTRIBUTORS.

It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler and/or distributor, his, her or its agents or employees, to sell and/or deliver cereal malt beverages within the city, to persons authorized under this article to sell the same within this city unless such wholesaler and/or distributor has first secured a license from the director of revenue, state commission of revenue and taxation of the State of Kansas authorizing such sales. (K.S.A. 41-307:307a; Ord. 779, Sec. 13; Code 2004)


3-213. BUSINESS REGULATIONS.

It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe the following regulations.

(a)    The place of business licensed and operating under this article shall at all times have a front and rear exit unlocked when open for business.

(b)    The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police and health officers of the city, county and state.

(c)    Except as provided by subsection (d), no cereal malt beverages may be sold or dispensed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or consumed between the hours of 12:00 midnight, and 6:00 a.m., or on Sunday, except in a place of business which is licensed to sell cereal malt beverage for consumption on the premises, which derives not less than 30 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the licensed premises; closing hours for clubs shall conform to K.S.A. 41-2614 and any amendments thereto.

(d)    Cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on premises which are licensed pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq., and licensed as a club by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

(e)    The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at all times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club under a license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall be open to the police and not to the public.

(f)    It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the licensee to become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license has been issued.

(g)    No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license has been issued.

(h)    No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell or permit the sale of cereal malt beverage to any person under 21 years of age.

(i)    No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any gambling in the place of business for which such license has been issued.

(j)    No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any person to mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in said place of business or brought in for such purpose.

(k)    No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall employ any person under 21 years of age in dispensing cereal malt beverages. No licensee shall employ any person who has been judged guilty of a felony. (Ord. 779, Sec. 14; Ord. 808, Sec 1; Code 2004)


3-214. PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PREMISES.

The following conduct by a cereal malt beverage licensee, manager or employee of any licensed cereal malt beverage establishment is deemed contrary to public welfare and is prohibited:

(a)    Remaining or permitting any person to remain in or upon the premises who exposes to view any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of males/females public hair, anus, buttocks or genitals;

(b)    Permitting any employee on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals of any other employee or any patron;

(c)    Encouraging or permitting any patron on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva, or genitals of any employee;

(d)    Performing or permitting any person to perform on the licensed premises acts of or acts which simulate:

(1)    Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, or any other sexual act which is prohibited by law; or

(2)    Touching, caressing or fondling such persons’ breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.

(e)    Using or permitting any person to use on the licensed premises, any artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the acts prohibited by paragraph (d) of this section.

(f)    Showing or permitting any person to show on the licensed premises any motion picture, film, photograph, electronic reproduction, or other visual reproduction depicting:

(1)    Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, or any sexual act which is prohibited by law;

(2)    The touching, caressing or fondling of the buttocks, anus, genitals or the female breasts;

(3)    Scenes in which a person displays the buttocks, anus, genitals or the female breasts.

(g)    As used in this section, the term premises means the premises licensed by the city as a cereal malt beverage establishment and such other areas, under the control of the licensee or his or her employee or employees, that are in such close proximity to the licensed premises that activities and conduct of persons within such other areas may be viewed by persons on or within the licensed premises.

(Code 2004)


3-215. SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.

All parts of the licensed premises including furnishings and equipment shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, free from flies, rodents and vermin at all times. The licensed premises shall have at least one restroom for each sex easily accessible at all times to its patrons and employees. The restroom shall be equipped with at least one lavatory with hot and cold running water, be well lighted, and be furnished at all times with paper towels or other mechanical means of drying hands and face. Each restroom shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities which shall be of sanitary design and readily cleanable. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self closing and toilet paper at all times shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste material and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered. The restrooms shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition and free of offensive odors and shall be at all times subject to inspection by the city health officer or designee. (Ord. 779, Sec. 15; Code 2004)


3-216. MINORS ON PREMISES.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to remain on any premises where the sale of cereal malt beverages is licensed for on-premises consumption.

(b)    This section shall not apply if the person under 21 years of age is an employee of the licensed establishment, or is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or if the licensed establishment derives not more than 50 percent of its gross receipts in each calendar year from the sale of cereal malt beverages for on-premises consumption. (Ord. 779, Sec. 16; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 3. ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR


3-301. STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale, or expose for sale or sell any alcoholic liquor as defined by the "Kansas liquor control act" without first having obtained a state license to do so. (Code 2004)


3-302. LICENSE FEE.

(a)    There is hereby levied an annual license fee, which fee shall be paid before the business is begun under an original state license and within five days after any renewal of a state license. The city license fee for any person holding a license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control for the retail sale within the city of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the premises shall be $300.

(b)    All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city.

(c)    The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.

(Code 2004)


3-303. POSTING OF CITY LICENSE.

Every licensee under this article shall cause the city alcoholic liquor retailer’s city license certificate to be placed in plain view, next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Code 2004)


3-304. HOURS OF SALE.

No person shall sell at retail any alcoholic liquor:

(a)    On any Sunday before 12:00 p.m. and after 8:00 p.m.;

(b)    On Easter, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas;

(c)    Before 12:00 p.m. and after 8:00 p.m. on Memorial Day, Fourth of July and Labor Day;

(d)    Before 9:00 a.m. and after 11:00 p.m. on any day when the sale hereby is permitted except the specific hours for Sundays and Memorial Day, Fourth of July and Labor Day.

(K.S.A. 41-712 and 41-2911; Ord. 1279)


3-305. BUSINESS REGULATIONS.

It shall be unlawful for a retailer of alcoholic liquor to:

(a)    Permit any person to mix drinks in or on the licensed premises;

(b)    Employ any person under the age of 21 years in connection with the operation of the retail establishment;

(c)    Employ any person in connection with the operation of the retail establishment who has been adjudged guilty of a felony;

(d)    Furnish any entertainment in his or her premises or permit any pinball machine or game of skill or chance to be located in or on the premises; or

(e)    Have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, cask, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in the original package.

(f)    Sell, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver, or permit the sale, gift or procuring of any alcoholic liquor to or for any person under 21 years of age.

(Code 2004)


3-306. RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION.

No person shall knowingly or unknowingly sell, give away, furnish, dispose of, procure, exchange or deliver, or permit the selling, giving away, furnishing, disposing of, procuring, exchanging or delivering of any alcoholic beverage in any building, structure or premises, for consumption in such building or upon such premises if such consumption is within 200 feet from the nearest property line of any existing hospital, school, church or library. (K.S.A. 41-710; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 4. PRIVATE CLUBS


3-401. LICENSE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person granted a private club license by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license within the city without first obtaining a local license from the city clerk. (Ord. 788, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


3-402. LICENSE FEE.

(a)    There is hereby levied an annual license fee on each private club located in the city which has a private club license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five days after any renewal of a state license. The city license fee for a Class A club shall be $150 and the city license fee for a Class B club shall be $150.

(b)    All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city.

(c)    The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.

(d)    Every licensee shall cause the city club license to be placed in plain view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.

(Ord. 788, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


3-403. BUSINESS REGULATIONS.

(a)    No club licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.

(b)    Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail sale of cereal malt beverages for on-premises consumption at any time when alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises.

(c)    No club membership shall be sold to any person under 21 years of age, nor shall alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages be given, sold or traded to any person under 21 years of age.

(K.S.A. Supp. 41-2614; Ord. 788, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 5. DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS


3-501. LICENSE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person granted a drinking establishment license by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license within the city without first obtaining a city license from the city clerk. (Ord. 788, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


3-502. LICENSE FEE.

(a)    There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount of $150 on each drinking establishment located in the city which has a drinking establishment license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five days after any renewal of a state license.

(b)    All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city.

(c)    The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.



(d)    Every licensee shall cause the city drinking establishment license to be placed in plain view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.

(Ord. 787, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


3-503. BUSINESS REGULATIONS.

(a)    No drinking establishment licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.

(b)    Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail sale of cereal malt beverage for on-premises consumption at any time when alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises.

(c)    No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages shall be given, sold or traded to any person under 21 years of age.

(K.S.A. Supp. 41-2614; Ord. 787, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 6. CATERERS


3-601. LICENSE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by the State of Kansas as a caterer to sell alcoholic liquor by the drink, to sell or serve any liquor by the drink within the city without obtaining a local caterer’s license from the city clerk. (Ord. 790, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


3-602. LICENSE FEE.

(a)    There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount of $150 on each caterer doing business in the city who has a caterer’s license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five days after any renewal of a state license.

(b)    All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city.

(c)    The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason.

(d)    Every licensee shall cause the caterer license to be placed in plain view on any premises within the city where the caterer is serving or mixing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.

(Ord. 790, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


3-603. BUSINESS REGULATIONS.

(a)    No caterer licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.

(b)    No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages shall be given, sold or traded to any person under 21 years of age.

(K.S.A. Supp. 41-2614; Ord. 790, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


3-604. NOTICE TO CHIEF OF POLICE.

Prior to any event at which a caterer will sell or serve alcoholic liquor by the individual drink the caterer shall provide written notice to the chief of police at least seven days prior to the event if the event will take place within the city. The notice shall contain the location, name of the group sponsoring the event, and the exact date and times the caterer will be serving. (Ord. 790, Sec. 4; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 7. TEMPORARY PERMITS


3-701. PERMIT REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person granted a temporary permit by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor within the city without first obtaining a local temporary permit from the city clerk. (Ord. 789, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


3-702. PERMIT FEE.

(a)    There is hereby levied a temporary permit fee in the amount of $150 per day on each group or individual holding a temporary permit issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control authorizing sales within the city, which fee shall be paid before the event is begun under the state permit.

(b)    Every temporary permit holder shall cause the temporary permit receipt to be placed in plain view on any premises within the city where the holder of the temporary permit is serving or mixing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.

(Ord. 789, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


3-703. CITY TEMPORARY PERMIT.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an event under a state issued temporary permit without first applying for a local temporary permit at least seven days before the event. Written application for the local temporary permit shall be made to the city clerk and shall clearly state:

(1)    the name of the applicant;

(2)    the group for which the event is planned;

(3)    the location of the event;

(4)    the date and time of the event;

(5)    any anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services.

(b)    Upon presentation of a state temporary permit, payment of the city's temporary permit fee and a written application as provided for in subsection (a), the city clerk shall issue a local temporary permit to the applicant if there are no conflicts with any zoning or other ordinances of the city.

(c)    The city clerk shall notify the chief of police whenever a temporary permit has been issued and forward a copy of the permit and application to the chief of police.

(Ord. 789, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


3-704. PERMIT REGULATIONS.

(a)    No temporary permit holder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 11:59 a.m. at any event for which a temporary permit has been issued.

(b)    No alcoholic beverages shall be given, sold or traded to any person under 21 years of age.

(Ord. 789, Sec. 4; Code 2004)


CHAPTER IV. BUILDINGS

Article 1.    Fire Limits

Article 2.    Building Code

Article 3.    Electrical Code

Article 4.    Plumbing and Gas-Fitting Code

Article 5.    Dangerous Buildings

Article 6.    International Mechanical Code

Article 7.    Manufactured Home Parks

Article 8.    Moving Buildings

Article 9.    International Residential Code

Article 10.    Erosion and Sediment Control

Article 11.    International Fuel Gas Code

Article 12.    Licensing of Contractors


ARTICLE 1. FIRE LIMITS


4-101. FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.

The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits of the city:

(a)    City limits, including;

(b)    Annual boundary resolutions; and

(c)    Any new annexations approved by the governing body.

(Code 2004)


ARTICLE 2. BUILDING CODE


4-201. DEFINITIONS.

As used in this article, the words and phrases herein defined shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires:

(a)    Whenever the word municipality is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas;

(b)    Whenever the term corporation counsel is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney of the City of Tonganoxie;

(c)    Whenever the term building official is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the building inspector or his or her authorized designee.

(Code 2004)


4-202. INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE INCORPORATED.

A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Tonganoxie, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters C, E and I (see International Building Code Section 101.2.1, 2012 Edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city of Tonganoxie, in the State of Kansas, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the city of Tonganoxie are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section.

The following sections are hereby revised: 101.1, 101.4.6 is deleted, 105.1.1 is deleted, 105.1.2 is deleted, 105.2, 108.3 revised, Chapter 9, Section 903 is amended, Chapter 13 is deleted, 1612.13, 3109.4 is amended to reference Appendix G of the 2003 International Residential Code, 3303.4 and 3410.2 are amended. 

In more detail as follows:

101.4.1 Deleted (Electrical) – The provisions of the 2002 National Electrical Code shall apply (not listed in 2012 IBC).

101.4.7 Updated to 101.4.6 Deleted – International Energy Conservation Code.

109.3 revised – The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work including materials and labor for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the code official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the code official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the code official.

109.3.7 – Energy efficiency inspection (not titled in IBC 2012). (Ord. 1334; Ord. 1451, Sec. 1)


4-203. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.

The following sections of this article are in addition to the provisions of the standard code incorporated by reference in section 4-202. (Code 2004)


4-204. BUILDING OFFICIAL; POWERS; DUTIES.

(a)    This and other articles of the city relating generally to building and structures shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector. The building inspector shall act as chief building official and may assume the responsibilities of or with the consent and approval of the governing body appoint a building inspector and such other assistants as may be advisable for the issuance of building permits and the inspection of building work.

(b)    The building inspector shall prepare such application, permit, inspection and record forms as may be required for the purposes of the article. The building inspector may make and promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to obtain conformity with this article pertaining to the making of applications for building permits, issuing of building permits and inspecting of buildings and building works.

(Code 2004)


4-205. BUILDING INSPECTOR; RECRUITMENT.

The city administrator shall make recommendation to the governing body to hire a qualified person(s) or to be and perform the duties of building inspector as may be required, subject to the consent and approval of the governing body. (Code 2004)


4-206. SAME; DUTIES.

The building inspector shall have the following duties:

(a)    To enforce all regulations relating to construction, alteration, repair, removal and demolition of building and structures;

(b)    May permit, with the approval of the governing body, on the basis of duly authenticated reports from recognized sources, the use of new materials or modes of construction, not provided for in this article, and may, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article adopt an accepted standard of material or workmanlike practices of federal or state bureaus, national, technical organizations or fire underwriters;

(c)    To examine all buildings in the process of erection, construction, alteration or relocation in the city for the purpose of determining whether the work is in compliance with the permit given and in compliance with the regulations of the city pertaining to such work, including zoning regulations; and;

(d)    To keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits or certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection during stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building official without his or her written consent.

(e)    Stop Orders.

(1)    Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the enforcement officer or his designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the enforcement officer or his designee to proceed with the work.

(2)    Whenever a site is posted with a "Stop Work" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove, deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his designee. The penalty will be assessed in accordance with the penalties section in the ordinance codified in this subsection.

(f)    Occupancy Violations.

(1)    Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by this article is being used contrary to the provisions of this article, the enforcement officer or his designee may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the enforcement officer or his designee after receipt of such notice to make the structure or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this code.

(2)    Whenever the site is posted with a "Do Not Occupy" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove, deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his designee. The penalty will be assessed in accordance with the penalty section in the ordinance codified in this subsection.

(Ord. 1083, Secs. 3:4; Ord. 1178)


4-207. SAME; POWERS.

The building inspector shall have the following powers:

(a)    To enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable hour, whether complete or in the process of erection, to perform the duties contained in this chapter;

(b)    To adopt and enforce all such prudent emergency measures as he or she may deem necessary and expedient for the public safety under the laws of the city;

(c)    May cause any work done in violation of this chapter to be discontinued until he or she shall have satisfactory evidence that the work will be done in accordance with the building regulations of the city, subject to the right of any builder or owner to appeal to the governing body.

(Code 2004)


4-208. SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY.

The building inspector, or his or her agent, upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour to perform his or her duties as set out in this chapter. (Code 2004)


4-209. CLARIFICATION; MODIFICATION.

(a)    The governing body shall be the final determiner of the scope and meaning of all provisions of the building code which may be unclear, ambiguous, or requiring interpretation.

(b)    The building inspector shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the building code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his or her authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. In approving modifications, the building inspector shall see that the spirit of the code is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of a modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the building inspector and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.

(Code 2004)


4-210. BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; APPROVAL; PENALTY.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter erect or cause to be erected within the city any building or structure of any kind or enlarge or add to the outside dimension thereof, or relocate any building or structure already erected or which may hereafter be erected or remodel any building or structure within the city without a building permit being first obtained therefor from the city clerk, after approval by the chief building official or his or her duly authorized assistant. The application for such permit shall be made and the permit shall be obtained before work is commenced upon any building or structure or the foundation thereof, or before the removal of any building begins.

(b)    To the extent that the applicant is not exempt pursuant to section 4-218, no person may obtain a building permit unless and until he or she has obtained a license for electrical, mechanical, or plumbing from the municipality and complied with the contractor licensing requirements of Johnson County, Kansas, or such person provides adequate proof to the building official that he or she is otherwise exempt from such requirements.

(c)    The erection or construction of a building or other structure without a separate building permit for each such building or structure is declared to be unlawful and deemed a crime, and shall be punishable according to subsection (f) of this section.

(d)    Construction code shall mean the International Building Codes as currently adopted and enforced, and shall also mean the National Electrical Code and such other construction codes as may be adopted by the governing body.

(e)    The construction or erection of a building, or any part thereof, in violation of any one or more of the construction codes of the municipality is unlawful and shall be deemed a crime, punishable as set out in subsection (f) of this section.

(f)    Any crime or violation described in subsections (a):(e) of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 per day, providing that each day such violation exists shall be counted as a separate count or offense, whether consecutive or not.

Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing or limiting the municipality from enforcing such construction codes by civil lawsuit.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1378, Sec. 1)


4-211. SAME; APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.

(a)    A building permit shall be issued upon an application in writing to the office of city clerk on a form or forms provided for the purpose. This application shall, among other things, disclose the following:

(1)    The name of the owner of the lot or tract of ground;

(2)    The location of the building or structure;

(3)    The building work proposed;

(4)    The outside dimensions of the building by floors and dimensions of the basement (if any);

(5)    The class of occupancy;

(6)    The class of construction;

(7)    The kind of materials to be used for walls, floors, ceilings, roofs, and foundations;

(8)    The estimated cost of the work;

(9)    The date work will commence;

(10)    Expected date of completion;

(11)    Name and address of contractor or contractors doing the work;

(12)    The construction documents submitted with the application for permit for a new residential or commercial structure or any attached structural addition to an existing structure shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, platted lot lines, streets and sidewalks, distances from lot lines, setbacks, and utility easements, and shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary survey prepared and stamped by a licensed surveyor.

(b)    An application for a building permit shall be signed by the owner or his or her duly authorized agent, or a building contractor who has complied with, or is exempt from, the licensing requirements of section 4-210. If the application is made by the owner or his agent, it shall contain the name or names of the contractor or contractors doing the work described, as well as proof that they have complied with or are exempt from the trade licensing requirements. A building permit may also be issued to a homeowner who personally occupies or will occupy and undertakes the construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of such homeowner’s single-family residence or an accessory structure thereto. Any permit issued to a homeowner in accordance herewith will be subject to final approval of the building inspector for work performed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of this section, any homeowner that undertakes the construction of a new residence for such homeowner’s personal occupancy more than three times in any five-year period shall be deemed to be a contractor that is required to comply with the licensing requirements herein. 

(Code 2004; Ord. 1241; Ord. 1378, Sec. 2)


4-212. SAME; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.

Whenever an application for a building permit is made, the chief building official may, if he or she finds it necessary to determine whether building work described in the application will comply with the laws pertaining to such work, require that the applicant file a written description or drawing of the proposed building as may be prepared for the purpose. If such drawing or description is insufficient for the purposes of determining whether a permit should be issued, the building official may require the applicant to file complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications for such building, or any part thereof, as may be necessary for the inspector to determine compliance with this article. The filing of such plans and specifications and the approval thereof in connection with an application for a permit shall not in any way affect the authority of the city to deny or issue a permit, or to inspect any building work for conformity with this article. (Code 2004)


4-213. SAME; FEES.

(a)    The fee for a building permit shall be calculated using the valuation of the improvement excluding land. The fees shall be calculated in accordance with the following schedule as of January 1, 2019:

Project Valuation Table – Used for Building Permit Fee Calculations 

	Total Valuation	Fee

	$1 to $500	$24

	$501 to $2,000	$24 for the first $500; plus $3 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof, up to and including $2,000

	$2,001 to $40,000	$69 for the first $2,000; plus $11 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $40,000

	$40,001 to $100,000	$487 for the first $40,000; plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $100,000

	$100,001 to $500,000	$1,027 for the first $100,000; plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000

	$500,001 to $1,000,000	$3,827 for the first $500,000; plus $5 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $1,000,000

	$1,000,001 to $5,000,000	$6,327 for the first $1,000,000; plus $3 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $5,000,000

	$5,000,001 and over	$18,327 for the first $5,000,000; plus $1 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

Table 1-A: Specialized Permit Fees  

	Sheds/Accessory Buildings	≤ 120 sq. ft., no permit required

121 to 200 sq. ft., permit required, $50

200 sq. ft. and over, based on valuation table

	Detached Garage	Based on square footage; see Table 1-B*

	Decks/Patios	Based on project valuation (Table 1-A)

	Signs	Permit required, $50

	Pools	Above ground – temporary soft-sided – no permit required

Above ground – permanent hard-sided – permit required, $50

In-ground – permit required based on valuation table

	Remodels (Residential and Commercial)	Based on square footage; see Table 1-B*

*References the 2012 Building Code Square Footage Valuation Table

Standalone Permit Fees – Miscellaneous Permits Valuation Less Than $10,000 

Includes: Fence, Residential and Commercial Roof, Windows, Siding, Driveway, Sidewalk, HVAC-Mechanical, Plumbing, Electrical, etc. 

	Valuation	Permit Fee

	$0 – $5,000	$30

	$5,000 – $10,000	$50

	Valuations $10,001 and over use Table 1-A.

The fee herein shall be paid to the city clerk upon obtaining a building permit and the same shall be credited to the general operating fund of the city. (Ord. 1083, Sec. 2; Code 2004; Ord. 1451, Sec. 2; Ord. 1459, Sec. 1)


4-214. SAME; POSTING.

A copy of the building permit shall be kept on the premises for public inspection during the performance of the work and until the completion of the same. The building inspector may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work to the completion thereof. (Code 2004)


4-215. CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.

Upon the completion of any work under a building permit, the chief building official, the building inspector or his or her designee is authorized to issue a certificate of approval for the occupancy and use of the building or structure. The certificate shall show the number of inspections made and the orders and corrections required during the course of the work. A copy of such certificate shall be given the owner. (Code 2004)


4-216. INSPECTIONS OF BUILDING; LAYOUT OF BUILDING; FOUNDATIONS AND FOOTINGS; NOTICE TO INSPECTOR.

(a)    The contractor or builder having a permit for new construction, or additions to existing buildings, shall notify the chief building official or building inspector immediately upon the marking or laying out of the site and foundation for such work. The official or inspector shall inspect the layout for conformity with this article and with respect to lot lines, setbacks and location of the proposed buildings to determine conformity with the city zoning regulations. In case of doubt respecting the required location, the chief building official may require an official survey of the lot lines to determine conformity, at the expense of the permit holder.

(b)    Upon completion of the excavation for the building foundation and footings and the construction of the necessary forms thereof and before the foundation and footings are poured or laid, the official or inspector shall be notified as in the first case, and it shall be his or her duty to inspect all such work for conformity with laws respecting location of the building foundations and footings.

(c)    The building inspector shall during the course of all building make such other inspections as may be directed by the chief building official to be made during any successive stage of the construction or other work covered by a permit in order to secure compliance with laws pertaining thereto.

(Code 2004)


4-217. REQUEST FOR INSPECTION.

Upon the completion of any building construction work covered by this article, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the building inspector and request that it be inspected; after which such work shall be inspected promptly as hereinafter provided. (Code 2004)


4-218. WORK BY PROPERTY OWNERS.

Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any property owner from personally performing any building or construction work within and upon his or her own residence and intended for his or her personal use and permanent occupancy; provided, the owner shall satisfy the building inspector as to his or her ability to perform such work, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance with this article, and apply for an inspection and receive a certificate of approval. Personal building or construction performed by an owner under this section shall be by himself, herself, for himself or herself on his or her own residence, without compensation and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way on such work except a builder or building contractor licensed by the city. (Code 2004)


4-219. LIABILITY.

This article shall not be construed to relieve from any liability or lessen the liability of any person performing any activity connected herewith, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of any inspection authorized herein, by reason of any certificate of inspection issued by it or by reason of any permit or license granted herein. (Code 2004)


4-220. SEVERABILITY.

If any section of the International Building Code or of this article shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, then such section shall be considered separate and apart from the remaining sections, the section to be completely severable from the remaining provisions which shall continue in full force and effect. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 3. ELECTRICAL CODE


4-301. DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.

(a)    Approved shall mean approved by the chief building official, the electrical inspector or his or her designee.

(b)    Authorized person shall mean any individual, firm or corporation who or which is licensed under the provisions of this article to do the work as permitted under the specified provisions of this article.

(c)    City shall mean the territory within the corporate limits of this city.

(d)    Conductor shall mean a wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying the electric current or potential.

(e)    Electrical construction or installation shall mean and include all work and materials used in installing, maintaining or extending a system of electrical wiring and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith, inside or attached to any building, structure, lot or premises, except industrial plants where fulltime maintenance is provided and other agencies providing inspections of installations and facilities. Electrical construction shall not be held to mean or include any of the following:

(1)    The replacement of lamps, fuses, bulbs or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring;

(2)    Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or

(3)    Any work in industrial establishments where inspections come under the scope of other inspection agencies.

(f)    Equipment shall mean conductors, materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, motors and the like, used as a part of or in connection with an electrical installation.

(g)    Inspector shall mean the chief building official or any individual who has been appointed by the city as electrical inspector.

(h)    Person shall mean a natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors, assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.

(i)    Special permission shall mean the written consent of the chief building official or the electrical inspector.

(j)    Special ruling shall mean a written ruling filed in the office of the chief building official or the electrical inspector.

(Code 2004)


4-302. ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE BY REFERENCE.

A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Tonganoxie, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the city of Tonganoxie, in the State of Kansas, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Electrical Code on file in the office of the city of Tonganoxie are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section.

The following sections are hereby revised: Article 210-12 is revised and Article 230-70 is revised and Section 406.12 is deleted. 

In more detail as follows:

210.12 Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection.

Dwelling Units. All 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampere branch circuits supplying outlets installed in dwelling unit family rooms, dining rooms, living rooms, parlors, libraries, dens, bedrooms, sunrooms, recreation rooms, closets, hallways, or similar rooms or areas shall be protected by a listed arc-fault circuit interrupter, combination-type, installed to provide protection of the branch circuit.

Is revised to say:

210.12 Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection.

Dwelling Unit Bedrooms. All 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampere branch circuits supplying outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms shall be protected by a listed arc-fault circuit interrupter, combination type installed to provide protection of the branch circuit. 

(Ord. 1335; Ord. 1456, Sec. 1)


4-303. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.

The following sections of this article are in addition to the provisions of the standard code incorporated by reference in section 4-302. (Ord. 1077, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


4-304. BUILDING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY.

The building inspector or his or her authorized designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and appointment of an electrical inspector in accordance with section 4-204 of this chapter, which shall apply in a like manner to this article. (Code 2004)


4-305. ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT.

The mayor with the consent of the council may assume the responsibilities of or appoint some qualified officer or employee of the city to be and perform the duties of electrical inspector as may be required, subject to the consent and approval of the governing body. (Code 2004)


4-306. SAME; DUTIES.

The electrical inspector shall have the following duties: (a)To enforce all regulations relating to electrical construction, alteration, repair or removal;

(b)    May permit, with the approval of the governing body, on the basis of duly authenticated reports from recognized sources, the use of new materials or modes of electrical construction, not provided for in this article, and may, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article adopt an accepted standard of material or workmanlike practices of federal or state bureaus, national, technical organizations or fire underwriters;

(c)    To examine all buildings requiring electrical construction in the process of erection, construction, alteration or relocation in the city for the purpose of determining whether the work is in compliance with the permit given and in compliance with the regulations of the city pertaining to such work, including zoning regulations; and

(d)    To keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits or certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection during stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building official or electrical inspector without his or her written consent.

(e)    Stop Orders.

(1)    Whenever any work is being down contrary to the provisions of this code, the enforcement officer or his designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such work until authorized by the enforcement officer or his or her designee to proceed with the work.

(2)    Whenever a site is posted with a "Stop Work" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his designee.

(f)    Occupancy Violations.

(1)    Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by this article is being used contrary to the provisions of this article, the enforcement officer of his or her designee may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the enforcement officer or his or her designee after receipt of such notice to make the structure or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this code.

(2)    Whenever the site is posted with a "Do Not Occupy" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove, deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his or her designee.

(Ord. 1077, Secs. 3:4; Code 2004)


4-307. SAME; POWERS.

The electrical inspector shall have the following powers:

(a)    To enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable hour, whether complete or in the process of erection, to perform the duties contained in this chapter;

(b)    To adopt and enforce all such prudent emergency measures as he or she may deem necessary and expedient for the public safety under the laws of the city;

(c)    May cause any work done in violation of this chapter to be discontinued until he or she shall have satisfactory evidence that the work will be done in accordance with the electrical regulations of the city, subject to the right of any installer or owner to appeal to the governing body.

(Code 2004)


4-308. SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY.

The electrical inspector, or his or her agent, upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour to perform his or her duties as set out in this chapter. (Code 2004)


4-309. CLARIFICATION; MODIFICATION.

(a)    The governing body shall be the final determiner of the scope and meaning of all provisions of the electrical code which may be unclear, ambiguous, or requiring interpretation.

(b)    The electrical inspector shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the electrical code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his or her authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. In approving modifications, the electrical inspector shall see that the spirit of the code is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of a modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the electrical inspector and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. (Code 2004)


4-310. ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; APPROVAL.

(a)    Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any electrical construction as defined in section 4-301 within the city without an electrical permit being first obtained therefor from the city clerk, after approval by the chief building official or his or her duly authorized assistant. The application for such permit shall be made and the permit obtained before any electrical construction work is commenced.

(b)    No electrical permit shall be required for any of the following:

(1)    The replacement of lamps, fuses, bulbs or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring;

(2)    Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or

(3)    Any work in industrial establishments where the issuance of electrical permits come under the scope of other agencies.

(Code 2004)


4-311. SAME; APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.

(a)    An electrical permit shall be issued upon an application in writing to the office of city clerk on a form or forms provided for the purpose. This application shall, among other things, disclose the following:

(1)    The name of the owner of the lot or tract of ground;

(2)    The location of the building or structure;

(3)    The electrical construction work proposed;

(4)    The class of occupancy;

(5)    The class of electrical construction;

(6)    The kind of materials to be used;

(7)    The estimated cost of the work;

(8)    The date work will commence;

(9)    Expected date of completion;

(10)    Name and address of electrical contractor or contractors doing the work;

(11)    Such other information as may be pertinent to the issuance of the required permit.

(b)    An application for an electrical permit shall be signed by the owner or his or her duly authorized agent, or an electrician or electrical contractor licensed by the city. If the application is made by the owner or his or her agent, it shall contain the name or names of the licensed electrician or electrical contractor or contractors doing the work described, or an electrical permit may be issued to the owner upon his or her application disclosing satisfactory evidence that the proposed work will be performed by the owner, himself or herself and not by a licensed electrical contractor, and likewise subject to the final approval of the electrical inspector for work performed.

(c)    Upon approval of the completed application and a determination that a permit should be issued, the chief building official or his or her assistant shall issue a permit to the owner, electrician or electrical contractor authorizing the electrical construction work covered by the application.

(d)    Any permit issued under this section shall be valid and subsisting for a period of not more than six months from the date of issuance unless the permittee shall have commenced, within the period so limited, the electrical construction work authorized by such permit. Electrical construction work commenced, for the purpose of this section, shall mean the beginning of electrical construction work other than the preparation of plans or the letting of an electrical contract.

(Code 2004)


4-312. SAME; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.

Whenever an application for a electrical permit is made, the chief building official or the electrical inspector may, if he or she finds it necessary to determine whether electrical construction work described in the application will comply with the laws pertaining to such work, require that the applicant file a written description or drawing of the proposed electrical construction as may be prepared for the purpose. If such drawing or description is insufficient for the purposes of determining whether a permit should be issued, the building official may require the applicant to file complete electrical and engineering plans and specifications for such electrical construction, or any part thereof, as may be necessary for the inspector to determine compliance with this article. The filing of such plans and specifications and the approval thereof in connection with an application for a permit shall not in any way affect the authority of the city to deny or issue a permit, or to inspect any electrical construction work for conformity with this article. (Code 2004)


4-313. SAME; FEES.

The fee herein shall be paid to the city clerk upon obtaining an electrical permit and the same shall be credited to the general operating fund of the city. The fees shall be calculated in accordance with the following schedule:

	Valuation	Permit Fee

	$1 to $500	$24

	$501 to $2,000	$24 for the first $500; plus $3 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof, up to and including $2,000

	$2,001 to $40,000	$69 for the first $2,000; plus $11 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $40,000

	$40,001 to $100,000	$487 for the first $40,000; plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $100,000

	$100,001 to $500,000	$1,027 for the first $100,000; plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000

	$500,001 to $1,000,000	$3,827 for the first $500,000; plus $5 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $1,000,000

	$1,000,001 to $5,000,000	$6,327 for the first $1,000,000; plus $3 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $5,000,000

	$5,000,001 and over	$18,327 for the first $5,000,000; plus $1 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

(Ord. 1077, Sec. 2; Code 2004; Ord. 1456, Sec. 2)


4-314. SAME; POSTING.

A copy of the electrical permit shall be kept on the premises for public inspection during the performance of the work and until the completion of the same. The electrical inspector may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work to the completion thereof. (Code 2004)


4-315. REQUEST FOR INSPECTION.

Upon the completion of any electrical work covered by this article, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the electrical inspector and request that it be inspected; after which such work shall be inspected promptly as hereinafter provided. (Code 2004)


4-316. INSPECTION; CONCEALMENT OF PRIOR WORK.

(a)    When any electric equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person, firm or corporation installing the equipment shall notify the building inspector and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected, approved or authorized by the electrical inspector or until 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notification. On large installations, where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person, firm or corporation installing the electrical equipment shall give the electrical inspector due notice and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work.

(b)    The electrical inspector shall have the authority to require building contractors to open such work which, in any manner, conceals electrical wiring that has been closed without his or her knowledge or permission, and in no case shall the inspector issue a certificate of approval until satisfied that the work is in accordance with the provisions of this article. The inspector shall also have the right to refuse to issue a certificate of approval on any wiring, that is concealed in such manner that it cannot be fully determined that it has been done in accordance with this article.

(Code 2004)


4-317. CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.

(a)    When the electrical inspector finds an electrical construction or installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he or she shall issue to the person, firm, or corporation performing the electrical construction work or making the installation, a certificate of approval, with duplicate copy for delivery to the owner, authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the supply of electricity.

(b)    When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary installation, the certificate shall expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable for cause by the electrical inspector.

(c)    In no case shall certificates of approval be issued on electrical construction, installations or parts of installations where the work installed does not conform to the requirements of this article.

(d)    If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the electrical inspector shall immediately notify the person, firm, or corporation performing the electrical construction work or making the installation of the existing defects.

(e)    No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the electric conductor or equipment has been installed in strict conformity with the provisions of this article and unless the electrical construction or installation is made in compliance with nationally approved methods of construction for safety to life and property as herein set forth.

(f)    The electrical inspector shall be deemed the judge of whether the installation of electric conductors and equipment has been made in accordance with the requirements of this article.

(g)    No certificate of approval shall be required for any of the following:

(1)    The replacement of lamps, fuses, bulbs or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring;

(2)    Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or

(3)    Any work in industrial establishments where inspections come under the scope of other inspection agencies.

(Code 2004)


4-318. CONNECTION TO INSTALLATIONS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make connection to a supply of electricity to any building or electrical equipment for which an inspection is required, or which has been disconnected by the order of the electrical inspector, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing the connection and use of such electric supply. The electrical inspector may, at his or her discretion, authorize a temporary connection. (Code 2004)


4-319. REINSPECTION.

The electrical inspector shall periodically reinspect existing installations of electrical conductors and equipment. When the installation of any conductors or equipment is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person, firm, or corporation owning, using, or operating the installation shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place the conductors or equipment in safe condition and have the work completed within the period specified by the electrical inspector. (Code 2004)


4-320. CONDEMNATION; APPEAL.

(a)    If in the judgment of the electrical inspector, after an inspection, any electrical conductors, appliances or equipment in any building are unsafe or dangerous to persons or property, the inspector shall have the power to cause the wires or appliances to be disconnected from the source of electrical energy supplying these conductors or equipment, and may, at his or her discretion, seal the control switches for the same in an open or disconnected position, whereupon he or she shall give notice to the owner, or his or her agent, or by posting such notice at the site and shall also notify the utilities serving the premises. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit electric current to be supplied to the electrical conductors, appliances or equipment so sealed until they shall have been made safe and the inspector shall have issued a certificate of approval to that effect.

(b)    It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to cause all dead wires, unused poles or electric apparatus on the outside of the buildings or in streets or alleys to be removed at the expense of the owners thereof by giving the owners written notice.

(c)    When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of any electrical installation, the owner may, within 10 days after receiving written notice thereof, file a petition in writing for review of the action of the building inspector by the governing body, upon the receipt of which the governing body shall at once proceed to determine the facts, and within 10 days from receiving the petition make a decision in accordance with their findings.

(Code 2004)


4-321. INTERFERENCE BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSON.

It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to, in any manner, change or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If in the course of the erection of a building or structure, electrical conductors or equipment are in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the structure, notice shall be immediately given the authorized person or firm installing the electrical conductors or equipment, and the needed change shall be made by such authorized person or firm. (Code 2004)


4-322. WORK BY PROPERTY OWNERS.

Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any property owner from personally performing any electrical construction or installing electrical wiring or equipment within and upon his or her own residence and intended for his or her personal use and permanent occupancy; provided, the owner shall satisfy the electrical inspector as to his or her ability to perform such work or install such electrical wiring, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance with this article, and apply for an inspection and receive a certificate of approval. Personal electrical construction or installation performed by an owner under this section shall be by himself, herself, for himself or herself on his or her own residence, without compensation and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way on such work except an electrician or electrical contractor licensed by the city. (Code 2004)


4-323. APPROVED MATERIALS.

No electric materials for wiring of appliances or equipment shall be installed in the city unless they are in conformity with the provisions of this article and with the approved standards of construction for safety to life and property. Conformity of materials for wiring appliances and equipment to the standards of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. shall be prima facie evidence that the materials, devices, appliances and equipment comply with the requirements of this article. (Code 2004)


4-324. LIABILITY.

This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability, by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein, or the certificate of approval of any work or equipment authorized herein or by reason of any permit or license granted herein. (Code 2004)


4-325. SEVERABILITY.

If any section of the National Electrical Code or of this article shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, then such section shall be considered separate and apart from the remaining provisions of the National Electrical Code or of this article, the section is to be completely severable from the remaining provisions which shall continue in full force and effect. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 4. PLUMBING AND GAS-FITTING CODE


4-401. DEFINITION OF PLUMBING.

The term plumbing as used in this article shall be construed to mean the installation of gas or water pipes, fixtures, apparatus and the necessary connections either for supplying gas or water to premises or for the removing of liquid and water-borne wastes from premises in the city, or both such purposes, and shall also denote installed fixtures, drainage and vent systems and gas or water distribution systems as the case may be. (Code 2004)


4-402. ADOPTION.

A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Tonganoxie, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E and F, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the city of Tonganoxie, in the State of Kansas, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the office of the city of Tonganoxie are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section.

The following sections are hereby revised: 101.1, 106.6.2, 106.6.3, 108.4, 108.5, 305.4.1, 312.10, 410.1, 604.9, 903.1 and 1114.1.1. 

In more detail as follows:

305.6.1 Updated to 305.4.1 – Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 36 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 36 inches below grade.

312.9 Updated to 312.10 – Inspection and testing shall comply with the regulations and standards set forth by City of Tonganoxie Public Works and Water Department.

904.1 Updated to 903.1 – All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 6 inches above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extension shall be run at least 7 feet above the roof.

1113.1.1 Updated to 1114.1.1 – The sump pump shall be of a capacity and head appropriate to anticipated use requirements. Sumps receiving storm water from any exposed exterior drains or openings shall be provided with back-up system(s) capable of assuring proper sump operation in case of power failure. (Ord. 1336; Ord. 1453, Sec. 1)


4-403. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.

The following sections of this article are in addition to the provisions of the standard code incorporated by reference in section 4-402. (Code 2004)


4-404. BUILDING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY.

The building inspector or his or her authorized designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and shall act as plumbing inspector, when such designation by the code is required. (Code 2004)


4-405. SAME; DUTIES.

The plumbing inspector shall have the following duties:

(a)    To enforce all regulations relating to plumbing construction, alteration, repair or removal;

(b)    May permit, with the approval of the governing body, on the basis of duly authenticated reports from recognized sources, the use of new materials or modes of construction, not provided for in this article, and may, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article adopt an accepted standard of material or workmanlike practices of federal or state bureaus, national, technical organizations or fire underwriters;

(c)    To examine all buildings in the process of erection, construction, alteration or relocation in the city for the purpose of determining whether the work is in compliance with the plumbing permit given and in compliance with the regulations of the city pertaining to such work, including zoning regulations; and

(d)    To keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits or certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection during stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building official or plumbing inspector without his or her written consent.

(Code 2004)


4-406. SAME; POWERS.

The plumbing inspector shall have the following powers:

(a)    To enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable hour, whether complete or in the process of erection, to perform the duties contained in this chapter;

(b)    To adopt and enforce all such prudent emergency measures as he or she may deem necessary and expedient for the public safety under the laws of the city;

(c)    May cause any work done in violation of this chapter to be discontinued until he or she shall have satisfactory evidence that the work will be done in accordance with the plumbing regulations of the city, subject to the right of any plumber, plumbing contractor or owner to appeal to the governing body.

(Code 2004)


4-407. SAME; RIGHT OF ENTRY.

The plumbing inspector, or his or her agent, upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour to perform his or her duties as set out in this chapter. (Code 2004)


4-408. CLARIFICATION; MODIFICATION.

(a)    The governing body shall be the final determiner of the scope and meaning of all provisions of the plumbing code which may be unclear, ambiguous, or requiring interpretation.

(b)    The plumbing inspector shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the plumbing code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his or her authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. In approving modifications, the plumbing inspector shall see that the spirit of the code is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of a modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the plumbing inspector and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. (Code 2004)


4-409. PLUMBING PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.

(a)    It shall be unlawful to install, alter or reconstruct any plumbing or plumbing system, as defined by the plumbing code and section 4-401, in any building in the city without first making application to and receiving a permit therefor from the city clerk, after approval by the chief building official or his or her authorized assistant. The application for such permit shall be made and the permit obtained before any plumbing work is commenced.

(b)    Stop Orders.

(1)    Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the enforcement officer or his or her designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the enforcement officer or his or her designee to proceed with the work.

(2)    When ever a site is posted with a "Stop Work" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his or her designee.

(c)    Occupancy Violations.

(1)    Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by this article is being used contrary to the provisions of this article, the enforcement officer or his or her designee may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the enforcement officer or his or her designee after receipt of such notice to make the structure or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this code.

(2)    Whenever the site is posted with a "Do Not Occupy" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove, deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his or her designee.



(d)    No permit shall be required for making minor repairs of any plumbing including repair of leaks in water pipes, traps or cocks, opening up stoppage in waste or supply pipes, traps or drains, replacing fixtures when waste pipes are not disturbed, or replacing frozen pipes inside the building, and like repair work not involving original installation or reconstruction.

(Ord. 1085, Secs. 3:4; Code 2004)


4-410. SAME; APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.

(a)    A plumbing permit shall be issued upon an application in writing to the office of city clerk on a form or forms provided for the purpose. This application shall, among other things, disclose the following:

(1)    The name of the owner of the lot or tract of ground;

(2)    The location of the building or structure;

(3)    The plumbing work proposed;

(4)    The class of occupancy;

(5)    The class of construction;

(6)    The kind of materials to be used;

(7)    The estimated cost of the work;

(8)    The date work will commence;

(9)    Expected date of completion;

(10)    Name and address of plumber, plumbing contractor or contractors doing the work;

(11)    Such other information as may be pertinent to the issuance of the required permit.

(b)    An application for a plumbing permit shall be signed by the owner or his or her duly authorized agent, or a plumber or plumbing contractor licensed by the city. If the application is made by the owner or his or her agent, it shall contain the name or names of the licensed plumber, plumbing contractor or contractors doing the work described, or a plumbing permit may be issued to the owner upon his or her application disclosing satisfactory evidence that the proposed work will be performed by the owner, himself or herself and not by a licensed plumber or plumbing contractor, and likewise subject to the final approval of the plumbing inspector for work performed.

(c)    Upon approval of the completed application and a determination that a permit should be issued, the chief building official or his or her assistant shall issue a permit to the owner or contractor authorizing the plumbing work covered by the application.

(d)    Any permit issued under this section shall be valid and subsisting for a period of not more than six months from the date of issuance unless the permittee shall have commenced, within the period so limited, the plumbing work authorized by such permit. Plumbing work commenced for the purpose of this section shall mean the beginning of plumbing work other than the preparation of plans or the letting of a plumbing contract.

(Code 2004)


4-411. SAME; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.

Whenever an application for a plumbing permit is made, the chief building official or the plumbing inspector may, if he or she finds it necessary to determine whether work described in the application will comply with the laws pertaining to such work, require that the applicant file a written description or drawing of the proposed plumbing construction as may be prepared for the purpose. If such drawing or description is insufficient for the purposes of determining whether a permit should be issued, the chief building official or the plumbing inspector may require the applicant to file complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications for such building or construction, or any part thereof, as may be necessary for the inspector to determine compliance with this article. The filing of such plans and specifications and the approval thereof in connection with an application for a permit shall not in any way affect the authority of the city to deny or issue a permit, or to inspect any plumbing work for conformity with this article. (Code 2004)


4-412. SAME; FEES.

The fee herein shall be paid to the city clerk upon obtaining a plumbing permit and the same shall be credited to the general operating fund of the city.

	Valuation	Permit Fee

	$1 to $500	$24

	$501 to $2,000	$24 for the first $500; plus $3 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof, up to and including $2,000

	$2,001 to $40,000	$69 for the first $2,000; plus $11 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $40,000

	$40,001 to $100,000	$487 for the first $40,000; plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $100,000

	$100,001 to $500,000	$1,027 for the first $100,000; plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000

	$500,001 to $1,000,000	$3,827 for the first $500,000; plus $5 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $1,000,000

	$1,000,001 to $5,000,000	$6,327 for the first $1,000,000; plus $3 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $5,000,000

	$5,000,001 and over	$18,327 for the first $5,000,000; plus $1 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

(Ord. 1085, Sec. 2; Code 2004; Ord. 1453, Sec. 2)


4-413. SAME; POSTING.

A copy of the plumbing permit shall be kept on the premises for public inspection during the performance of the work and until the completion of the same. The plumbing inspector may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work to the completion thereof. (Code 2004)


4-414. REQUEST FOR INSPECTION.

Upon the completion of any plumbing work covered by this article, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the plumbing inspector and request that it be inspected; after which such work shall be inspected promptly as hereinafter provided. (Code 2004)


4-415. INSPECTION; CONCEALMENT OF PRIOR WORK.

(a)    When any plumbing is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person, firm or corporation installing the plumbing shall notify the plumbing inspector and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected, approved or authorized by the plumbing inspector or until 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notification. On large installations, where the concealment of plumbing proceeds continuously, the person, firm or corporation installing the plumbing shall give the plumbing inspector due notice and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work.

(b)    The plumbing inspector shall have the authority to require owners or contractors to open such work which, in any manner, conceals plumbing that has been closed without his or her knowledge or permission, and in no case shall the inspector issue a certificate of approval until satisfied that the work is in accordance with the provisions of this article. The inspector shall also have the right to refuse to issue a certificate of approval on any plumbing, that is concealed in such manner that it cannot be fully determined that it has been done in accordance with this article.

(Code 2004)


4-416. CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.

(a)    When the plumbing inspector finds plumbing construction to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he or she shall issue to the person, firm, or corporation performing the plumbing construction, a certificate of approval, with duplicate copy for delivery to the owner, authorizing the use of the plumbing system and connection to the supply of gas or water, as the case may be.

(b)    When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary gas or water supply, the certificate shall expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable for cause by the plumbing inspector.

(c)    In no case shall certificates of approval be issued on plumbing or plumbing systems or parts of systems where the work installed does not conform to the requirements of this article.

(d)    If, upon inspection, the plumbing or plumbing system is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the plumbing inspector shall immediately notify the person, firm, or corporation making the installation of the existing defects.

(e)    No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the plumbing or plumbing system has been installed in strict conformity with the provisions of this article and unless the plumbing or plumbing system is made in compliance with nationally approved methods of construction for safety to life and property as herein set forth.

(f)    The plumbing inspector shall be deemed the judge of whether the plumbing or plumbing system has been made in accordance with the requirements of this article.

(g)    No certificate of approval shall be required for making minor repairs of any plumbing including repair of leaks in water pipes, traps or cocks, opening up stoppage in waste or supply pipes, traps or drains, replacing fixtures when waste pipes are not disturbed, or replacing frozen pipes inside the building, and like repair work not involving original installation or reconstruction.

(Code 2004)


4-417. CONNECTION TO GAS OR WATER SUPPLY.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make connection to a supply of gas or water for which an inspection is required, or which has been disconnected by the order of the plumbing inspector, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the plumbing inspector authorizing the connection and use of such plumbing or plumbing system. The plumbing inspector may, at his or her discretion, authorize a temporary connection. (Code 2004)


4-418. CONDEMNATION; APPEAL.

(a)    If in the judgment of the plumbing inspector, after inspection, the plumbing or plumbing system in any building are unsafe or dangerous to persons or property, the inspector shall have the power to cause the plumbing or plumbing system to be disconnected from the supply of gas or water and may, at his or her discretion, seal the control valves for the same in a closed or disconnected position, whereupon he or she shall give notice to the owner, or his or her agent, or by posting such notice at the site and shall also notify the utilities serving the premises. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit gas or water to be supplied to the plumbing or plumbing system so sealed until they shall have been made safe and the inspector shall have issued a certificate of approval to that effect.

(b)    When the plumbing inspector condemns all or part of any plumbing system, the owner may, within 10 days after receiving written notice thereof, file a petition in writing for review of the action of the plumbing inspector by the governing body, upon the receipt of which the governing body shall at once proceed to determine the facts, and within 10 days from receiving the petition make a decision in accordance with their findings.

(Code 2004)


4-419. EXCAVATIONS.

When it appears that the laying or repairing of any water or sewer pipes or the making of any connection therewith shall require excavation in any street, alley or public way of the city or the cutting or removal of any pavement, curb or gutter or any sidewalk, during the course of such work, the application for a permit shall so state and describe the location and extent of the excavation, cutting or removal. Before the city clerk shall issue any permit for such work, the applicant shall pay any fee required by this code. All excavations shall be barricaded and guarded as provided by the appropriate sections of this code. Before any such excavation shall be backfilled, new plumbing work therein shall be inspected and the bottom of the excavation holding any sewer, drain or water pipe shall be so filled, leveled and tamped as to properly support the pipe and permit proper drainage when carrying sewage, and the excavation shall be backfilled and all paving, curbing, guttering or sidewalks shall be restored as near as possible to their last condition, subject always to the approval of the plumbing inspector or the superintendent of streets. (Code 2004)


4-420. WORK BY PROPERTY OWNERS.

Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any property owner from personally installing plumbing piping or equipment within and upon his or her own residence and intended for his or her personal use and permanent occupancy; provided, the owner shall satisfy the plumbing inspector as to his or her ability to install such piping or equipment, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance with this article, and apply for an inspection and receive approval. Personal installation by an owner under this section shall be by himself, herself, for himself or herself on his or her own residence, without compensation and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way on such work except a plumber or plumbing contractor licensed by the city. (Code 2004)


4-421. APPROVED MATERIALS.

No plumbing materials, appliances or equipment shall be installed in the city unless they are in conformity with the provisions of this article and with the approved standards of construction for safety to life and property. Conformity of materials for plumbing materials, appliances and equipment to the standards of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. shall be prima facie evidence that the materials, devices, appliances and equipment comply with the requirements of this article. (Code 2004)


4-422. LIABILITY.

This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or performing any plumbing construction for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability, by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein, or the certificate of approval of any work or equipment authorized herein or by reason of any permit or license granted herein. (Code 2004)


4-423. SEVERABILITY.

If any section of the Uniform Plumbing Code or of this article shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, then such section shall be considered separate and apart from the remaining provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code or of this article, the section is to be completely severable from the remaining provisions which shall continue in full force and effect. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 5. DANGEROUS BUILDINGS


4-501. ADOPTION.

The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference for the purpose to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the Building Code, Housing Code or otherwise available by law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this code in the city, such code being made a part of the ordinances of the city as if the same had be set out in full herein, all as authorized and in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 12-3009 through 12-3012 including any amendments thereto. No fewer than three copies of the Uniform Code Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition shall be marked "Official Copy as Incorporated by the City of Tonganoxie" and shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours of business. (Ord. 1085, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


4-502. STOP ORDERS.

(a)    Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the enforcement officer or his or her designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the enforcement officer or his or her designee to proceed with the work.

(b)    When ever a site is posted with a "Stop Work" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his or her designee.

(Ord. 1078, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


4-503. OCCUPANCY VIOLATIONS.

(a)    Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by this    ordinance is being used contrary to the provisions of this ordinances, the enforcement officer or his or her designee may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the use within the time prescribed by the enforcement officer or his or her designee after receipt of such notice to make the structure or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this code.

(b)    Whenever the site is posted with a "Do Not Occupy" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove, deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his or her designee.

(Ord. 1085, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 6. INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE


4-601. ADOPTION.

A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Tonganoxie, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapter A (see International Mechanical Code Section 101.2.1, 2012 Edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the city of Tonganoxie, in the State of Kansas, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the office of the city of Tonganoxie are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section.

The following sections are hereby revised and/or deleted: 101.1, Section 103 is hereby deleted, 106.5.2, 106.5.3, 108.4, 108.5, Section 301.2 is hereby deleted and 301.10. 

In more detail as follows:

301.7 Updated to 301.10 – Electrical wiring, controls and connections to equipment and appliances regulated by this code shall be in accordance with the 2011 NEC (National Electrical Code), was NEC 2002 or the 2012 IRC (International Residential Code), was IRC 2003. (Ord. 1337; Ord. 1454, Sec. 1)


4-602. STOP ORDERS.

(a)    Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the enforcement officer or his or her designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the enforcement officer or his or her designee to proceed with the work.

(b)    When ever a site is posted with a "Stop Work" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his or her designee.

(Ord. 1084, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


4-603. OCCUPANCY VIOLATIONS.

(a)    Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by this article is being used contrary to the provisions of this ordinances, the enforcement officer or his or her designee may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the use within the time prescribed by the enforcement officer or his or her designee after receipt of such notice to make the structure or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this code.

(b)    Whenever the site is posted with a "Do Not Occupy" sign, it shall be illegal for anyone to remove, deface or destruct the sign, save the enforcement officer or his or her designee.

(Ord. 1085, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 7. MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS


4-701. DEFINITIONS.

The definition of a manufactured home is any structure, subject to and built in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 5403, and ordinarily equipped with wheels or not, that is designed, constructed or manufactured to be moved from one place to another by being towed or carried, and to provide:

(a)    A dwelling house or premises;

(b)    A business office or premises; or,

(c)    Accommodation for any other purpose, unless exempted by the Manufactured Home Act.

(Ord. 1087, Sec. 1)


4-702. APPLICATIONS.

Application for manufactured home occupancy permits are required by this article and shall be filed at the office of the city clerk. The application shall be in writing on forms provided by the city. (Ord. 1087, Sec. 2)


4-703. SAME; APPROVAL.

All applications for manufactured home occupancy permits for individual manufactured homes shall be approved by the building inspector, police chief, fire chief, or their properly designated representative in accordance with the provisions of this article and subject to any other limitations that may be imposed by other ordinances of the city. Upon approval the office of the city clerk shall issue the manufactured home occupancy permit upon payment of the fees herein provided. (Ord. 1087, Sec. 3)


4-704. CONNECTION.

It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any manufactured home upon the premises of a leased mobile/manufactured home park without first having secured a manufactured home occupancy permit. All necessary connection fees shall be paid prior to the installation of the manufactured home. (Ord. 1087, Sec. 4)


4-705. APPLICATION DENIED.

If upon inspection of any manufactured home, the building inspector, police chief, fire chief or their properly designated representative finds conditions that exist which are in violation of any provisions of city ordinances, the building inspector, police chief, fire chief or their properly designated representative shall give notice to the person whom the permit was requested that the permit was denied. Unless such condition or practices are corrected within a reasonable time to be determined by the building inspector, police chief, fire chief or their properly designated representative, he or she shall give notice in writing remove the manufactured home from the city. (Ord. 1087, Sec. 5)


4-706. ISSUANCE.

After inspection of the manufactured home for conformance with the provisions of city ordinances, and upon payment of the manufactured home occupancy fee, the city clerk shall issue a mobile home occupancy permit which shall be valid so long as the manufactured home is not moved. (Ord. 1087, Sec. 6)


4-707. FEES.

Fees for mobile home occupancy permits shall be as follows: The fee for a manufactured home occupancy permit shall be $50 to be paid by the owner of the manufactured home. (Ord. 1087, Sec. 7)


4-708. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOME OCCUPANCY PERMIT APPROVAL.

(a)    Electricity. All electrical installations shall comply with the electrical code of the city.

(b)    Fuel. Natural and liquefied petroleum gas for heating and cooking purposes may be used at individual manufactured home park spaces; provided, however, that the installation is connected by copper or suitable metallic tubing and complies with the fire prevention code of the city.

(c)    Miscellaneous. Persons so designated to enforce this article may add requirements for special circumstances where appropriate.

(d)    Site. Any manufactured home shall be located on a site previously approved as a manufactured home park. The lot shall be properly graded to insure proper drainage and to prevent stagnant pools of water.

(e)    Skirts. Skirts may not be installed until after the inspection process is complete. Each manufactured home shall be equipped with skirts on all sides, such skirts to be of a material harmonious to the manufactured home structure.

(d)    Tie Downs. The manufactured home will need to be properly tied down to insure the safety of the inhabitants in accordance with manufacturer’s requirements and applicable federal, state or local laws.

(e)    Water Supply. The water supply shall be connected to the municipal water system and all plumbing shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the city’s plumbing code. If the owner of the manufactured home park has required each unit be metered separately within the private water system, the city will maintain, read and allow disconnections of services in accordance with city ordinances, and any costs associated with meter maintenance will be billed to the manufactured home park owner.

(f)    Sewage Disposal. All liquid waste shall disposed of through a sanitary sewer system and treatment facility. All plumbing at the manufactured home park shall comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations. The sewer connections shall be provided with suitable fittings so that a watertight connection can be made between the manufactured home sewage line and the sewer connection. Such individual manufactured home connections shall be so constructed that they can be closed when not linked to a manufactured home, and shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor-free condition. All sewer lines of the manufactured home park shall be connected to the public sewer system.

(g)    Sewer Connection Fee will be assessed to the property owner for each initial manufactured home installation.

(Ord. 1087, Sec. 8)


4-709. DWELLING DESIGNATED.

For the purposes of water and sewer connection fees each and every manufactured dwelling unit shall be treated as a single-family dwelling provided services are publicly provided. (Ord. 1087, Sec. 9)


ARTICLE 8. MOVING BUILDINGS


4-801. BUILDING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY.

The building inspector or his or her authorized designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and appointment of an inspector in accordance with sections 4-204:209 of this chapter, which apply in a like manner to this article.

(Code 2004)


4-802. PERMIT REQUIRED.

No person, firm or corporation shall move, haul, or transport any house, building, derrick, or other structure of the height when loaded for movement of 16 feet or more from the surface of the highway, road, street or alley, or a width of eight feet or more or which cannot be moved at a speed of four miles per hour or faster, upon, across or over any street, alley or sidewalk in this city without first obtaining a permit therefor. (K.S.A. 17-1914; Code 2004)


4-803. SAME: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.

All applications for permits required under the provisions of this article shall be made in writing to the city clerk specifying the day and hour said moving is to commence and the route through the city’s streets over which the house, building, derrick or other structure shall be moved and stating whether it will be necessary to cut and move, raise, or in any way interfere with any wires, cables or other aerial equipment of any public or municipally-owned utility, and if so, the application shall also state the name of the public or municipally-owned utility, and the time and location that the applicant’s moving operations shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or otherwise interfering with such aerial facilities. (K.S.A. 17-1915; Code 2004)


4-804. SAME; BOND, INSURANCE REQUIRED.

(a)    It shall be the duty of any person at the time of making application for a permit as provided in this article to give a good and sufficient surety bond to the city, to be approved by the governing body, indemnifying the city against any loss or damage resulting from the failure of any such person to comply with the provisions of this article or for any damage or injury caused in moving any such house or structure. The bond herein shall be in the sum of $5,000, or cash may be deposited in lieu of such surety bond.

(b)    A public liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Kansas, in the amount of $100,000 per person, $300,000 per accident as to personal injury, and $50,000 property damage may be permitted in lieu of a bond.

(Code 2004)


4-805. SAME; FEE.

Before any permit to move any house or structure is given under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall pay a fee of not less than $5 to the city clerk; plus the additional cost for the time for any city crews involved in such moving. (Code 2004)


4-806. ROUTE; DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.

The city clerk shall, upon filing of the above application, refer the same to the chief building official or his or her authorized designee to check the proposed route and determine if it is practical to move such house or other structure over the route proposed. If it shall appear that such route is not practical and another route may be used equally well with less danger to street and travel, then he or she may designate such other route as the one to be used and shall notify the applicant of the same. The building official may also require the planking of any street, bridge or culvert or any part thereof to prevent damage thereto. It shall also be the duty of the chief building official or his or her authorized designee to inspect the progress of moving any house or other structure to see that the same is being moved in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Code 2004)


4-807. NOTICE TO OWNERS.

(a)    Upon issuance of a moving permit the applicant shall give not less than 15 days written notice to any person owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment along the proposed route of the intent to move the structure, giving the time and location that the applicants moving operation shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or interfering of any wires, cables or other aerial equipment.

(b)    The notice provision of subsection (a) shall not apply where the person owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment has waived their right to advance notice.

(c)    Should the moving operation be delayed, the applicant shall give the owner or his or her agent not less than 24 hours advance notice of the actual operation.

(K.S.A. 17-1916; Code 2004)


4-808. DUTY OF OWNERS.

(a)    It shall be the duty of the person or the city owning or operating such poles or wires after service of notice as provided herein, to furnish competent lineman or workmen to remove such poles, or raise or cut such wires as will be necessary to facilitate the moving of such house or structure. The necessary expense which is incurred thereby shall be paid by the holder of the moving permit.    (b)    The owner of any wires, cables or other aerial equipment, after service of notice as provided in section 4-808, shall be liable to the permit holder for damages in an amount not to exceed $100 per day for each day the owner shall fail or refuse to accommodate the permit holder’s moving operations.

(K.S.A. 17-1917; Code 2004)


4-809. INTERFERING WITH POLES; WIRES.

It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in moving any house or other structure to raise, cut or in any way interfere with any wires or poles bearing wires or any other aerial equipment. (K.S.A. 17-1918; Code 2004)


4-810. DISPLAY OF LANTERNS.

It shall be the duty of any person moving any of the structures mentioned in this article upon or across any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place, in this city, to display red lanterns thereon in such a manner as to show the extreme height and width thereof from sunset to sunrise. (Code 2004)


Article 9. INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE


4-901. ADOPTION.

A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Tonganoxie, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, E, G, I, K, L, M and Q (see International Residential Code Section R102.5, 2012 Edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the city of Tonganoxie, in the State of Kansas, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office of the city of Tonganoxie are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 4-902. (Ord. 1333; Ord. 1452, Sec. 1)


4-902. AMENDMENTS.

The following sections are hereby revised and/or amended: Sections R101.1, R101.2, R102.7, 105.2 #1 and #5, 105.2.1, 105.7, 106.1, 106.2, 108.2 revised, 109.4, 202, Table R301.2, 302.5.1, 302.5.2, 302.6, 309.3, 311.3, 302.2.2, 319.1, 401.3, 403.1.1.1, 404.1.3, 801.3, 2503.5.1, 2503.5.2 #2, P2603.5.1, P3103.1, P3114.3, E3601.6.2, E3901.4.2, E3902.12.

In more detail as follows:

108.2 Revised – On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. The fee for a building remodel or addition, electrical, mechanical and/or plumbing permit shall be as set forth (in Exhibit A, B, C and D) on scheduling fee chart.

309.1 Updated to 302.5.1 – Opening protection.

309.1.1 Updated to 302.5.2 – Duct penetration.

309.2 Updated to 302.6 – Dwelling/garage fire separation.

309.5 Updated to 309.3 – Flood hazard areas.

311.4.3 Updated to 311.3 – Floors and landings at exterior doors.

317.2.2 Updated to 302.2.2 – Parapets.

321.1 Updated to 319.1 – Address numbers.

M1501.3 Delete – Exceptions on clothes dryer exhaust limits, removed from 2012 IRC.

P2603.6.1 Updated to 2603.5.1 – Sewer Depth.

E3501.6.2 Updated to 3601.6.2 – Service disconnect location.

E3801.4.2 Updated to E3901.4.2 – Island countertop spaces.

E3802.11 Updated to E3902.12 – Arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection.

Revised E3902.12 – All branch circuits that supply 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampere outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms shall be protected by a combination type arc-fault circuit interrupter installed to provide protection of the branch circuit.

Section 106.1 of International Residential Code as adopted by this article is amended to read as follows:

106.1: Submitted documents.

Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional, except for slab on grade single-story structures, and except where required by state statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional for residential structures less than three stories, walls ten feet high or shorter, finished area of 4,000 square feet or less, if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.

Appendix L – Now Scheduling Permit Fee Chart.

Appendix M – Home Day Care R-3 Occupancy.

Appendix Q – Is 2003 IRC Appendix L – National Electrical Code Cross Reference. (Ord. 1333; Ord. 1414, Sec. 1; Ord. 1452, Sec. 1)


Article 10. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL


4-1001. PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.

The purpose of this article is to set forth procedures for controlling erosion and sedimentation caused by land disturbance activities, thereby providing for the protection and enhancement of the water quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands. (Ord. 1320)


4-1002. DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:

(a)    Best management practices or BMPs mean physical facilities, schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will be effective to prevent or reduce the discharge of water or air pollution associated with land disturbance activities regulated by this article.

(b)    Certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) means an individual who is currently holding such certification as issued by CPESC, Inc., or other person holding a state license authorizing them to prepare and submit an erosion and sediment control plan.

(c)    Code means the city of Tonganoxie Municipal Code.

(d)    Erosion means the wearing away of land by the action of wind, water, gravity or ice or a combination thereof.

(e)    Erosion and sediment control plan, or plan, means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from land disturbing activity, and may include, without being limited to, the drawings, specifications, construction documents, schedules, or other related documents upon which establish the best management practices (BMPs) to be used on a project. The plan shall include any site area set forth, including such information required as necessary to review the basis for the design of the BMPs and to ensure their proper installation, maintenance, inspection, and removal of the BMPs, along with the details required to construct any portion of the final storm sewer system that was impeded by a BMP.

(f)    Erosion and sediment control standards or standards means the erosion and sediment control design criteria and specifications adopted by reference by the city of Tonganoxie.

(g)    Land disturbance means any activity that changes the physical conditions of landform, vegetation and hydrology, creates bare soil, or otherwise may cause erosion or sedimentation. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing, removal of vegetation, stripping, grading, grubbing, excavating, filling, logging and storing of materials.

(h)    Perennial vegetation means grass or other appropriate natural growing vegetation that provides substantial land cover, erosion protection and soil stability and that is capable of sustained and healthy growth over multiple years under the constraints of shade, temperature and moisture that will be prevalent on the site. For the purposes of this article, annual grasses that do not regenerate after winter, ornamental plants or shrubs that do not offer effective erosion and sediment protection, and plants that are not suitable for the expected growing conditions on the site shall not be considered perennial vegetation.

(i)    Permit means a building permit for construction of a building, site development permit, land disturbance permit, or right-of-way permit.

(j)    Permit holder means the owner or contractor who is issued a permit. The permit holder may designate a separate contact person regarding field issues related to erosion and sediment control.

(k)    Person means any individual, business, partnership, corporation, association, organization or legal entity of any kind including governmental entities.

(l)    Sediment means any solid material, organic or inorganic, that has been deposited in water, is in suspension in water, is being transported or has been removed from its site of origin by wind, water, ice or gravity as result of soil erosion. Sedimentation is the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.

(m)    Storm sewer system means any conveyance or system of conveyances for storm water, including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, as well as any system that meets the definition of a municipal separate storm sewer system or "MS4" as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency in 40 CFR 122.26.

(n)    Storm water means storm runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.

(o)    Water bodies means surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands, including all areas designated by the federal government as a waterway of the United States.

(Ord. 1320)


4-1003. ADMINISTRATION.

(a)    Authority. The code enforcement officer or designated officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The city council shall have the authority to adopt regulations, policies and procedures as necessary for the enforcement of this article.

(b)    Right of Entry. Whenever the code enforcement officer or designated officer has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises, any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the code enforcement officer or designated officer is authorized to enter the premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this article. If entry is refused, the code enforcement officer or designated officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

(c)    Erosion and Sediment Control Standards. The city shall adopt and maintain erosion and sediment control standards to assist in the administration of this article. The erosion and sediment control standards shall be based on, but not limited to, the following principles:

(1)    Fit the development to existing site conditions.

(2)    Minimize the extent of exposure.

(3)    Minimize duration of exposure.

(4)    Break work activities into phases when possible.

(5)    When possible, protect disturbed areas from any unnecessary run-on of storm water from adjacent sites, at least during the construction period.

(6)    Stabilize disturbed areas.

(7)    Keep runoff velocities low.

(8)    Retain sediment on the site.

(9)    Inspect and maintain control measures.

(10)    Use performance measures and outcomes.

(11)    Timely employment and maintenance of all measures.

(d)    Time Requirement. Where land disturbance activities have temporarily or permanently ceased on a portion of a project site for over 21 consecutive days, the disturbed areas shall be protected from erosion by stabilizing the areas with mulch or other similarly effective soil stabilizing BMPs, unless the time frame for compliance is extended by the code enforcement officer or designated officer. Where implementation of stabilization measures is precluded by snow cover, stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable.

(e)    Other Pollutants. In addition to sediment, the erosion and sediment control plan shall provide for the control of other pollutants related to the land disturbance activity that might cause an adverse impact to water quality, including, but not limited to, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, fuel, hydraulic fluids, chemicals, litter, and sanitary wastes.

(Ord. 1320)


4-1004. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(a)    Any person undertaking land disturbance activities, including the clearing, grading, excavating, filling, storing, and disposing of soil and earth materials, shall comply with the requirements and standards set forth in this chapter.

(b)    Applicability. Regardless of whether or not a land disturbance activity requires a permit, any person engaged in any land disturbance activity shall comply with the spirit and intent of this article. At a minimum, such persons shall employ BMP methods for erosion and sediment control in proportion to the scale of the activity to reduce the amount of sediment or other pollutants in storm water discharges associated with those activities.

(c)    Responsible Person(s). The responsible person(s) is/are the owner of the property upon which a land disturbance takes place and any person(s) performing a land disturbance activity.

(Ord. 1320)


4-1005. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS.

(a)    All proposed land disturbance activity shall be depicted on a site-specific erosion and sediment control plan. Land disturbance activities that do not require a permit are required to employ applicable BMPs included in standard details provided by the city. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the building official or the planning director for review. The plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

(1)    Proposed site map.

(2)    Areas to be disturbed.

(3)    Proposed erosion and sediment control BMPs to be employed.

(4)    Phasing of erosion and control measures.

(5)    Final stabilization plan for each phase.

(6)    Details and specifications for any sections of the final storm sewer system that must be constructed after the removal of BMPs such as temporary sediment basins or silt ponds.

(7)    Work schedule.

(8)    Maintenance and inspection requirements. The building official or the planning director may require any additional information or data deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with the intent, purpose and provisions of this section.

(b)    Review and Approval of Erosion and Sediment Control Plans. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, manner, nature and extent of the work proposed. The plan shall clearly show that the proposed work will conform to the provisions of this code, the erosion and sediment control standards, and other relevant laws, ordinances, policies, rules and regulations as determined by the city. The building official or the planning director shall review the submitted documents to determine compliance with the erosion and sediment control standards. If the plan is not in compliance, the applicant shall be advised which elements of the plan are not in compliance.

(c)    Preparation of Plans. Erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the city for review must be prepared under the supervision of and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or landscape architect or by a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC). The engineer or landscape architect must be licensed to practice in the State of Kansas. The building official or planning director may waive this plan preparation requirement if the applicant’s plan consists entirely of utilizing standard plans and specifications as adopted in the city’s erosion and sediment control standards.

(d)    Amended Plans. Work shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved plan. Changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved plan shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Minor modifications of the approved plan may be authorized by the building official or the planning director without formal review provided those modifications are consistent with the erosion and sediment control standards and standard industry practice.

(Ord. 1320)


4-1006. INSPECTION.

(a)    Initial Inspection. The permit holder shall notify the building official or the public works director when initial erosion and sediment control measures are installed in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan. No land disturbance activities shall begin prior to approval from the building official, public works director or the planning director that all pre-construction erosion and sediment control measures are correctly installed per the approved plan.

(b)    Maintenance of Control Measures. All prescribed erosion and sediment control measures shall be maintained in good order and in compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan at all times.

(c)    Routine Inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to routinely inspect the construction site and maintain effective erosion and sediment control measures.

Routine inspections shall be performed once per month or more frequently if required on the plan and within 24 hours following each rainfall event of one-half inch or more within any 24-hour period. A log shall be kept of these inspections. Any deficiencies shall be noted in a report of the inspection and include the action taken to correct the deficiency. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the building official or the planning director upon request.

The inspection report shall include the following minimum information:

(1)    Inspector’s name.

(2)    Date of inspection.

(3)    Observations relative to the effectiveness of the erosion and sediment control measures.

(4)    Actions necessary to correct deficiencies.

(5)    Signature of person performing the inspection.

The code enforcement officer may also perform inspections of the land disturbance site to verify compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan. Should it be found that erosion and control methods are ineffective or are not being maintained properly, the code enforcement officer or designated officer may take enforcement actions described within this chapter.

(d)    Closure of Land Disturbance Activities. Once the site is stabilized a final inspection shall be requested. The site shall be considered stabilized when perennial vegetation, pavement, buildings or structures using permanent materials cover all areas that have been disturbed. Perennial vegetation shall be considered established and completed for stabilization when it has established a healthy and growing stand with a density of at least 70% of undisturbed areas at the site.

(e)    Removal of Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Measures. Subsequent to a satisfactory final inspection of the land disturbance, all temporary erosion and sediment control measures must be removed and the final segments of the storm sewer system shall be constructed in the manner described within the approved plans in the erosion and sediment control plan. Such removal shall be complete prior to closure of the permit which authorized the land disturbance.

(Ord. 1320)


4-1007. ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    In General. The code enforcement officer or designated officer shall handle enforcement of the provisions of this chapter through routine activities that include receiving inspection reports from the permit holder when requested, inspections, and communication with contractors. However, if these methods fail, the code enforcement officer or designated officer may proceed with any or all of the following enforcement measures:

(1)    Refusal of Inspection. Request for an inspection of any permitted construction activity may be denied if it is found that erosion and sediment control measures have not been implemented, or are found to be ineffective or are not maintained. If an inspection is refused, a notice of violation or a stop work order may be issued. No further inspections will be performed until the erosion and control measures have been implemented or violations have been abated.

(2)    Notice of Violation. The code enforcement officer or designated officer is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on any person found to be doing work in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and order the abatement of the violation by the responsible person.

(3)    Stop Work Order. The code enforcement officer or designated officer is authorized to issue a stop work order for any or all construction activity within the established boundary of the permit. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or the owner’s agent or to the person doing the work. In addition, notice of the stop work order shall be posted on the site. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. Any person who shall continue to work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed by the city to perform for the removal of a violation or unsafe condition, is guilty of a public offense and may be subject to penalties as prescribed herein.

(4)    Abatement. Should any person fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the code enforcement officer or designated officer is authorized to correct or abate such violation without further notice. This action can be taken in lieu of, or in conjunction with, any action taken under this article of the city of Tonganoxie, or enforcement actions set forth in this chapter.

(A)    City expenditures to correct or abate a violation shall be assessed as a fee against the property owner, developer, builder or any other applicable party. The city will keep a record of the abatement costs. The fee shall be paid prior to recommencement of work on the site and prior to any further inspections. If the fee is not paid within 30 days of the date the invoice is sent to the permit holder, then that person involved will be found guilty of a municipal code violation under this article and be fined the maximum amount of $100 per each day the violation exists.

(B)    Should the permit become suspended, revoked, or expired with the fee not paid, all city expenditures to correct or abate the violation may be assessed as a lien and special assessment against the lot or parcel of land on which the permitted activity took place. The same abatement and collection procedure shall apply if work is done without the issuance of a permit. The city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against the lot or parcel of land.

(b)    Violations and Penalties.

(1)    Any person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or fails to comply with a directive issued by the building official or the code enforcement officer or designated officer is guilty of a public offense and shall be subject to the maximum penalties as provided in this article.

(2)    The code enforcement officer or designated officer shall be permitted to cite the owner or any/all persons identified on a permit as being legally responsible to the city for any violations of the article pertaining to that permit.

(Ord. 1320)


4-1008. MISCELLANEOUS.

(a)    Other Laws. Neither this article nor any administrative decision made under it exempts the permit holder or any other person from other requirements of this code, state and federal laws, or from procuring other required permits, including any state or federal storm water permits authorized under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), or limits the right of any person to maintain, at any time, any appropriate action at law or in equity for relief or damages against the permit holder or any person arising from the activity regulated by this article.

(b)    Disclaimer of Liability. The performance standards and design criteria set forth herein establish minimum requirements, which must be implemented with good engineering practice and workmanship. Use of the requirements contained herein shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the city, or its officers and employees, of the adequacy or safety of any best management practice or use of land, nor shall the approval and issuance of a permit imply that land uses permitted will be free from damages caused by storm water. The degree of protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records and engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or storm water runoff heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. These regulations therefore shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer with respect to any legislative or administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

(c)    Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this article or any part thereof is held to be unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this article.

(Ord. 1320)


Article 11. INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE


4-1101. ADOPTION.

A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Tonganoxie, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C and D (see International Fuel Gas Code Section 101.3, 2012 Edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the city of Tonganoxie, in the State of Kansas, for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the city of Tonganoxie are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 4-1102. (Ord. 1338; Ord. 1455, Sec. 1)


4-1102. AMENDMENTS.

The following sections are hereby revised and/or deleted: 101.1, Section 103.1 is hereby deleted, 106.5.2, 106.5.3, 108.4, 108.5, 403.4.4, 403.5.1, 403.5.2 and 406.4.1. (Ord. 1338; Ord. 1455, Sec. 1)


ARTICLE 12. LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS*

*    Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1378, Section 8, provides that the ordinance codified in this article shall take effect on January 1, 2015.


4-1201. DEFINITIONS.

As used in this article, the words and phrases herein defined shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires:

(a)    Whenever the word municipality is used in the incorporated associated building codes, it shall be held to mean the “city of Tonganoxie.”

(b)    Whenever the term corporation counsel is used in the incorporated associated building codes, it shall be held to mean the city attorney of the city of Tonganoxie.

(c)    Whenever the term building official is used in the incorporated associated building codes, it shall be held to mean the building inspector or his or her superior or authorized designee.

(d)    Contractor shall mean an individual or company that performs mechanical, electrical, or plumbing work. 

(Ord. 1378, Sec. 4) 


4-1202. LICENSING; ACCEPTANCE.

The municipality requires a contractor that performs mechanical, electrical, and interior plumbing work in the city limits that requires a permit and inspection must be licensed by the municipality. Exterior plumbing does not require a license.

To obtain a license of the municipality, a contractor must present a current, active contractor license from Johnson County, Kansas. To be eligible to obtain a license through Johnson County, the applicants must fulfill one of the following:

(a)    Pass a nationally recognized test of the master level in at least one of the following:

(1)    Mechanical code;

(2)    Electrical code;

(3)    Plumbing code; or

(b)    Possess a bachelor of science degree in architecture of the relevant code, engineering of the relevant code, construction science, or construction management from an accredited college or university.

(Ord. 1378, Sec. 5; Ord. 1422, Sec. 1)


4-1203. REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

The municipal license of any contractor may be revoked for any one of the following:

(a)    If a contractor fails three inspections, limited to undisputed corrections and resolved disputes, on any single project. Pending disputes on the same project with the building official will not count toward the number of failed inspections on the same project.

(b)    If the contractor fails to maintain proper insurance.

(c)    If the contractor repeatedly chooses to build without a permit.

(d)    If the contractor fails to perform in compliance with applicable laws.

(Ord. 1378, Sec. 6) 


CHAPTER V. BUSINESS REGULATIONS

Article 1.    General Provisions

Article 2.    Solicitation, Peddling and Canvassing


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS


5-101. LICENSE REQUIRED.

No person, firm or corporation, either as principal, officer, agent, servant or employee, shall conduct, pursue, carry on, or operate in the city, any business, trade, occupation or profession or render or furnish any service hereinafter specified, without first making application to the city clerk for a license therefor, and paying the license fee hereinafter prescribed at the time the license is approved and issued. 

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 1; Code 2004; Ord. 1387, Sec. 1)


5-102. BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.

(a)    The license fee hereby charged shall be in the amount shown below for all businesses, trades, professions and occupations for the sale of goods, or rendering, or furnishing any services conducted, pursued, carried on or operated within the limits of the city for each annual period unless a shorter time is specifically stated in the approved application.

(b)    All licenses shall be due and payable immediately upon the commencement of the business, trade, occupation or profession or rendering or furnishing any service for which the same are issued, commencing with the first day of the next month.

(c)    Unless otherwise provided in this article, the amount due shall be $50 for all businesses, trades, professions, occupations and home occupations, for the sale of goods, or rendering or furnishing any service conducted, pursued, carried on or operated within the limits of the city; provided, however, that if the application and payment are rendered by electronic means in a manner acceptable by the city, the amount due shall be $45.

(d)    If the license renewal fee is not fully paid before February 1st of the same year it is due, the fee to renew shall increase to $100.

(e)    If a newly formed business applies for a business license on or after September 1st in the calendar year, the discounted license fee shall be $20; provided, that the fee is paid at the time of application.

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 2; Code 2004; Ord. 1387, Sec. 2; Ord. 1401, Secs. 1:2; Ord. 1419, Sec. 1)


5-103. SPECIFIC PROVISIONS TO CONTROL.

In any case where a fee is specifically imposed upon a certain trade, occupation, business or profession by this article and which trade, occupation, business or profession would be liable under some general provision of the ordinances of this city, if the specific provision herein were absent, then, and in that case, the fee shall be that specifically imposed.

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 3; Code 2004; Ord. 1387, Sec. 3)


5-104. CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS.

This article shall not be construed to amend, modify or repeal any of the rules and regulations of the business, trades, occupations or professions or rendering or furnishing any services provided for in any other ordinance of this city.

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 4; Code 2004)


5-105. TERM OF LICENSE.

All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire on the first day of January next after the same are issued, and shall be signed by the mayor and clerk and countersigned by the treasurer, and the clerk shall affix the corporate seal thereto. 

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 5; Code 2004)


5-106. PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE.

Every person making application for or receiving an annual license for a business carried on previously shall pay the full amount of the license fee set out in section 5-102. After August 31 of each year the annual license fee for a business not previously carried on or licensed in the city shall be prorated by calendar quarter. 

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 6; Code 2004)


5-107. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.

Any person desiring a license required by the provisions of this article shall make application therefore to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city for such purpose.

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 7; Code 2004)


5-108. ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.

(a)    All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk upon receipt of the fee and approved application.

(b)    If the business, trade, profession, or occupation earns gross annual revenue less than $4,000, it will be exempt from this business license to the extent that the applicant provides documented proof of the eligible amount of gross revenue to the satisfaction of the city.

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 8; Code 2004; Ord. 1387, Sec. 4)


5-109. LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE OR ASSIGNABLE.

No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable or assignable.

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 9; Code 2004)


5-110. DISPLAY OF LICENSE.

All persons doing business in a permanent location shall have their license conspicuously displayed in their place of business, and all persons to whom licenses are issued not having a permanent place are hereby required to carry their licenses with them, and any licensee shall present the license for inspection when requested to do so by a citizen or an officer of the city. 

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 10; Code 2004)


5-111. EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.

Unless otherwise specifically provided all licenses issued under this article shall expire on the last day of December next following the date of issuance thereof. 

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 11; Code 2004)


5-112. VIOLATION OF LAWS, ORDINANCES PROHIBITED.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit any licensee licensed under the provisions of this article to violate any law of the United States, the State of Kansas, or any ordinances of the city. 

(Ord. 1093, Sec. 12; Code 2004)




5-113. CLERK TO SIGN LICENSE; SEAL TO BE AFFIXED.

All licenses issued under this article shall be signed by the mayor and clerk and countersigned by the treasurer, and the clerk shall affix the corporate seal thereto. (Ord. 1093, Sec. 13; Code 2004)


5-114. FAILURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE, PAY FEE.

Any person, firm or corporation which shall conduct, pursue, carry on or operate within the limits of the city, any business, trade, occupation or profession or rendering or furnishing any service, for which a license or the payment of a license fee is required by this article, or shall assist directly or indirectly in so doing in any manner or to any extent, either as owner or proprietor, or as an officer of any corporation, or as manager, superintendent, agent, servant, or employee of any person, firm, or corporation after a license fee should have been paid or a license obtained to conduct, pursue, carry on or operate such business, trade or profession or rendering or furnishing any service, shall be deemed to do so unlawfully. Violations of this article shall be a municipal offense and may be prosecuted in municipal court. Any person so charged and found guilty in municipal court of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a municipal offense. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty for an initial violation shall be a written warning. The penalty for a second violation shall be a mandatory fine of $100. The penalty for a third or subsequent conviction shall be a mandatory fine of $200. In addition, such person may be required by the court to serve a definite term of confinement in the city or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not exceed 30 days. Further, the city shall have the authority to maintain suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing any provisions of this article and to seek civil penalties to abate nuisances maintained in violation thereof and, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land. Each day of violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1093, Sec. 14; Code 2004; Ord. 1387, Sec. 5)


5-115. SEPARABILITY.

If any part or parts of this article shall be declared unconstitutional, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of the remainder of the article and its applicability to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The governing body hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared invalid. (Ord. 1093, Sec. 15; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 2. SOLICITATION, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING


5-201. Purposes.

The purposes of this chapter are to protect the public against criminal activity, including fraud and burglary, minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruptions of privacy, and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare by regulating and controlling solicitors, peddlers and canvassers. (Ord. 1299)


5-202 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context.

A.    "Canvass" as used in this chapter means opinion sampling, poll-taking, proselytizing, or other similar activity that is not exchanging goods or services for a fee from house to house, door to door, street to street, or from place to place, excluding federal, state, county or Tonganoxie municipal census takers.

B.    "Canvasser" as used in this chapter means any person who engages in canvassing in person.

C.    "Charitable" as used in this chapter means any activity represented as carried on from unselfish, civic, or humanitarian motives, or for the benefit of others, and not for private gain, and may include without limitation patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, cultural, eleemosynary, scientific, historical, athletic, medical, or religious activities, either actual or implied.

D.    "City" as used in this chapter means the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

E.    "Individual Dwelling Unit" as used in this chapter means a portion of a building containing sleeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a permanent residence by one family.

F.    "Multi-Family Dwelling Complex" as used in this chapter means a grouping of individual buildings which are arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by two (2) or more families, commonly referred to as apartments, town homes, or condominiums.

G.    "Peddle" as used in this chapter means to travel from house to house, door to door, street to street, building to building or from place to place, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of offering and exposing the same for sale.

H.    "Peddler" as used in this chapter means a person who peddles.

I.    "Person" as used in this chapter means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, religious sect or denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.

J.    "Solicit" and "Solicitation" as used in this chapter means and includes any one or more of the following:

1.    Selling or offering for sale, or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods or services of any kind, character or description;

2.    Requesting directly or indirectly contributions of funds on the plea or representation that such contributions will be used for a charitable purpose;

3.    Canvassing or peddling as defined in this section.

4.    Advertising or offering of (to include, but not limited to) any item, service or benefit by the hanging of any flyer or handbill to any door, residence or business, regardless of whether a doorbell is rung or any physical or verbal contact is made.

K.    "Solicitation" as defined herein shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale.

L.    "Solicitor" as used in this chapter means a person who solicits for himself or any other person." (Ord. 1299; Ord. 1382, Sec. 1; Ord. 1411, Sec. 1)


5-203 License Required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler, as defined in the preceding sections of this article, within the corporate limits of the city without then having an unrevoked and unexpired license therefor in his or her possession and issued by the city clerk or designee. (Ord. 1382, Sec. 2; Ord. 1411, Sec. 2)


5-204 License Required; Application Required.

Before the city clerk or designee will issue a license required by this article, he or she shall require an application on a form supplied by the city to be completed and reviewed by the city administrator or designee and the police department. In addition, the applicant will be required to provide a copy of a state issued photo ID, or other official form of photo identification such as a passport. Those obtaining a peddler’s license will not be required to obtain a city business license in addition. (Ord. 1382, Sec. 3; Ord. 1411, Sec. 3)


5-205 License Required; License Fee.

Every peddler shall be subject to a license fee. The fee shall be $10 per day or $100 per year per person to peddle within the city limits. (Ord. 1382, Sec. 4; Ord. 1411, Sec. 4)


5-206 License Required; License Fee Exemptions.

The fee as described in section 5-205 shall not apply to those working on behalf of a nonprofit organization soliciting donations for a charitable cause or businesses placing flyers or coupons on the doors of residents without otherwise disturbing the residents. (Ord. 1382, Sec. 5; Ord. 1411, Sec. 5)


5-207 Prohibited Acts.

A.    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to:

1.    Ring the bell, or knock on the door, or otherwise attempt to gain admittance for the purpose of soliciting at a residence, dwelling or apartment at which a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors", "No Trespassers", or words of similar import indicating that such persons are not wanted on the premises, is painted, affixed or otherwise exposed to public view; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any solicitor who gains admittance to such residence at the invitation or with the consent of the occupant thereof.

    For purposes of this section, the "No Solicitors" decal can be purchased from the City Clerk at City Hall for one dollar ($1.00), and prominently displayed on the door. Such decal shall constitute sufficient notice to all Solicitors. However, other similar signs, as defined above, are also sufficient.

2.    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to solicit or attempt to solicit at an Individual Dwelling Unit in a Multi-Family Complex when all street entrances to the Multi-Family Complex have been clearly posted with signs marked "No Solicitors". This paragraph shall not apply to Solicitation in an Individual Dwelling Unit when the Solicitor has been invited onto the property to solicit there by the occupant for that dwelling unit.

3.    Solicit at hours other than the following: between ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. to five (5:00) P.M. local time of any day.

4.    Engage in soliciting upon any premises (including parking lots), business or dwelling house, apartment or other residence after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave the premises, business or residence.

5.    Make more than one solicitation call at the same residential premises for identical goods, services, or contributions within any consecutive fourteen (14) day period without receiving a prior invitation therefore from the occupants of the premises. This provision shall be construed to include solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents, or other persons acting on behalf of the same person more than once during the aforesaid period without a prior invitation as herein provided.

6.    Fail to provide, at the request of the purchaser, a written receipt for purchases exceeding five dollars ($5.00) in cash or tangible property, which receipt shall be signed by the person making the sale and shall set forth a brief description of the goods or services sold, the total purchase price thereof, amount of cash payment, if any, and the balance due and terms of payment; or for any charitable solicitor or organization accepting any contribution exceeding five dollars ($5.00) in cash or tangible property to fail to provide, at the request of the donor, a written receipt acknowledging such contribution and personally signed by the person accepting such contribution.

7.    Fail at the outset, to disclose to the prospective buyer, prospective donor or canvassee his/her name and the name of the company, product or organization he/she represents.

8.    Make any assertion, representation or statement which misrepresents the purpose of the call or use any plan, scheme, or ruse which misrepresents such purpose.

9.    Conduct business in such a way as would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, increase traffic congestion or delay or constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property, or an obstruction of adequate access to fire, police or sanitation vehicles.

10.    Advertise or offer (to include, but not limited to) any item, service or benefit by the handing of or flyer or handbill to any door, residence or business, if asked to discontinue by the owner/occupant, or if a "No Solicitors" sign is posted on the property, regardless of whether a doorbell is run or any physical or verbal contact is made.

11.    To cut across or walk upon any lawn, front yard or courtyard, except upon sidewalks or walkways if such walkways are provided or upon a regularly established path where no sidewalk or walkway has been provided to the house or other building.

B.    It shall be unlawful for any person to:

1.    Solicit who has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving force, violence, moral turpitude, deceit, fraud or the violation of any law regulating the act of soliciting as defined in this chapter within the past five (5) years in this City, State or subdivision thereof or any other state or subdivision thereof or of the United States.

2.    Solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance other than the main entrance of the residence. (Ord. 1299; Ord. 1382, Sec. 6. Formerly 5-203)


5-208 Special Regulations for Ice Cream Vendors.

It shall be unlawful for any ice cream vendor to:

A.    Exceed a speed of twelve (12) miles an hour when cruising neighborhoods seeking sales or when attempting to make a sale;

B.    Make more than two stops in any one block to make any sale;

C.    Stop anywhere within twenty-five feet of an intersection when making a sale or attempting to make a sale;

D.    Double-park, or park in any manner contrary to any ordinance relating to parking when attempting a sale or when making a sale;

E.    Make a U-turn on any block;

F.    Drive his vehicle backwards to make or attempt any sale;

G.    Permit any person to hang on the vehicle or permit any person to ride in or on the vehicle, except a bona fide assistant or assistants;

H.    Remain standing or stopped at any place for a period of time exceeding five (5) minutes;

I.    Sell or attempt to sell along any particular route more than one time during a twenty-four hour period; (Ord. 1299; Ord. 1382, Sec. 6. Formerly 5-204)


5-209 Duty of Police to Enforce.

It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. (Ord. 1299; Ord. 1382, Sec. 6. Formerly 5-205)


5-210 Penalty.

A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense or shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed one hundred seventy nine (179) days, or shall be both so fined and imprisoned.

B.    Each day any violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1299; Ord. 1382, Sec. 6. Formerly 5-206)


CHAPTER VI. ELECTIONS

Article 1.    City Elections


ARTICLE 1. CITY ELECTIONS


6-101. CONDUCT OF ELECTION.

The election of city officials shall be conducted in all respects as provided by the laws of Kansas governing the holding of city elections and Charter Ordinance No. 3. (K.S.A. 25-2101 et seq.; Code 2004)


6-102. TERMS.

The general election of city officers shall be held on the first Tuesday in April of each odd numbered year and the terms of city officers shall be four years. There shall be no primary election for city officers.

In April, 1975 and every four years thereafter in the City of Tonganoxie there shall be elected a mayor and two councilmen. In April, 1977 and every four years thereafter there shall be elected three councilmen. All such elected councilmen and mayors shall hold their offices for four years and until there successors are elected and qualified. Elected officials in office at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be continued in office for the unexpired term for which they were elected. Provided that all councilmen shall be elected in April, 1975, as follows:

The two councilmen receiving the highest vote total in April, 1975, shall hold their office for four years and the three councilmen receiving the next highest votes in April, 1975, shall hold their offices for two years. (C.O. No. 3, Secs. 2:3; Code 2004)


6-103. HOURS OF VOTING.

At all city elections the polls shall be open at 7:00 a.m. and close at 7:00 p.m., unless different hours are set and publicly announced by the county election officer. (K.S.A. 25-2111, 26-206; Code 2004)


CHAPTER VII. FIRE

Article 1.    Fire Department

Article 2.    Fire Prevention

Article 3.    Fireworks


ARTICLE 1. FIRE DEPARTMENT


7-101. CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.

The fire department of the city is hereby established and the department shall be organized to consist of a fire chief, assistant fire chief, captain, and lieutenant, and not less than 10 nor more than 50 firefighters. Members of the fire department shall be selected by the Fire Chief. One company shall be established and its members appointed and confirmed upon passage of this code, and additional companies shall be established from time to time as the governing body shall deem necessary.

(Ord. 561, Sec. 1; Code 2004; Ord. 1287)


7-102. MEMBERSHIP; FIRE DRILL.

Members of the fire department shall all be volunteers. They shall meet at least once each month for practice and drill. The chief of the fire department shall keep a record of attendance of such meetings. Any member who shall fail to attend six consecutive meetings shall automatically become expelled from membership. 

(Ord. 729, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


7-103. SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT.

The chief of the fire department shall be under the supervision of the city manager and shall have immediate superintendency and control over and be responsible for the care and condition of the fire apparatus and equipment. It shall be the chief’s duty to see that all such apparatus and equipment is ready at all times for immediate use.

(Ord. 561, Sec. 3; Code 2004; Ord. 1405, Sec. 12)


7-104. FIRE CHIEF; POWERS.

(a)    The fire chief shall be responsible for the discipline of the members of the fire department including full time, part time, reserve members and volunteers and is hereby given authority to suspend or expel any member for refusal to obey orders or for misconduct or for failure to do his or her duty at a fire.

(b)    The chief shall also have the right to summon any and all persons present to aid in extinguishing a fire or to aid in removing personal property from any building on fire or in danger thereof and in guarding the same.

(c)    At fires the chief shall have full power, control and command of all persons present and shall direct the use of the fire apparatus and equipment, and command the firefighters in the discharge of their duties. He or she shall take such measures as he or she deems proper and necessary in the preservation and protection of persons and property and the extinguishing of fires.

(d)    The fire chief or in his absence the assistant fire chief shall have the authority to declare a ban on all outside burning and the discharge of all fireworks as defined in section 7-301. The fire chief shall make his or her determination based upon factors which include, but are not limited to, weather, soil conditions, and water supply. In the event the fire chief declares a burning ban within the city, the fire chief shall immediately advise the mayor, city council, city administrator, and police department. Notice of the burning ban shall be posted on the city’s web site, City Hall, fire department buildings and the police station. A notice shall also be posted in prominent view at any establishment selling fireworks.

The burning ban shall remain in effect until lifted by the fire chief or upon action by the city council at its next regular meeting or at any special meeting. In the event a burning ban is declared during a time period in which it is legal to sell fireworks, the city council may, upon application of a firework vendor, refund part of a vendor’s firework sale permit, but in no instance shall more than 50% be refunded.

A violation of a burning ban shall be considered a Class A misdemeanor subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or up to a year in jail. Upon a violation of a burning ban, a police officer may issue a citation with a notice to appear in the municipal court of Tonganoxie to answer the charge.

(Ord. 1358)


7-105. SAME; RECORDS.

The chief of the fire department shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires. Such information shall include the time and location, construction of building, owner, occupancy, how extinguished, value of building and contents, loss on building and contents, insurance on building and contents, members responding to the alarm, and any other information deemed advisable. 

(Ord. 561, Sec. 6; Code 2004)


7-106. ASSISTANT CHIEF.

In the absence of the chief, the assistant fire chief shall perform all the duties and have all the authority and responsibility of the chief as conferred by this chapter. 

(Ord. 561, Sec. 8; Code 2004)


7-107. PRIVATE USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT.

It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to take away or use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose or for any person willfully and without proper authority to remove, take away, keep or conceal any tool, appliance, equipment or other article used in any way by the fire department. 

(Ord. 561, Sec. 12; Code 2004)


7-108. FIRE EQUIPMENT; EMERGENCY RIGHT-OF-WAY AND USE.

(a)    All fire apparatus and equipment is hereby given and granted the exclusive right-of-way over and through all streets, avenues, alleys and public thoroughfares in the city while enroute to fires or in response to any alarm, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to in any manner obstruct or hinder the apparatus or equipment.

(b)    All emergency vehicles of the fire department, while proceeding on official business, shall be operated in strict accordance with the requirements of the Kansas Statutes regarding the operation of emergency vehicles, and each departmental member assigned to the operation of emergency vehicles shall familiarize himself or herself with the requirements of the law and govern himself or herself accordingly. Any operator violating the provisions of the state law shall be liable for disciplinary action.

(Ord. 561, Sec. 9; Code 2004)


7-109. SAME; FIRE HOSE.

It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle over any fire hose laid on any street, alley or lot. This section shall not apply to any apparatus or vehicle being driven by members of the fire department.

(Code 2004)


7-110. OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANT.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed upon or about any fire hydrant any rubbish, building material, fence or other obstruction of any character, or in any manner obstruct, hinder, or delay the fire department in the performance of its duties in case of fire. Nor shall any person fasten to any fire hydrant any guy rope or brace, nor stand any vehicle within 15 feet of any such hydrant. (Ord. 561, Sec. 10; Code 2004)


7-111. FALSE ALARM.

It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make or sound or cause to be made or sounded, or by any other means, any false alarm. (Ord. 561, Sec. 11; Code 2004)


7-112. MEASURES ADOPTED.

It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to adopt all prudent measures for the prevention of fires and for this purpose his or her assistant, under the chief’s direction may, upon request or whenever the chief has reason to believe that the safety of life and property demands it, and as often as he or she may deem necessary, enter any building, yard, or premises in the city during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection, and where dangerous, unsafe or hazardous conditions are found to exist, he or she shall give such directions for the alteration, change, or removal or better care or management of the same as he or she may deem proper, and such directions shall be obeyed and complied with by the person directed in that regard and at their expense. (Ord. 561, Sec. 7)


7-113. FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle other than one on official business, to follow closer than 500 feet any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive into or stop any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (Ord. 535, Sec. 1)


ARTICLE 2. FIRE PREVENTION


7-201. KANSAS BUILDINGS FIRE SAFETY ADOPTED.

In order to provide the city of Tonganoxie rules and regulations to improve the safety of the public by promoting the control of fire hazards, governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, those certain standards know as Kansas Buildings Fire Safety Handbook, 1999 Second Edition, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, save the and except for such portions as hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. The Kansas Buildings Fire Safety Handbook, Second Edition, is made part of the ordinances of the City of Tonganoxie as if the same had been set out in full herein, all as authorized and in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 12-3009 through 12-3012 including any amendments thereto. No fewer than three copies of the Kansas Buildings Fire Safety Handbook, 1999 Second Edition, shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Incorporated by the City of Tonganoxie" and shall be filed with the city clerk to be opened for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours of business.

a.    International Fire Code Incorporated—omissions—additions. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, prepared and published in book form by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041-3401.

b.    Definitions. Wherever the word jurisdiction is used in the International Fire Code it shall be held to mean the city of Tonganoxie.

c.    Copies on file. Not less than three copies of the code hereinbefore incorporated by reference shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy as adopted by ordinance No. 1457” and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. The police department, municipal judge and all administrative departments of the city charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall be supplied at the cost of the city such number of official copies of such code as may be deemed expedient. (Ord. 1079, Sec. 1; Code 2004; Ord. 1259; Ord. 1457, Sec. 1)


7-202 VIOLATIONS.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this article, to permit or maintain such violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation except as variation may be allowed by the governing body of the city. Proof of such unlawful act or failing to act shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner or the occupant shall not be deemed to relieve the other.

(b)    The provision shall apply equally to both public and private property. It shall apply to all new structures and their occupancies, including buildings, structures, equipment, etc., and, except as otherwise specified within its own terms, to existing structures and their occupancies, including buildings, structures, equipment, etc., that constitute a clear and present hazard to life or to property. (Ord. 1079, Secs. 2:3; Code 2004)


7-203. SAME; ENFORCEMENT.

The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department.


7-204. OPEN BURNING.

It shall be unlawful for any person to burn in the city limits without the fire chief or his or her qualified designee first inspecting the site, viewing that materials to be burned and issuing a permit authorizing the burn. (Code 2004)


7-205. ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH AND TRASH.

It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to accumulate or to keep in any part of any building or outside of and adjacent to any building or in any alley, sidewalk, street or premises within 30 feet of any building any rubbish, trash, waste paper, excelsior, empty boxes, barrels or other combustibles which shall constitute a fire hazard. (Code 2004)


7-206. STACKING OF HAY OR STRAW.

It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, stack or store any hay or straw within 500 feet of any building located inside the fire limits of the city. (Code 2004)


7-207. KEEPING OF PACKING MATERIALS.

It shall be unlawful to keep excelsior or other packing material in any other than metal or wood metal line boxes or bins having self closing or automatic covers. All refuse and trash from rooms where packing or unpacking is done shall be removed daily. (Code 2004)


7-208. STORAGE OF ASHES.

It shall be unlawful to store ashes inside of any nonfireproof building unless they are stored in a noncombustible container or receptacle, and a clearance of at least five feet shall be maintained between such container or receptacle and any combustible materials not placed therein. Ashes shall not be stored outside of any building in wooden, plastic, or paper product receptacles or dumped in contact with or in close proximity to any combustible materials. (Code 2004)


7-209. FILLING GASOLINE TANKS OF MOTOR VEHICLES.

The engines of motor vehicles shall be stopped when the gasoline tanks of such vehicles are being filled with gasoline at service stations or other places where gasoline is supplied to motor vehicles. The driver or person in control of such vehicle when the gasoline tank of same is being filled who refuses, neglects or fails to stop the engine of such vehicle shall likewise be guilty of a violation of this code. (Code 2004)


7-210. FIRE HAZARDS GENERALLY.

It is unlawful for any person to cause or create anywhere within the city, or to permit on any premises under his or her control, any situation or condition that is conducive to or likely to cause or permit the outbreak of fire or the spreading of fire. Any situation or condition conducive to the outbreak of or spreading of fire, is declared to be a fire hazard. The violation of or failure to comply with any law pertaining to the storage, handling or use of inflammable oils, explosives, liquefied petroleum gases, or fertilizers and all wires and other conductors charged with electricity, is declared to be a fire hazard. The placing of stools, chairs or any other obstruction in the aisles, hallways, doorway, or exit of any theater, public hall, auditorium, church or other place of indoor public assemblage, or the failure to provide any such place of public assemblage with sufficient, accessible and unobstructed fire exits and escapes is also declared to be a fire hazard. The obstruction of any street, avenue, alley, fire hydrant or any other condition that might delay the fire department in fighting fire is declared to be unlawful. (Code 2004)


7-211. SAME; INSPECTIONS TO DISCOVER.

It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect or cause to be inspected by fire department officers or members, as often as may be necessary all buildings, particularly all mercantile buildings, manufacturing plants, warehouses, garages, hotels, boarding houses, rooming houses, theaters, auditoriums and all places of public assemblage, for the purpose of discovering the violation of any fire preventive law or any fire hazard and ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fires and to see that all places of public assemblage, hotels and rooming houses have sufficient and unobstructed facilities for escape therefrom in case of fire. (Code 2004)


7-212. ABATEMENT OF FIRE HAZARDS; ISSUING ORDER.

Whenever any officer or member of the fire department shall find or discover any fire hazard or shall find in any building or upon any premises combustible or explosive material or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of paper, boxes, shavings or any other inflammable material, so situated as to endanger property by the probability of fire, or shall find or discover any violation of this chapter or any other law hazardous to public safety from fires, the fire chief shall order the fire hazard or danger from the fire forthwith abated and remedied and such order shall be complied with immediately by the owner or occupant of such buildings or premises. If the hazard or condition ordered abated and remedied is a violation of, or a failure to comply with any law, the fire chief shall report the matter to the city attorney and he or she shall, if he or she deems it advisable, prosecute the offender. (Code 2004)


7-213. SAME; SERVICE OF ORDER; RECORDS.

Any order made under section 7-212 shall be in writing and may be served personally upon the owner or occupant of the premises or by leaving it with any person in charge of the premises or if the premises are unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident of the city, then by mailing a copy to the owner’s last known post-office address. One notice to either the occupant or owner shall be sufficient. The fire chief shall keep a record of and copies of all such orders and notices and shall follow up such notices at the expiration of the time for compliance therewith and when complied with make proper entry, and if not complied with, file complaint with the municipal court against the property owner and/or occupant. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 3. FIREWORKS


7-301. FIREWORKS DEFINED.

For purposes of this article, the term fireworks shall mean those items as defined by the rules and regulations of the Kansas state fire marshal, and shall include but not be limited to: firecrackers, torpedoes, sparklers, Roman candles, sky rockets, pin wheels, cap or toy pistols (except such pistols or any like device designed to discharge paper caps containing not more than .25 grains of explosive mixture), canes, bombs, cannons or other like devices and all classes of fireworks that may be shot into the air or propelled over the ground by explosive discharges or any device using blank cartridges. (Ord. 675, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


7-302. FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.

(a)    Except as provided in sections 7-303:306; it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store, display for sale, fire, discharge or explode any fireworks.

(b)    Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to:

(1)    Toy paper caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive composition per cap;

(2)    The manufacture, storage, sale or authorized use of signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or private transportation;

(3)    The military or naval forces of the United States or of this state while in the performance of official duty;

(4)    Law enforcement officers while in the performance of official duty; or

(5)    The sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical or athletic events.

(Code 2004)


7-303. SAME: EXCEPTIONS; DISCHARGES.

(a)    Section 7-302 shall not apply to the firing or discharge of fireworks in the city between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on June 30th, July 1st, July 2nd, July 3rd and July 4th of each year or as authorized by the governing body.

(b)    The governing body of the city may, in its discretion, grant permission at any time for the public display of fireworks by responsible individuals or organizations when such display or displays shall be of such a character and so located, discharged and fired as shall not be a fire hazard or endanger persons or surrounding property.

(c)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to give any public display of fireworks without having first obtained a permit therefor.

(Ord. 1321)


7-304. SAME: EXCEPTION; SALE OF FIREWORKS.

Any person who has first obtained a valid permit to sell fireworks within the city may do so between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on June 30th, July 1st, July 2nd, July 3rd and July 4th of each year and except as otherwise stated, it shall be unlawful to sell fireworks at any other time. (Ord. 1268)


7-305. PERMIT FOR SALE OF FIREWORKS REQUIRED; FEE; ISSUANCE.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display for sale, offer to sell or give away any type of fireworks within the city without first paying a fee of $500 per establishment or premises to the city clerk. The application shall be approved by the fire chief before the license shall be issued.

(b)    No permit shall be issued for any location where retail sales are not permitted under the zoning laws. Prior to the issuance of the permit, an inspection will be made of the applicant’s facility for compliance with this chapter and other pertinent laws, and no permit shall be issued for any premises not in compliance with such laws. Upon qualifying for the permit, the permittee shall prominently display the permit, the days and hours of the legal discharge of fireworks, and the penalties for noncompliance at the establishment or premises where fireworks are to be sold or displayed for sale. The permit fee shall not be refundable upon failure to qualify for the permit or withdrawal or cancellation of the application or permit.

(c)    No permit shall be approved unless the applicant furnished a certificate of public liability insurance for the display in a minimum amount of $1,000,000, written by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in Kansas, conditioned as being non-cancelable except by giving 10 days’ advance written notice to the city clerk.

(d)    No permit shall be approved unless the applicant furnished a tax clearance from the Department of Revenue ensuring prior year sales taxes if owed are paid.

(e)    No permit shall be approved unless the applicant provides proof of retail sales tax certificate.

(Ord. 1318)


7-306. PERMIT FOR PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY REQUIRED.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to give or provide a fireworks display for the public or for organized groups without first obtaining a permit to do so by making application at least 30 days in advance of the desired display. Approval of the permit shall be by the governing body. In the event of cancellation of the insurance prior to the display, the permit shall automatically be revoked and void. The application for the permit shall clearly state:

(1)    The name of the applicant.

(2)    The group for which the display is planned.

(3)    The location of the display.

(4)    The date and time of the display.

(5)    The nature or kind of fireworks to be used.

(6)    The name of the person, firm or corporation that will make the actual discharge of the fireworks.

(7)    Anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services.

(b)    No permit shall be issued if the location, nature of the fireworks or other relevant factor is such as to create an undue hazard or risk of harm or damage to persons or property. No permit shall be approved unless the applicant furnishes a certificate of public liability insurance for the display in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00, written by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in Kansas, conditioned as being non-cancelable except by giving 10 days advance written notice to the city clerk.

(Ord. 1228)


7-307. APPROVED FIREWORKS; BOTTLE ROCKETS PROHIBITED.

(a)    All fireworks offered for sale and discharged within the city shall be of a type that has been tested and approved for sale and use within the state by the state fire marshal.

(b)    Bottle rockets and other similar self-propelled firework or fireworks devices consisting of a tube and attached guiding stock or rod shall not be sold or discharged in the city.

(Ord. 675, Secs. 1, 2C; Code 2004)


7-308. DISCHARGE ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, ignite or fire any fireworks upon any public street, alley or avenue or in any park or public place within the city unless prior approval from the governing body has been obtained. (Ord. 1228)


7-309. THROWING PROHIBITED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast or propel fireworks of any kind in the direction of or into the path of any animal, person or group of persons, or from, in the direction of or into any vehicle of any kind. (Code 2004)


7-310. SALE OF FIREWORKS; WHERE PROHIBITED.

It shall be unlawful for fireworks to be stored, sold or displayed for sale in a place of business where paint, oils, varnishes, turpentine or gasoline or other flammable substances are kept, unless such fireworks are in a separate and distinct section or department of the premises.

Where the fire chief deems there is a fire hazard, he or she is hereby authorized to have such hazard abated.

Fireworks to be sold at wholesale shall be stored in a room set aside for the storage of fireworks only. Over the entrance to this room shall be posted a sign reading, "Fireworks - No Smoking-Keep Open Flames Away." State Fire Marshal Regulation 22-6-2; R.O. 1965, Sec. 12-602.

(Ord. 675, Secs. 2D:E; Code 2004)


7-311. RETAIL DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.

(a)    All retailers are forbidden to expose fireworks where the sun shines through glass on the merchandise displayed, except where such fireworks are in the original package.

(b)    All fireworks displayed for sale must remain in original packages, except where an attendant is on constant duty at all times where such fireworks are on display; provided, that fireworks in open stock may be kept in show cases or counters out of the reach of the public without an attendant being on duty.

(c)    Signs reading "Fireworks for Sale--No Smoking Allowed" shall be displayed in the section of a store or premises set aside for the sale of fireworks.

(Ord. 675, Sec. 2G; Code 2004)


7-312. FIRE EXTINGUISHERS REQUIRED.

(a)    Two functioning and approved fire extinguishers must be provided and kept in close proximity to the stock of fireworks in all permanent buildings where fireworks are stored, sold or displayed for sale.

(b)    Small stands, temporarily erected to be used as a place for storing and selling fireworks only, shall have one such fire extinguisher, or in lieu of the fire extinguisher, a pressurized water hose with nozzle end within five feet of the fireworks stand.

(Ord. 675, Sec. 2F; Code 2004)


7-313. RESTRICTIONS AS TO GASOLINE INSTALLATIONS.

It shall be unlawful to store, keep, sell, display for sale or discharge any fireworks within 50 feet of any gasoline pump, gasoline filling station, gasoline bulk station or any building in which gasoline or volatile liquids are sold in quantities in excess of one gallon, except in stores where cleaners, paints and oils are handled in sealed containers only. (Code 2004)


7-314. AUTHORITY OF FIRE CHIEF.

The chief of the fire department is authorized to seize and confiscate all fireworks which may be kept, stored or used in violation of any section of this article, and all of the rules of the state fire marshal. He or she shall dispose of all such fireworks as may be directed by the governing body. (Code 2004)


7-315 FIRE HAZARDS.

The fire chief shall make a report to the city clerk stating that due to the weather and/or other conditions that a fire hazard exists in the city and upon presentation to the governing body, and the approval thereof, and notice being given the Tonganoxie Mirror, the official newspaper of the city or a newspaper of general circulation in Leavenworth County, Kansas, that an emergency exists with respect to the sale, use, discharge and possession of fireworks, then, upon the happening of such events, within the city limits shall be prohibited. Such notice shall have the effect of prohibiting the discharge of fireworks within the city limits until the fire chief shall file a report indicating a fire hazard no longer exists with the city clerk and upon presentation to the governing body, and the approval thereof.

Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined not less than $25 and not more that $250 for each offense.

(Ord. 798, Secs. 3:3A; Code 2004)


7-316 REMOVAL.

All tents, temporary structures, signs and debris shall be removed no later than July 6th, 11:00 p.m.

In the event the permit holder fails to remove such tents, temporary structures, signs or debris the City shall remove and dispose of said items. The cost of such removal or destruction shall be paid by the permit holder. If the costs are not paid with thirty days of submission of a written statement of the costs to the permit holder the costs shall be assessed upon the property for which the permit is issued and shall create a lien thereon. Such lien, including as a part thereof, an allowance for court costs and attorneys fees, may be foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided or authorized by law or shall be assessed as a special assessment upon the parcel of land on which the permit was issued and the city clerk at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the aforesaid costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls against the parcel. (Ord. 1228)


7-317

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation issued a fireworks permit to fail or refuse to remove all tents, temporary structures, signs and debris from the location for which the permit was issued by 11:00 p.m. of July 6th following the issuance of the permit.

Any person, firm or corporation will be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 per day and not exceeding $500.00 per day for tents, temporary structures, signs or debris not removed by the deadline. Each day in which the tents, temporary structures, signs or debris are not removed after the deadline will be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 1228)


CHAPTER VIII. HEALTH AND WELFARE

Article 1.    Code Enforcement

Article 2.    Health Nuisances

Article 2A.    Environmental Code

Article 3.    Junked Vehicles on Private Property

Article 4.    Weeds

Article 5.    Minimum Housing Code

Article 6.    Rodent Control

Article 7.    Insurance Proceeds Fund

Article 8.    Costs Recovery For Environmental Releases


ARTICLE 1. CODE ENFORCEMENT


8-101. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER CREATED.

The office of code enforcement of the city is hereby created by the governing body. (Code 2004; Ord. 1374)


8-102. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES.

The code enforcement officer shall:

(a)    Cause investigations and inspections to be made as required by the laws of Kansas and of the city;

(b)    Make recommendations to the governing body respecting the improvement of health of the inhabitants of the city;

(c)    Perform such other duties as may be required of him or her under the laws of the State of Kansas or of the city;

(d)    Issue citations to persons responsible for the property with notices to appear in the municipal court of Tonganoxie, Kansas, for violations of the health and welfare code.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-103. DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions shall apply to all articles of this chapter:

Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle which is not currently registered or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149 inclusive, as amended; or parked in violation of the ordinance; or incapable of moving under its own power; or in a junked or wrecked condition.

Accessory structure means a secondary structure detached from the principal structure but on the same premises, including, but not limited to, garages, sheds, barns, or outbuildings.

Commercial or industrial means used or intended to be used primarily for other than residential purposes.

Dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair shall mean any condition characterized by, but not limited to: holes, breaks, rot, decay, crumbling, cracking, peeling or flaking paint, rusting, or other evidence of physical damage, neglect, lack of maintenance, excessive use or weathering.

Exterior means those parts of a structure which are exposed to the weather or subject to contact with the elements, including, but not limited to: sidings, facings, veneers, masonry, roofs, foundations, porches, screens, shutters, windows, doors or signs.

Garbage means without limitation any accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable waste matter that results from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving, delivering, storage, or use of foodstuffs.

Inoperable vehicle means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the function of legally operating on public streets/roadways.

Nuisance. A nuisance shall include but not be limited to the following:

(1)    Filth, excrement, lumber, rocks, dirt, cans, paper, trash, metal or any other offensive or disagreeable thing or substance thrown or left or deposited upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public or private enclosure or lot whether vacant or occupied;

(2)    All dead animals not removed within 24 hours after death;

(3)    Any place or structure or substance which emits or causes any offensive, disagreeable or nauseous odors;

(4)    All stagnant ponds or pools of water;

(5)    All grass or weeds or other unsightly vegetation not usually cultivated or grown for domestic use or to be marketed or for ornamental purposes;

(6)    Abandoned iceboxes or refrigerators kept on the premises under the control of any person, or deposited on the sanitary landfill, or any icebox or refrigerator not in actual use;

(7)    All articles or things whatsoever caused, kept, maintained or permitted by any person to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of the public or of any neighborhood;

(8)    Any fence, structure, thing or substance placed upon or being upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public ground so as to obstruct the same, except as permitted by the laws of the city.

Person means any individual, individuals, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association, other business organization, committee, board, trustee, receiver, agent or other representative responsible for the charge, care, control or maintenance of the premises including any owner, tenant, or guest who has property on the premises which is in violation of section 8-201. 

Premises means any lot, plot or parcel of land including the structures thereon. Premises shall also mean any lot, plot or parcel of land without any structures thereon.

Public Officer. A public officer is any police officer, including the police chief, the code enforcement officer, or his or her designee.

Refuse means garbage and trash.

Residential means used or intended to be used primarily for human habitation.

Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground including any appurtenances belonging thereto.

Trash means combustible waste consisting of, but not limited to: papers, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rags, leaves, yard trimmings, or tree branches and noncombustible waste consisting of, but not limited to: metal, tin, cans, glass, crockery, plastics, mineral matter, ashes, clinkers, or street rubbish and sweepings.

Vehicle means, without limitation, any automobile, truck, tractor or motorcycle or other mode of transportation which as originally built contained an engine, regardless of whether it contains an engine at any other time, and designed to operate on roadways.

Weathered means deterioration caused by exposure to the elements.

Weeds as used herein means any of the following:

(1)    Brush and woody vines shall be classified as weeds;

(2)    Plants and grasses which may attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property;

(3)    Plants and grasses which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;

(4)    Plants and grasses which are located in an area which harbors rats, insects, animals, reptiles, or any other creature which either may or does constitute a menace to health, public safety or welfare;

(5)    Plants and grasses on or about residential property which, because of their height, have a blighting influence on the neighborhood. Any such weeds and indigenous grasses shall be presumed to be blighting if they exceed eight inches in height.

Yard means the area of the premises not occupied by any structure.

(Formerly 8-201, 8-2A05, 8-302, 8-402. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1173; K.S.A. 21-4106:4107; Ord. 1174; Ord. 1175; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


ARTICLE 2. HEALTH NUISANCES


8-201. NUISANCES UNLAWFUL.

It shall be unlawful to maintain a nuisance within the city limits of Tonganoxie as described in this chapter. (K.S.A. 21-4106:4107; Ord. 1174; Ord. 1374)


8-202. COMPLAINTS; INQUIRY AND INSPECTION.

A public officer shall make inquiry and inspection of premises upon receiving a complaint or complaints that a nuisance exists or being informed that a nuisance may exist by the police department, code enforcement officer or their qualified designee. A public officer may make such inquiry and inspection when he or she observes conditions which appear to constitute a nuisance. Upon making any inquiry and inspection a public officer shall make a written report including documentation which may include photos of findings. (Formerly 8-203. Ord. 1174; Ord. 1374)


8-203. RIGHT OF ENTRY.

A public officer has the right of access and entry upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inquiry and inspection to determine if a nuisance exists. (Formerly 8-204. Ord. 1174; Ord. 1374)


8-204. VIOLATION.

(a)    The code enforcement officer or any officer of the Tonganoxie police department, including the chief of police and deputy chief, may serve upon the person or persons responsible for the property found by a public officer to be in violation of section 8-201 a citation with notice to appear in the municipal court of Tonganoxie, Kansas. The citation shall be served on the person or persons responsible for such property by personal service by the code enforcement officer or any officer of the Tonganoxie police department or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the property is unoccupied and the person is a nonresident, then by mailing the citation by certified mail, return receipt requested, and first class mail to the last known address of the owner. 

(b)    If person or persons responsible for the property have failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further citations to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the citation by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the person responsible for the property is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail.

(Formerly 8-205. K.S.A. 12-1617e; Ord. 1174; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-205. SAME; CONTENTS.

The citation shall state the condition(s) which is (are) in violation of section 8-201. The citation shall also inform the person, corporation, partnership or association that:

(a)    He, she or they shall have 10 days from the date of serving the citation to abate the condition(s) in violation of section 8-201; or

(b)    Failure to abate the condition(s) within the time allowed may result in prosecution as provided by section 8-206 and/or abatement of the condition(s) by the city as provided by section 8-207.

(c)    Upon the termination of the 10-day period, the city shall notify the violator of failure to abate and requirement to attend court. Determination of abatement will be made by the city administrator or assistant city administrator at the recommendation of the public officer. Notice shall be given by first class mail.

(Formerly 8-206. Ord. 1174; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-206. PENALTY.

Should the person or persons to whom the citation is issued fail to comply with the citation to abate the nuisance the citation shall be prosecuted as a complaint in the municipal court of the city against such person, corporation, partnership or association and upon conviction of any violation of provisions of section 8-201, be fined in an amount not to exceed $500 or be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues after notice has been served shall constitute an additional or separate offense. (Formerly 8-207. Ord. 1174; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-207. ABATEMENT.

Upon a guilty finding by the municipal court judge, the judge can order abatement by the city and that costs for such abatement shall be assessed upon the person or persons responsible or assessed to real estate when applicable.

In addition to or as an alternative to prosecution as provided in section 8-206, a public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in the following manner. If a person or persons to whom a citation has been served pursuant to section 8-204 have not alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation a public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for adoption authorizing a public officer or other agents of the city to abate the conditions causing the violation at the end of 10 days after passage of the resolution. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located as provided in section 8-208. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person or persons in violation in one of the following ways:

(a)    Personal service upon the person or persons in violation;

(b)    Certified mail, return receipt requested, and first class mail at the last known address of the person or persons; or

(c)    In the event the whereabouts of such person or persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect shall be made by a public officer and filed with the city clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition exists.

(d)    If the person responsible for the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the person or persons responsible for the property are a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail.

(Formerly 8-208. Ord. 1174; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-208. COSTS ASSESSED.

If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to section 8-207, the city shall give notice to the person or persons responsible for the property by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel of land on which the nuisance was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest have been paid in full. (Formerly 8-209. Ord. 1174; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


ARTICLE 2A. ENVIRONMENTAL CODE


8-2A01. TITLE.

This article shall be known as the “Environmental Code.” (Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1374)


8-2A02. LEGISLATIVE FINDING OF FACT.

The governing body has found that there exist within the city of Tonganoxie unsightly and hazardous conditions due to: dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair of walls, siding, fences or structure exteriors; accumulations increasing the hazards of accidents or other calamities; structural defects; uncleanliness; and unsightly stored or parked material, equipment, supplies, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof. Such conditions are inimical to the general welfare of the community in that they have a blighting influence on the adjoining properties, the neighborhood and the city, or are injurious to the health and safety of the residents of the city of Tonganoxie. The governing body desires to promote the public health, safety and welfare by the repair, removal, abatement, and regulation of such conditions in the manner hereafter provided. (Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1374)


8-2A03. PURPOSE.

The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve, upgrade, and regulate the environmental quality of industrial, commercial and residential neighborhoods in this city, by outlawing conditions which are injurious to the health, safety, welfare or aesthetic characteristics of the neighborhoods, and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. (Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1374)


8-2A04. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

For the purpose of this article, the following rules of construction shall apply:

(a)    Any Part Thereof. Whenever the words “premises,” “structure,” “building” and “yard” are used they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”

(b)    Gender. Words of gender shall be construed to mean neuter, feminine or masculine, as may be applicable.

(c)    Number. Words of number shall be construed to mean singular or plural, as may be applicable.

(d)    Tense. Words of tense shall be construed to mean present or future, as may be applicable.

(e)    Shall. The word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1374)


8-2A05. ENFORCEMENT STANDARDS.

No person shall be found in violation of this article unless a public officer, after a reasonable inquiry and inspection of the premises, believes that conditions exist of a quality and appearance not commensurate with the character of the neighborhood. Such belief must be supported by evidence of a level of maintenance significantly below that of the rest of the neighborhood. Such evidence shall include conditions declared unlawful under section 8-2A06 but shall not include conditions which are not readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. (Formerly 8-2A07. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1374)


8-2A06. UNLAWFUL ACTS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to exist on any residential, commercial or industrial premises conditions which are injurious to the health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the community or conditions which are detrimental to adjoining property, the neighborhood or the city. For the purpose of fair and efficient enforcement and administration, such unlawful conditions shall be classified as follows:

(a)    Exterior conditions (yard) shall include, but not be limited to, the scattering over or the parking, leaving, depositing or accumulation on the yard of any of the following:

(1)    Lumber, wire, metal, tires, concrete, masonry products, plastic products, supplies, equipment, machinery, auto parts, junk or refuse;

(2)    Abandoned vehicles;

(3)    Furniture, stoves, refrigerators, televisions, sinks, bicycles, lawn mowers, or other such items of personal property; or

(4)    Nauseous substances, carcasses of dead animals or places where animals are kept in an offensive manner.

(b)    Exterior conditions (structure) shall include, but not be limited to, deteriorated, dilapidated, or unsightly:

(1)    Exteriors of any structure;

(2)    Exteriors of any accessory structure; or

(3)    Fences, walls, or retaining walls.

(Formerly 8-2A08. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1374)


8-2A07. VIOLATION.

(a)    The code enforcement officer or any officer, including the chief of police and deputy chief of the Tonganoxie police department, may serve upon the person or persons responsible for the property found by a public officer to be in violation of section 8-2A06 a citation with notice to appear in the municipal court of Tonganoxie, Kansas. The citation shall be served on the person or persons responsible for such property by personal service by the code enforcement officer or any officer of the Tonganoxie police department or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by mailing the citation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner.

The citation shall state:

(1)    The condition which has caused the violation of this article; and

(2)    That the person in violation shall have:

(A)    Ten days from the date of the mailing of the notice to alleviate the exterior conditions (yard) violation; and/or

(B)    Forty-five days from the date of the mailing of the notice to alleviate the exterior conditions (structure) violation; or in the alternative to subsections (a)(2)(A) and (B) of this section;

(3)    That failure to alleviate the condition may result in prosecution of the citation under section 8-2A08 and/or abatement of the condition by the city according to section 8-2A09 with the costs assessed against the property under section 8-2A11.

(b)    If the person or persons responsible for the property have failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further citations to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the citation by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the person is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail.

(Formerly 8-2A09. K.S.A. 12-1617e; Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-2A08. PENALTY.

Upon prosecution of such complaint in the municipal court, any person or persons found to be in violation of section 8-2A06 shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500, or by imprisonment, for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense. For the purposes of this article, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation is permitted to exist. (Formerly 8-2A10. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-2A09. ABATEMENT.

In addition to or as an alternative to prosecution as provided in section 8-2A08, a public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in the following manner. If a person to whom a citation has been served pursuant to section 8-2A07 has not alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation, a public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for adoption authorizing a public officer or other agents of the city to abate the conditions causing the violation at the end of 10 days after passage of the resolution. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located as provided in section 8-2A11. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person or persons in violation in one of the following ways:

(a)    Personal service upon the person or persons in violation;

(b)    Certified mail, return receipt requested; or

(c)    In the event the whereabouts of such person or persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect shall be made by a public officer and filed with the city clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition exists.

(d)    If the person or persons responsible for the property have failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the person or persons responsible for the property are a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail.

(Formerly 8-2A11. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-2A10. APPEALS.

Any person affected by any determination of the governing body under section 8-2A08 or 8-2A09 may appeal such determination in the manner provided by K.S.A. 60-2101. (Formerly 8-2A12. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-2A11. COSTS ASSESSED.

If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to section 8-2A09, the city shall give notice to the person or persons responsible for the property by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel of land on which the nuisance was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest have been paid in full. (Formerly 8-2A13. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-2A12. CONSTRUCTION.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its laws nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the Kansas Constitution, by any other law or by ordinance. (Formerly 8-2A14. Code 2004; Ord. 1172; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


ARTICLE 3. JUNKED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY


8-301. FINDINGS OF GOVERNING BODY.

The governing body finds that junked, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned vehicles affect the health, safety and general welfare of citizens of the city because they:

(a)    Serve as a breeding ground for flies, mosquitoes, rats and other insects and rodents;

(b)    Are a danger to persons, particularly children, because of broken glass, sharp metal protrusions, insecure mounting on blocks, jacks or other supports;

(c)    Are a ready source of fire and explosion;

(d)    Encourage pilfering and theft;

(e)    Constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are located;

(f)    Constitute a fire hazard because they frequently block access for fire equipment to adjacent buildings and structures.

(Ord. 1175; Ord. 1374)


8-302. NUISANCES UNLAWFUL; DEFINED; EXCEPTIONS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any vehicle nuisance within the city.

(a)    A vehicle nuisance is any vehicle which is not currently registered or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149 inclusive, as amended; or parked in violation of city ordinance; or incapable of moving under its own power; or in a junked, wrecked or inoperable condition. Any one of the following conditions shall raise the presumption that a vehicle is junked, wrecked or inoperable:

(1)    Absence of a current registration plate upon the vehicle;

(2)    Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, or other supports;

(3)    Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon street or highway.

(b)    The provisions of this article shall not apply to:

(1)    Any vehicle which is enclosed in a garage or other building;

(2)    Any person conducting a business enterprise in compliance with existing zoning regulations or who places such vehicles behind screening of sufficient size, strength and density to screen such vehicles from the view of the public and to prohibit ready access to stored vehicles by children. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the maintenance of a public nuisance.

(Formerly 8-303. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1374)


8-303. COMPLAINTS; INQUIRY AND INSPECTION.

Any public officer shall make inquiry and inspection of premises upon receiving a complaint or complaints stating that a nuisance exists and describing the same and where located or being informed that a nuisance may exist by the police department, code enforcement officer or their qualified designee. A public officer may make such inquiry and inspection when he or she observes conditions which appear to constitute a nuisance. Upon making any inquiry and inspection a public officer shall make a written report of findings. (Formerly 8-305. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1374)


8-304. RIGHT OF ENTRY.

A public officer has the right of access and entry upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inquiry and inspection to determine if a nuisance exists. (Formerly 8-306. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1374)


8-305. VIOLATION.

(a)    A public officer may serve upon the person responsible for the property found by the public officer to be in violation of section 8-302 a citation with notice to appear in the municipal court of Tonganoxie, Kansas. The citation shall be served on the person responsible for the property by personal service by the code enforcement officer or any officer of the Tonganoxie police department or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by mailing the citation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner.

(b)    If the owner or person responsible for the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further citations to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the citation by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner or person responsible for the property is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail.

(Formerly 8-307. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-306. SAME; CONTENTS.

The citation shall state the condition(s) which is (are) in violation of section 8-302. The notice shall also inform the person, corporation, partnership or association that:

(a)    For the first offense by the defendant he, she or they shall have 10 days from the date of serving the order to abate the condition(s) in violation of section 8-302;

(b)    Failure to abate the condition(s) may result in prosecution of the citation as provided by section 8-307 and/or abatement of the condition(s) by the city as provided by section 8-308; or

(c)    After a first offense has been committed the officer may direct the defendant to appear in municipal court for any second or additional offenses and said appearance shall not be relieved by the abatement of the nuisance. A repeat offense is considered any event in which a public officer or the city has notified the person, corporation, partnership or association that its conduct has created a nuisance which may be prosecuted after the defendant has been notified at least once within the previous 24 months of a similar offense within this chapter. The first notice does not require a conviction in municipal court to be treated as a first offense.

(Formerly 8-308. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1357; Ord. 1374)


8-307. FAILURE TO COMPLY; PENALTY.

Should the person fail to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance or request a hearing, the public officer may file a complaint in the municipal court of the city against such person and upon conviction of any violation of provisions of section 8-302, be fined in an amount not to exceed $500 or be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues after notice has been served shall constitute an additional or separate offense.

No notice to abate shall be required for any person and their obligation to appear in court shall not be relieved when he/she receives a citation for a nuisance within the meaning of this section after he/she has received a notice or citation of the existence of a similar nuisance within the past 24 months. (Formerly 8-309. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1357; Ord. 1374)


8-308. ABATEMENT.

In addition to or as an alternative to prosecution as provided in section 8-307, a public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in the following manner. If a person to whom an order has been sent pursuant to section 8-305 has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the governing body within the time period specified in section 8-306, a public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for adoption authorizing a public officer or other agents of the city to abate the conditions causing the violation at the end of 10 days after passage of the resolution.

The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located as provided in section 8-310. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in violation in one of the following ways:

(a)    Personal service upon the person in violation;

(b)    Service by certified mail, return receipt requested; or

(c)    In the event the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect shall be made by a public officer and filed with the city clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition exists.

(d)    If the person responsible for the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the person responsible for the property or owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail.

The opportunity to remedy the violation by abatement shall not be required to be offered to any person who has received a citation or notification of a similar violation within this code section within the previous 24 months. 

(Formerly 8-310. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1357; Ord. 1374)


8-309. DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE; RECOVERY OF VEHICLE.

(a)    Disposition of any vehicle removed and abated from private property pursuant to this article shall be as provided by K.S.A. Supp. 8-1102, as amended.

(b)    Any person attempting to recover a vehicle impounded as provided in this article shall show proof of valid registration and ownership of the vehicle before the vehicle shall be released. In addition, the person desiring the release of the vehicle shall pay all reasonable costs associated with the impoundment of the vehicle, including transportation and storage fees, prior to the release of the vehicle.

(Formerly 8-311. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1374)


8-310. COSTS ASSESSED.

If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to section 8-308, the city shall give notice to the person responsible for the property by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel of land on which the nuisance was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest have been paid in full. (Formerly 8-312. Ord. 1175; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


ARTICLE 4. WEEDS


8-401. WEEDS TO BE REMOVED.

It shall be unlawful for any person responsible for property within the city limits of Tonganoxie, Kansas, to permit weeds to remain upon said property or any area between the property lines of said property and the centerline of any adjacent street or alley, including but not limited to sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way and all other areas, public or private, except that inaccessible drainage ways, as determined by a public officer, shall not be included. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the property is in excess of three acres and is not included within a final plat of record with the county recorder of deeds, person occupying or having charge or control of said property shall only be required to eliminate the weeds in any rights-of-way adjoining the property. All weeds as defined hereinafter are hereby declared a nuisance and are subject to abatement as further provided. (Code 2004; Ord. 1173; Ord. 1325; Ord. 1374)


8-402. PUBLIC OFFICER; NOTICE TO REMOVE.

(a)    A public officer or authorized assistant shall give written notice to the person responsible for such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service to cut or destroy weeds; provided, however, that if the property is unoccupied and the person is a nonresident, such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the person. Such notice shall only be given once per calendar year.

(b)    The notice to be given hereunder shall state:

(1)    That the person in charge of the property is in violation of the city weed control law;

(2)    That the person in control of the property is ordered to cut or destroy the weeds within 10 days of the receipt of the notice;

(3)    That the person in control of the property may request a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative within five days of the receipt of the notice or, if the person is unknown or a nonresident, and there is no resident agent, 10 days after notice has been published by the city clerk in the official city newspaper;

(4)    That if the person in control of the property does not cut or destroy the weeds or fails to request a hearing within the allowed time the city or its authorized agent will cut or destroy the weeds and assess the cost of the cutting or destroying the weeds, including a reasonable administrative fee, against the person in charge of the property;

(5)    That the person in control of the property will be given an opportunity to pay the assessment, and if it is not paid within 30 days of such notice, it will be added to the property tax as a special assessment; and

(6)    That no further notice will be given during the current calendar year prior to the removal of weeds from the property.

(c)    If there is a change in the record owner of title to property subsequent to the giving of notice pursuant to this section, the city may not recover any costs or levy an assessment for the costs incurred by the cutting or destruction of weeds on such property unless the new record owner of title to such property is provided notice as required by this article.

(Formerly 8-403. Code 2004; Ord. 1173; Ord. 1374)


8-403. ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.

(a)    If the person in charge of the property has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing within the time periods specified in section 8-402, a public officer or an authorized assistant shall abate or remove the conditions causing the violation.

(b)    If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to this section, the city shall give notice to the person responsible for the property by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the total cost of the abatement or removal incurred by the city. The notice shall also state that the payment is due within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section.

(c)    The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel of land on which the nuisance was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest have been paid in full.

(Formerly 8-404. K.S.A. 12-1617f; Code 2004; Ord. 1173; Ord. 1374)


8-404. RIGHT OF ENTRY.

A public officer is hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of cutting, destroying and/or removing such weeds in a manner not inconsistent with this article. (Formerly 8-405. Code 2004; Ord. 1173; Ord. 1374)


8-405. UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE.

It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or to attempt to prevent a public officer or the public officer’s authorized representative from entering upon any such lot or piece of ground or from proceeding with such cutting and destruction. Such interference shall constitute an ordinance violation. (Formerly 8-406. Code 2004; Ord. 1173; Ord. 1374)


8-406. NOXIOUS WEEDS.

(a)    Nothing in this article shall affect or impair the rights of the city under the provisions of Chapter 2, Article 13 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, relating to the control and eradication of certain noxious weeds.

(b)    For the purpose of this article, the term noxious weeds shall mean kudzu (Pueraria lobata), field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), Russian knapweed (Centaurea picris), hoary cress (Lepidium draba), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), quackgrass (Agropyron repens), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), burragweed (Franseria tomentosa and discolor), pignut (Hoffmannseggia densiflora), musk (nodding) thistle (Carduus nutans L.), and Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense).

(Formerly 8-407. K.S.A. 2-1314; Code 2004; Ord. 1173; Ord. 1374)


ARTICLE 5. MINIMUM HOUSING CODE


8-501. TITLE.

This article shall be known as the "Minimum Standard for Housing and Premises Code," and will be referred to herein as "this code." (Code 2004)


8-502. GENERAL.

Buildings used in whole or in part as a home or residence of a single family or person and every building used in whole or in part as a home or residence of two or more persons or families living in separate apartments and all premises, either residential or non-residential, shall conform to the requirements of this code. (Code 2004)


8-503. DECLARATION OF POLICY.

The governing body declares the purpose of this code is to protect, preserve, and promote the physical and mental health of the people, investigate and control communicable diseases, regulate privately and publicly-owned structures or dwellings, and all premises for the purpose of sanitation and public health, general appearance, and protect the safety of the people and promote the general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all dwellings, structures and premises now in existence or hereafter constructed or developed and which legislation:

(a)    Establishes minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation and heating, for safety from fire, for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy, and for safe and sanitary maintenance;

(b)    Establishes standards concerning unsightly and blighted buildings and premises, both residential and non-residential structures.

(c)    Determines the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants.

(d)    Provides for the administration and enforcement thereof.

(Code 2004)


8-504. DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions shall apply to the enforcement of this code:

(a)    Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.

 

(b)    Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.

(c)    Dwelling shall mean any building which is wholly or party used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants: provided, that temporary housing hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.

(d)    Dwelling Unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.

(e)    Habitable Dwelling shall mean any structure or part thereof that shall be used as a home or place of abode by one or more persons.

(f)    Habitable Room shall mean a room designed to be used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls and storage places, or other similar places, not used by persons for extended periods.

(g)    Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of insects, rodents, or other pests.

(h)    Multiple Dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.

(i)    Occupant shall mean any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.

(j)    Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care, owns, or has control of a premise or of a building or structure or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.

(k)    Owner shall mean any person, firm, or corporation, who jointly or severally along with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care and control of any structure or dwelling unit or premises within the city as owner, employee, or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the title holder, and such person shall be deemed and taken to be the owner or owner of such property within the true intent and meaning of this code and shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the record owner and notice to any such person shall be deemed and taken to be a good and sufficient notice as if such person or persons were actually the record owner or owner of such property.

(l)    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.

(m)    Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas or fuel pipes, gas or fuel burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes- washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, gas or fuel lines.

(n)    Premise shall mean any lot or land area, either residential or nonresidential, not covered by a structure and which is subject to a city tax in part or in whole.

(o)    Public Officer shall mean the building inspector.

(p)    Rooming House shall mean any dwelling, or that part of a dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.

(q)    Rooming Unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.

(r)    Refuse. For the purpose of this article refuse shall include garbage, and trash.

(1)    Garbage shall mean any accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable waste matter that attends the preparation of, use of, cooking of, delivering of, or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable.

(2)    Trash (Combustible). For the purpose of this article combustible trash shall mean waste consisting of papers, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood and excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding and leaves, or any other combustible materials.

(3)    Trash (Non-Combustible). For the purpose of this article non-combustible trash shall mean waste consisting of metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, other mineral refuse and ashes and street rubbish and sweepings, dirt, sand, concrete scrap, or any other non-combustible material.

(s)    Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground.

(t)    Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of, the owner or operator.

(u)    Temporary Housing shall mean any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, house or building or another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days, except when located in a mobile home court duly licensed under laws of the city.

(v)    Words - Meanings. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "premises," are used in this ordinance, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."

(Code 2004)


8-505. DUTY OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER OF OCCUPIED OR UNOCCUPIED BUILDING AND ITS PREMISES OR VACANT PREMISES.

(a)    It shall be the duty of the owner of every occupied or unoccupied dwelling, building and premises or vacant premise, including all yards, lawns and courts to keep such property clean and free from any accumulation of filth, rubbish, garbage, or any similar matter as covered by sections 8-508:509.

(b)    It shall be the duty of each occupant of a dwelling unit to keep in clean condition the portion of the property which he or she occupies and of which he or she has exclusive control, to comply with the rules and regulations, to place all garbage and refuse in proper containers. Where care of the premise is not the responsibility of the occupant then the owner is responsible for violations of this code applicable to the premise.

(c)    If receptacles are not provided by the owner, then the occupant shall provide receptacles as may be necessary to contain all garbage and trash.

(d)    Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises. and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the unit primarily infested.

(e)    Notwithstanding, the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a vermin proof or reasonable insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner and operator.

(f)    Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.

(Code 2004)


8-506. REGULATIONS FOR THE USE AND OCCUPANCY OF DWELLINGS.

No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements. The following requirements are hereby declared essential to the health and safety of the occupants of such dwelling or dwelling unit:

(a)    Attached Garages or Non-dwelling Areas. All non-dwelling occupancies shall be separated from the dwelling unit by a fire resistant wall and if the dwelling and garage are covered by a common or connecting roof, then the ceiling also must have a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour as defined in the building code.

(b)    Basement or Cellar. The basement or cellar of any dwelling shall be reasonably dry and ventilated and shall be kept free from rubbish accumulation.

(c)    Basement Dwelling Units. The use of basements or cellars for dwelling units is prohibited unless they comply with section 8-506(r) governing ventilation, provided however, if occupied at the time of the passage of this code and if it complies with all other provisions of this code, the public officer may approve less than the required windows, if in his or her opinion, the window area is not detrimental to the occupants.

(d)    Bathing Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain within a room which affords privacy to a person in the room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.

(e)    Boarding and Rooming Houses. No room shall be used for sleeping purposes unless the ceiling height is at least seven feet and there are at least 400 cubic feet of air space for each occupant over six years of age. For sleeping rooms with sloping ceilings, the ceiling height shall be at least seven feet over at least 50 percent of the floor area.

(1)    Bathing facilities shall be provided in the form of a tub or shower for each eight occupants. Separate facilities shall be provided for each sex and plainly marked.

(2)    A flush water closet shall be provided for each six occupants and shall be separated with the separate access from bathing facilities if more than four occupants are served by each. Separate facilities shall be provided for each sex and shall be plainly marked.

(f)    Drainage. All courts, yards or other areas on the premises of any dwelling shall be so graded and drained that there is no pooling of the water thereon. Properly constructed wading and swimming pools and fish ponds are excepted from this section.

(g)    Entrances. (1) There shall be for each dwelling unit a normally used separate access either to a hallway, stairway, or street, which is safe and in good repair.

(2)    A secondary exit to the ground shall be available in case of fire through windows, porch roofs, ladders or any combination that is free of hazard or egress.

(h)    Floor Area. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof. The floor space shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area, inside measurements. No floor space shall be included in determining habitable room area over which the ceiling is less than seven feet above the floor for the purpose of this subsection.

(i)    Garbage and Trash Receptacles. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be provided with such receptacles, not exceeding 32 gallon capacity, as may be necessary to contain all garbage and trash and such receptacles shall at all times be maintained in good repair.

(j)    Heating. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be so constructed, insulated, and maintained and be provided by owner or occupant with heating units so that it is capable or reaching an air temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit under ordinary winter conditions. The chimney of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be maintained in good order, and the owner of the approved heating equipment shall maintain it in good order and repair.

(k)    Kitchen Sink. In every dwelling unit containing two or more rooms, there shall be at least one kitchen sink with public water under pressure and connected to the public sewer, or if that sewer system is not available, to a sewage disposal system approved by the city health department.

(l)    Lavatory Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and located in the same room as the required flush water closet or as near to the room as practicable.

(m)    Lighting. Every habitable room shall have a ceiling electric outlet and a duplex outlet in wall or floor, or at least two wall or floor outlets.

(n)    Lighting of Toilets and Bathrooms. Every toilet and every bathroom in every dwelling shall have at least one electric light in either the ceiling or on the wall.

(o)    Plumbing. All plumbing, water closets and other plumbing fixtures in every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be maintained in good working order.

(p)    Privies. All pit privies, privy vaults, "dry hopper" sewer-connected privies and frost-proof closets are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.

(q)    Toilet Facilities. There shall be at least one flush water closet in good working condition for each dwelling unit, which flush water closet shall be located within the dwelling and in a room which affords privacy.

(r)    Ventilation. Every habitable room in a dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain a window or windows openable directly to the outside air and the total area of such window or windows shall be not less than five percent of the floor area of such room. An approved system of mechanical ventilation or air conditioning may be used in lieu of openable windows. Such system shall be capable of providing not less than four air changes per hour, except that in toilet compartments such system shall provide a complete air change every five minutes and be automatically put in operation when the toilet compartment light is in the "on" position.

(s)    Water Heating Facilities. Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner and are maintained and operated in a safe and good working condition and are properly connected with the hot water lines to the kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

(t)    Windows and Doors. Every window and exterior door shall be reasonably weather-tight, lockable, and rodent-proof and shall be kept in good working condition and good repair.

(Code 2004)


8-507. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; DWELLINGS.

Every dwelling and every part thereof shall be maintained in good repair by the owner or agent and be fit for human habitation. The roof shall be maintained so as not to leak and all rainwater shall be drained therefrom so as not to cause dampness in the walls or ceilings. All floors, stairways, doors, porches, windows, skylights, chimneys, toilets, sinks, walls, and ceilings shall be kept in good repair and usable condition. (Code 2004)


8-508. DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS.

The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following requirements:

(a)    The Public Officer may determine, or five citizens may petition in writing, that any dwelling unit is unfit for human use or habitation if he, she or they find that conditions exist in such structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such buildings or other residents of the neighborhood, or which shall have a blighting influence on properties in the area.

(b)    Such Conditions may include the following without limitation:

(1)    Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities.

(2)    Lack of:

(i)    Adequate ventilation.

(ii)    Light.

(iii)    Cleanliness.

(iv)    Sanitary facilities.

(3)    Dilapidation.

(4)    Disrepair.

(5)    Structural defects.

(6)    Overcrowding.

(7)    Inadequate ingress and egress.

(8)    Unsightly appearance that constitute a blight to the adjoining property, the neighborhood or the city.

(9)    Air Pollution.

(c)    Placarding - Order to Vacate. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and placarded by the public officer shall be vacated within a reasonable time as so ordered.

(d)    Notice of Violation. Procedures as outlined in section 8-512 are applicable hereto.

(e)    Compliance Required before Reoccupancy. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by the public officer.

(1)    The public officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.

(2)    It shall be unlawful for anyone to let, lease, occupy or permit the occupancy, whether for a consideration or not, of any dwelling so posted and any violation of this provision shall constitute a public offense within the meaning of this code.

(3)    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except the public officer as herein provided, and any violation of this provision shall constitute a public offense within the meaning of this code.

(Code 2004)


8-509. DESIGNATION OF BLIGHTED PREMISES (RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL).

The designation of unsightly and blighted premises and elimination thereof shall be carried out in compliance with the following requirements.

(a)    The Public Officer may determine, or five citizens may petition in writing, that if the appearance of a premise is not commencerate with the character of the properties in the neighborhood or otherwise constitutes a blight to the adjoining property or the neighborhood or the city for such reasons as, but not limited to:

(1)    Dead trees or other unsightly natural growth.

(2)    Unsightly stored or parked material, equipment, supplies, machinery, trucks or automobiles or parts thereof; vermin infestation, inadequate drainage.

(3)    Violation of any other law or regulations relating to the use of land and the use and occupancy of the buildings and improvements.

(b)    Notice of Violation. Procedures as outlined in section 8-512 are applicable hereto.

(Code 2004)


8-510. DESIGNATION OF BLIGHTED BUILDINGS AND PREMISES (NON-RESIDENTIAL).

(a)    Certain Blighted Conditions covered in sections 8-508:509 concerning buildings and premises which are on the tax roll of the city are applicable to all non-residential buildings and premises.

(b)    Notice of Violation. Procedures of notification shall follow those prescribed in section 8-512.

(Code 2004)


8-511. INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, AND PREMISES.

(a)    For the Purpose of Determining Compliance with the provisions of this code, the public officer or his or her authorized representative is hereby authorized to make inspections to determine the condition, use, and occupancy of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and the premises upon which the same are located. This requirement is applicable to existing dwellings or buildings.

(b)    The Public Officer is not limited by the conditions in the above paragraph (a) where new construction or vacant premises are involved and may make such inspections at any appropriate time.

(c)    The Owner, Operator. and Occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall give the public officer, or his or her authorized representative, during reasonable hours, free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit, and its premises, for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey after identification by proper credentials.

(d)    Every Occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner thereof, or his or her authorized agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this code or with any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated, or any order issued pursuant to the provisions of this code.

(Code 2004)


8-512. NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURES.

(a)    Informal Discussion. Whenever the public officer or his or her authorized representative determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this code, the public officer will arrange with the alleged violator for an informal discussion of violations, and whether repair and correction is justified.

(b)    Formal Hearing. If a satisfactory solution to the violations, either by correction, demolition or removal, is not forthcoming, then a legal notice of a formal hearing will be issued according to the following procedures:

(1)    Shall be in writing.

(2)    Shall list the violations alleged to exist or to have been committed.

(3)    Shall provide a reasonable time, but not less than 30 days in any event for the correction of the violations particularized.

(4)    Shall be addressed to and served upon the owner of the property, the operator of the dwelling, and the occupant of the dwelling unit or the rooming unit concerned, if the occupant is or may be responsible for violation.

(5)    If one or more persons whom the notice is addressed cannot be found or served after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such person or persons by posting a notice in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, in which event the public officer or his or her authorized representative shall include in the record a statement as to why such posting was necessary.

(6)    Delivery shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service. If service is made by certified mail, the public officer or his or her authorized representative shall include in the record a verified statement giving details regarding the mailing.

(Code 2004)


8-513. PUBLIC OFFICER: AUTHORITY.

For the purpose of protecting the city against unsightly or blighted premises, also the health, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of dwellings or dwelling units, the public officer referred heretofore is hereby authorized, with the consent and prior knowledge of the governing body, to enforce provisions of this code and of other laws which regulate or set standards affecting buildings and premises.

(Code 2004)


8-514. GOVERNING BODY; AUTHORITY.

The governing body is hereby authorized:

(a)    To Informally Review all alleged violations as provided in section 8-512(a) prior to notification prescribed in section 8-512(b).

(b)    To Take Action as prescribed in section 8-512(b).

(c)    To Hear Appeals where there is opposition to any order, requirement, decision or determination by the public officer in enforcement of this code as outlined in section 8-518.

(d)    Discretionary Authority may be exercised in specific cases where variance from the terms of the code as:

(1)    Will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare of inhabitants of the city.

(2)    Is in harmony with the spirit of this code.

(3)    Where literal enforcement of the code will result in unnecessary hardship. (Code 2004)


8-515. ORDER TO CORRECT AND/OR REPAIR, REMOVE OR DEMOLISH.

At the time of the placarding and order to vacate specified by section 8-508(c) hereof, the public officer shall also issue and cause to be served upon the owner a notice advising of the option of removal or demolition in lieu of correction and/or repair following the procedures as outlined in section 8-512. (Code 2004)


8-516. DEMOLITION BY PUBLIC OFFICER; PROCEDURE AND COSTS.

(a)    Failure to Comply with the order under section 8-515 hereof for the alteration or improvement of such structure, the public officer, with the consent and prior knowledge of the governing body, may cause such condemned structure to be removed or demolished and the premises improved to eliminate the conditions outlined in section 8-509 of the code.

(b)    The Cost of Demolition by a Public Officer shall be a lien upon the property upon which the cost was incurred and such lien, including as a part thereof an allowance of his or her costs and necessary attorney’s fees, may be foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided or authorized by law for loans secured by liens on real property or shall be assessed as a special assessment upon the lot or parcel of land on which the structure was located and the city clerk at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the aforesaid costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls against the lot or parcel of land.

(c)    If the Structure is Removed or Demolished by the Public Officer he or she shall offer for bids and sell the structure or the materials of such structure. The proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition and, if there is any balance remaining, it shall be paid to the parties entitled thereto after deduction of costs or judicial proceedings, if any, including the necessary attorney’s fees incurred therein, as determined by the court, if involved.

(Code 2004)


8-517. CONFLICT OF LAWS; EFFECT OR PARTIAL INVALIDITY.

(a)    Conflicts between the provisions of this code and with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code of the city, existing on the effective date of this article, the provision shall prevail which establishes the higher standard.

(b)    Conflicts between this article with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this article which establishes a lower standard, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to prevail and such other laws or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this code. (Code 2004)


8-518. GOVERNING BODY; APPEALS.

(a)    Any person, firm, or corporation considering themselves aggrieved by the decision of the public officer and who desires to present a formal protest to the governing body shall in writing, request a hearing before the governing body within 10 days after receiving notice of the decision from the public officer, as provided in section 8-512(b). Such protest and request for a hearing shall be filed with the office of the city clerk.

(b)    Upon receipt of a protest and request for a hearing, the city clerk shall notify in writing the governing body of such appeal.

(c)    The governing body shall, within 30 days of receipt of protest and request for a hearing, determine a date for the hearing.

(d)    Notice of the date for the hearing shall be sent to the appellant at least 10 days before the hearing.

(e)    Except where an immediate hazard exists as described in section 8-612 of this code, the filing of a protest and request for a hearing before the governing body as specified in subsection (a) shall operate as a stay of the enforcement of the public officer’s order until such time as the governing body has reached a decision on the matter.

(Code 2004)


8-519. RIGHT OF PETITION.

After exhausting the remedy provided in section 8-518, any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer and approved by the governing body after a hearing on the matter, may within 30 days from the date which the order became final petition the district court of the county in which the property is located to restrain the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 6. RODENT CONTROL


8-601. DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

(a)    Building. Any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy as a residence, the transaction of business, the rendering of professional services, amusement, the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise or the performance of work or labor, including office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, workshops and all other houses, sheds and other structures on the premises used for business purposes.

(b)    Occupant. The person that has the use of, controls or occupies any business building or any portion thereof, whether owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or any vacant portion of a business building, the owner, agent or other person having custody of the building shall have the responsibilities of an occupant of a building.

(c)    Owner. The owner of any building or structure, whether individual, firm, partnership or corporation.

(d)    Rat harborage. Any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside a structure of any kind.

(e)    Rat-stoppage. A form of rat-proofing to prevent the ingress of rats into buildings from the exterior or from one building to another, consisting essentially of the closing of all openings in the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations, that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing or by burrowing, with material or equipment impervious to rat-gnawing.

(Code 2004)


8-602. BUILDING MAINTENANCE.

All buildings and structures located within the present or future boundaries of the city shall be rat-stopped, freed of rats and maintained in a rat-stopped and rat-free condition. (Code 2004)


8-603. NOTICE TO RAT-STOP; WHEN CITY TO DO WORK.

Upon receipt of written notice from the governing body, the owner of any building or structure specified therein shall take immediate measures for the rat-stoppage of such building or structure. The work shall be completed in the time specified in the written notice, which shall be within 15 days, or within the time of any written extension thereof that may have been granted by the governing body. (Code 2004)


8-604. FAILURE TO COMPLY.

If the owner fails to comply with such written notice or extension, then the governing body is authorized to take such action as may be necessary to completely rat-stop the building or structure at the expense of the owner, and the city clerk shall submit bills for the expense thereof to the owner of the building or structure. If the bills are not paid within 60 days, the city clerk shall certify the amount due to the city treasurer and the charge shall be a lien against the property where the work has been done, and the owner shall be promptly billed therefor. The expense thereof shall include the cost of labor, materials, equipment and any other actual expense necessary for rat-stoppage. (Code 2004)


8-605. REPLACE RAT-STOPPAGE.

It shall be unlawful for any occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other person to remove the rat-stoppage from any building or structure for any purpose and fail to restore the same in a satisfactory condition, or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. (Code 2004)


8-606. NOTICE TO ERADICATE RATS.

Whenever the governing body notifies in writing the owner of any building or structure theretofore rat-stopped as hereinabove defined, that there is evidence of rat infestation of the building or structure, the owner shall immediately institute appropriate measures for freeing the premises so occupied of all rats. Unless suitable measures for freeing the building or structure of rats are instituted within five days after the receipt of notice, and unless continually maintained in a satisfactory manner, the city is hereby authorized to free the building or structure of rats at the expense of the owner thereof and the city clerk shall submit bills for the expense thereof to the owner of the building or structure and if the same are not paid, the city clerk shall certify the amount due from the owner to the city treasurer, and the owner shall be promptly billed therefor. The expense thereof shall include the cost of labor, materials, equipment and any other actual expense necessary for the eradication measures. (Code 2004)


8-607. CONDITIONS CONDUCIVE TO HARBORAGE OF RATS.

(a)    All food and feed kept within the city for feeding animals shall be kept and stored in rat-free and rat-proof containers, compartments, or rooms unless kept in a rat-stopped building.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to accumulate any garbage or trash in any building or premises so that the same shall afford food and harborage for rats.

(c)    It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or to permit the accumulation on any premises or on any open lot any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stone or similar materials that may be permitted to remain thereon and which are rat harborages, unless the same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than 12 inches above the ground, evenly piled or stacked.

(d)    Whenever conditions inside or under any building or structure provide such extensive harborage for rats that the health department deems it necessary to eliminate such harborage, he or she may require the owner to install suitable cement floors in basements or to replace wooden first or ground floors or require the owner to correct such other interior rat harborage as may be necessary in order to facilitate the eradication of rats in a reasonable time and thereby to reduce the cost of such eradication.

(Code 2004)


8-608. INSPECTIONS.

The building inspector is empowered to make such inspections and re-inspections of the interior and exterior of any building or structure as in his or her opinion may be necessary to determine full compliance with this article. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 7. INSURANCE PROCEEDS FUND


8-701. SCOPE AND APPLICATION.

The city is hereby authorized to utilize the procedures established by K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., whereby no insurance company shall pay a claim of a named insured for loss or damage to any building or other structure located within the city, arising out of any fire, explosion, or windstorm, where the amount recoverable for the loss or damage to the building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the policy covering such building or other insured structure, unless there is compliance with the procedures set out in this article. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


8-702. LIEN CREATED.

The governing body of the city hereby creates a lien in favor of the city on the proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure located within the city, caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or windstorm, where the amount recoverable for all the loss or damage to the building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the policy(s) covering such building or other insured structure. The lien arises upon any unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, or any other charge imposed upon real property by or on behalf of the city which is an encumbrance on real property, whether or not evidenced by written instrument, or such tax, levy, assessment, expense or other charge that has remained undischarged for at least one year prior to the filing of a proof of loss. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


8-703. SAME; ENCUMBRANCES.

Prior to final settlement on any claim covered by section 8-702. the insurer or insurers shall contact the county treasurer, Leavenworth County, Kansas, to determine whether any such encumbrances are presently in existence. If the same are found to exist, the insurer or insurers shall execute and transmit in an amount equal to that owing under the encumbrances a draft payable to the county treasurer, Leavenworth County, Kansas. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


8-704. SAME; PRO RATA BASIS.

Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurance companies insuring the building or other structure. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 4; Code 2004)


8-705. PROCEDURE.

(a)    When final settlement on a covered claim has been agreed to or arrived at between the named insured or insureds and the company or companies, and the final settlement exceeds 75 percent of the face value of the policy covering any building or other insured structure, and when all amounts due the holder of a first real estate mortgage against the building or other structure, pursuant to the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto, shall have been paid, the insurance company or companies shall execute a draft payable to the city treasurer in an amount equal to the sum of 15 percent of the covered claim payment, unless the chief building inspector of the city has issued a certificate to the insurance company or companies that the insured has removed the damaged building or other structure, as well as all associated debris, or repaired, rebuilt, or otherwise made the premises safe and secure.

(b)    Such transfer of funds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the city shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.

(c)    Upon the transfer of the funds as required by subsection (a) of this section, the insurance company shall provide the city with the name and address of the named insured or insureds, the total insurance coverage applicable to said building or other structure, and the amount of the final settlement agreed to or arrived at between the insurance company or companies and the insured or insureds, whereupon the chief building inspector shall contact the named insured or insureds by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying them that said insurance proceeds have been received by the city and apprise them of the procedures to be followed under this article. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 5; Code 2004)


8-706. FUND CREATED; DEPOSIT OF MONEYS.

The city treasurer is hereby authorized and shall create a fund to be known as the "Insurance Proceeds Fund." All moneys received by the city treasurer as provided for by this article shall be placed in said fund and deposited in an interest-bearing account. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 6; Code 2004)


8-707. BUILDING INSPECTOR; INVESTIGATION, REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE.

(a)    Upon receipt of moneys as provided for by this article, the city treasurer shall immediately notify the chief building inspector of said receipt, and transmit all documentation received from the insurance company or companies to the chief building inspector.

(b)    Within 20 days of the receipt of said moneys, the chief building inspector shall determine, after prior investigation, whether the city shall instigate proceedings under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended. 1

(c)    Prior to the expiration of the 20 days established by subsection (b) of this section, the chief building inspector shall notify the city treasurer whether he or she intends to initiate proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended.

(d)    If the chief building inspector has determined that proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended shall be initiated, he or she will do so immediately but no later than 30 days after receipt of the moneys by the city treasurer.

(e)    Upon notification to the city treasurer by the chief building inspector that no proceedings shall be initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, the city treasurer shall return all such moneys received, plus accrued interest, to the insured or insureds as identified in the communication from the insurance company or companies. Such return shall be accomplished within 30 days of the receipt of the moneys from the insurance company or companies.

(Ord. 1074, Sec. 7; Code 2004)


8-708. REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE; EXCESS MONEYS.

If the chief building inspector has proceeded under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, all moneys in excess of that which is ultimately necessary to comply with the provisions for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, if any, shall be paid to the insured. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 8; Code 2004)


8-709. SAME; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.

If the chief building inspector, with regard to a building or other structure damaged by fire, explosion, or windstorm, determines that it is necessary to act under K.S.A. 12-1756, any proceeds received by the city treasurer under the authority of section 8-705(a) relating to that building or other structure shall be used to reimburse the city for any expenses incurred by the city in proceeding under K.S.A. 12-1756. Upon reimbursement from the insurance proceeds, the chief building inspector shall immediately effect the release of the lien resulting therefrom. Should the expenses incurred by the city exceed the insurance proceeds paid over to the city treasurer under section 8-705(a), the chief building inspector shall publish a new lien as authorized by K.S.A. 12-1756, in an amount equal to such excess expenses incurred. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 9; Code 2004)


8-710. EFFECT UPON INSURANCE POLICIES.

This article shall not make the city a party to any insurance contract, nor is the insurer liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 10; Code 2004)


8-711. INSURERS; LIABILITY.

Insurers complying with this article or attempting in good faith to comply with this article shall be immune from civil and criminal liability and such action shall not be deemed in violation of. K.S.A. 40-2404 and any amendments thereto, including withholding payment of any insurance proceeds pursuant to this article, or releasing or disclosing any information pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1074, Sec. 11; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 8. COSTS RECOVERY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RELEASES


8-801. DEFINITIONS.

(a)    Emergency Action. Emergency action shall mean all exigent activities conducted in order to prevent or mitigate harm to the public health and safety and the environment from a release or threatened release of any material into or upon land, water or air.

(b)    Person. Person shall include any individual, corporation, association, partnership, firm, trustee, legal representative, or any combination thereof.

(c)    Recoverable Expenses. Recoverable expenses shall include those expenses of the city that are reasonable necessary and allocable to an emergency action. Recoverable expenses shall not include normal budgeted expenditures that are incurred in the course of providing what are traditionally city services and responsibilities, such as routine firefighting protection. Expenses allowable for recovery may include, but are not limited to:

(1)    Disposable materials and supplies consumed and expended specifically for the purpose of the emergency action.

(2)    Compensation of employees for the time and efforts devoted specifically to the emergency action.

(3)    Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the emergency action (e.g., protective equipment or clothing scientific and technical equipment).

(4)    Replacement costs for equipment owned by the city that is contaminated beyond reuse or repair, if the equipment was a total loss and the loss occurred during the emergency action (e.g., self-contained breathing apparatus irretrievably contaminated during the responses).

(5)    Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the response.

(6)    Special technical services specifically required for the response (e.g., costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts or specialists not otherwise provided for by the city).

(7)    Other special services specifically required for the emergency action.

(8)    Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency action.

(9)    Any costs of cleanup, storage or disposal of the released material.

(10)    Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment procured for a specific evacuation of persons or property.

(11)    Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities.

(12)    Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the emergency action, including efforts to recovery expenses pursuant to this article.

(d)    Release. Release shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into or upon land, water or air, of any material which the city determines may be harmful to the public health and welfare or to the environment.

(e)    Threatened Release. Threatened release shall mean any imminent or impending event potentially causing but not resulting in a release, but causing the city to undertake an emergency action.

(Ord. 1119, Sec. 1)


8-802. STRICT LIABILITY.

Any person causing or responsible for a release or threatened release resulting in an emergency action shall be strictly liable to the city for the recoverable expenses resulting from the emergency action. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person owning or controlling property causing a release or threatened release is responsible for such release or threatened release. (Ord. 1119, Sec. 2)


8-803. RECOVERY OF EXPENSES.

(a)    Itemization of Recoverable Expenses. City personnel and departments involved in an emergency action shall keep an itemized record of recoverable expenses resulting from an emergency action. Promptly after completion of an emergency action, the appropriate city department shall certify those expenses to the city clerk. (Ord. 1119, Sec. 3)


CHAPTER IX. MUNICIPAL COURT

Article 1.    General Provisions


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS


9-101. MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED.

There is hereby established a municipal court for the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine cases involving violations of the ordinances of the city. (Code 2004)


9-102. SAME; PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE.

The Kansas code of procedure for municipal courts, as set forth in K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq. and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto shall govern the practice and procedure in all cases in the municipal court. (Code 2004)


9-103. TIME AND PLACE OF SESSIONS.

Municipal court shall be held in the municipal courtroom in the city hall building on such days and at such hours as the municipal judge designates. (Code 2004)


9-104. MUNICIPAL JUDGE; APPOINTMENT.

The municipal court shall be presided over by a municipal judge. The mayor, subject to the approval of the city council, shall appoint the judge of the municipal court. (Code 2004)


9-105. SAME; ABSENCE; VACANCY; PRO TEM.

In the event the municipal judge is temporarily unable to preside due to absence, illness or disqualification, the municipal judge shall designate an attorney or other qualified person to act as judge pro tempore. In the event the municipal judge fails to appoint a judge pro tempore, the judge pro tempore shall be appointed in the same manner as the municipal judge is selected. The judge pro tempore shall receive compensation as shall be provided by ordinance, payable in the same manner as the compensation of the regular municipal judge.

In the event a vacancy shall occur in the office of municipal judge, a successor shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term in the same manner as the municipal judge was appointed. (K.S.A. 12-4107; Ord. 616, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


9-106. SAME; REMOVAL; QUALIFICATIONS.

(a)    Removal. A majority of the members of the governing body may remove the judge pro tempore; or, for good cause, the mayor may remove the judge pro tempore, with the consent of the governing body.

(b)    Qualifications of Officers. The judge pro tempore elected or appointed under this act may be a resident of the county in which this city is located or a resident of an adjoining county.

(Ord. 616, Secs. 2:3)


9-107. SAME; POWERS AND DUTIES.

The municipal judge and municipal judge pro tem shall have such powers and duties as set forth in the Kansas code of procedure for municipal courts (K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq.) and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto. (Ord. 653, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


9-108. SAME; SALARY.

The municipal judge shall receive a salary as shall be fixed by ordinance. (Code 2004)


9-109. COURT CLERK.

There is hereby established the office of the clerk of the municipal court of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, which office shall be filled by appointment. The duties of the office shall be those prescribed by the Code for Municipal Courts set forth in Chapter 12, Article 41 of the Kansas Statutes, and shall include the following duties:

(a)    The clerk shall issue all process of the court, administer oaths, file and preserve all papers, docket cases and set same for trial and shall perform such further acts as may be necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the court. The clerk shall receive, account for and pay to the city treasurer monthly all fines and forfeited bonds paid into the court. The clerk shall make reports to the judicial administrator and furnish the information when requested by him, her or a departmental justice on such forms furnished by the judicial administrator, and approved by the supreme court.

(b)    The clerk of the municipal court shall within 10 days after selection and before entering upon the duties of office, execute to the city such bond as the governing body may require, which shall be approved by the governing body, and file in the office of the city clerk, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties required of him or her by law, and for the faithful application and payment of all moneys that may come into his or her hands in the execution of the duties of the office. The city shall pay the cost of such bond.

(c)    A majority of all members of the council may remove the clerk appointed under the authority of this article, or for good cause the mayor may temporarily suspend any such appointed clerk.

(K.S.A. Supp. 12-4108; Ord. 627, Secs. 1:3; Code 2004)


9-110. PAYMENT OF FINE.

Where a municipal court judgment against any person results in a fine and/or court costs only, the same shall be satisfied by paying the amount of such fine and/or court costs to the municipal court immediately on the rendition of judgment, or at such time as the municipal judge shall determine. (Code 2004)


9-111. SAME; FAILURE TO PAY SEPARATE VIOLATION.

It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail to pay any lawfully imposed fine for a violation of any law of the city within the time authorized by the court and without lawful excuse having been presented to the court on or before the date the fine is due. Such conduct constitutes a violation of this article, regardless of the full payment of the fine after such time. (Code 2004)


9-112. FAILURE TO APPEAR.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person charged with violation of any law of the city to fail to appear before the municipal court when so scheduled to appear, unless lawful excuse for absence is presented to the court on or before the time and date scheduled for appearance.

(b)    For the purpose of subsection (a), failure to appear shall include willfully incurring a forfeiture of an appearance bond and failure to surrender oneself within 30 days following the date of such forfeiture by one who is charged with a violation of the laws of the city and has been released on bond for appearance before the municipal court for trial or other proceeding prior to conviction, or willfully incurring a forfeiture of an appearance bond and failing to surrender oneself within 30 days after his or her conviction of a violation of the laws of the city has become final by one who has been released on an appearance bond by any court of this state.

(c)    Any person who is released upon his or her own recognizance, without surety, or who fails to appear in response to a summons, notice to appear, or traffic citation duly served upon him or her personally shall be deemed a person released on bond for appearance within the meaning of subsection (b) of this section.

(d)    Failure to appear, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by incarceration for up to 30 days and/or a fine of up to $250.

(Code 2004)


9-113. COURT COSTS.

(a)    Every person having been found guilty by the entry of a plea of guilty or no contest or been found guilty by the court of a violation of the ordinances of the city of Tonganoxie shall be assessed costs for the administration of justice in an amount set by ordinance.

(b)    The court costs for each offense designated as an ordinance traffic offense shall be $50. Court costs for any other offense shall be $80. If probation is imposed the defendant shall pay an additional fee of $100 for supervised probation and $25 for unsupervised probation.

(c)    A fee of $25 shall be paid by any defendant for whom fingerprinting is required pursuant to K.S.A. 12-4517.

(d)    The municipal court judge shall assess costs equal to the amount charged by any detention facility to which a defendant is ordered for each day the defendant serves in custody and for which the city of Tonganoxie incurs costs. 

(e)    The municipal court judge shall assess all fees imposed by the State of Kansas or the United States as required by statute.

(f)    The municipal court judge may assess additional court costs and fees for service of process, transcripts, for expenses incurred in issuing or serving a warrant, failure of a defendant to pay court costs and fines and failure to appear.

(Ord. 1368)


9-114. BAD DEBT CHARGES.

All bills which are determined to be bad debt and turned over for outside collection, including the State of Kansas set-off program, shall be subject to a fee of 25% of the total of the delinquent amount. This bad debt administrative charge shall be applied prior to referral for collection. (Ord. 1261)


CHAPTER X. POLICE

Article 1.    Organization of Police Department

Article 2.    Property in Police Custody

Article 3.    Law Enforcement Trust Fund


ARTICLE 1. ORGANIZATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT


10-101. POLICE DEPARTMENT.

The police department of the city shall consist of a chief of police and such number of regular law enforcement officers as may be employed by the city. The police department will consist of full-time police officers, part-time police officers and reserve police officers. (Ord. 1293)


10-102. DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.

It shall be the duty of the chief of police and other law enforcement officers to see that the laws of the State of Kansas and of the city and all resolutions of the governing body are properly enforced and obeyed within the police jurisdiction of the city.

Whenever arrest is made, they shall attend all trials, and any hearing in any court when required unless excused by the municipal judge. They shall promptly serve all process papers, notices or orders required by law or as directed by the city administrator. They shall also perform such other duties as may be required by the city administrator or the chief of police or by laws of the city. (Ord. 1293)


10-103. POWERS OF CHIEF OF POLICE.

The chief of police shall at all times have power to make or order an arrest, with proper process, for any offense against the laws of the state or of the city, and bring the offender for trial before the proper officer of the city, and to arrest without process in all cases where any such offense shall be committed, or attempted to be committed, in his or her presence. The chief of police shall have power to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the department. (Ord. 1293)


10-104. ARRESTS BY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.

The law enforcement officers of the city shall have power to arrest all offenders against the laws of the state, or of the city, by day or night. (Ord. 1293)


ARTICLE 2. PROPERTY IN POLICE CUSTODY


10-201. DEFINITION.

Property in police custody in the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie, Kansas, shall be handled in a manner prescribed by state law and city ordinance in accordance with this article. (Ord. 1293)


10-202. DETERMINATION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY; AUTHORITY TO SELL.

Any personal property recovered by the police department in the conduct of its authorized duties and activities or abandoned on the streets of the city shall be considered as abandoned personal property and shall be subject to sale by the city if held by the city for more than 30 days. This provision shall not apply to abandoned vehicles nor property seized pursuant to the Kansas Standard Asset Seizure and Forfeiture Act, K.S.A. 60-41-1, and amendments thereto. (Ord. 1293)


10-203. NOTICE OF SALE; AUCTIONS.

The police department shall be authorized to sell, by auction, whether by direct auction or consignment, to the highest bidder for cash, such property as may be abandoned, except as set forth in section 10-204. If it is fiscally responsible, an auction will be held annually. In the event the amount of accumulated property to be disposed of makes it fiscally impractical or irresponsible, the property may be donated to a not-for-profit organization.

(a)    Abandoned property may be disposed of on a consignment basis, provided the notice requirements of this section are satisfied before such sale occurs.

(b)    At such time as it has been determined that an auction is necessary to dispose of abandoned property, the inventory listing all property to be disposed of shall be placed on file in the police department.

(c)    Notice of an auction shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation prior to the date of the auction. At least one such publication shall be at least 10 days prior to the date of the sale.

(d)    The notice shall specify the date, time, and place of the auction, as well as provide a general description of the types of items to be auctioned. The notice shall also explain to prospective buyers or potential claimants that a comprehensive list of items to be auctioned is available at the police department and any claims on property must be made prior to the start of the auction.

(Ord. 1293)


10-204. EXEMPT PROPERTY.

The following classes of property are exempt from the provisions of section 10-202 and shall be dealt with in the following manner:

(a)    Cash. Cash money shall be transferred to the city clerk to deposit in the recovered property fund except in the case where the cash possesses a collectors’ value, in which case it shall be auctioned according to the provisions of this article.

(b)    Firearms. Firearms that are available for disposition may be dealt with in the following manner, in accordance with K.S.A. 21-4206 and amendments thereto, or in accordance with the most current state statute:

(1)    Returned to the owner upon acceptable proof of ownership or registration; or

(2)    Retained by the police department for internal use; or to be sold under the guidelines of the most current state statute;

(3)    Dismantled for parts for the internal use of the police department; or

(4)    Traded to another law enforcement agency for their internal use; or

(5)    Traded or given to the Kansas Bureau of Investigation for law enforcement training, comparison, or destruction by the Kansas Bureau of Investigation forensic laboratory; or

(6)    Destroyed.

(c)    Weapons. All other weapons not outlined in subsection (b) of this section shall be destroyed, unless specifically authorized by the judge of the municipal court to do otherwise.

(d)    Contraband. Any items determined to be contraband shall be destroyed.

(e)    Pharmaceuticals. Items of a pharmaceutical nature, which, while not contraband when properly dispensed, or which are of an over-the-counter nature, shall be destroyed.

(f)    Food. Foodstuffs, if sealed and undamaged, may be donated to an appropriate social service agency or destroyed, but shall not be auctioned. If unsealed or damaged all food items shall be destroyed.

(g)    Alcohol. Alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage products shall be destroyed.

(Ord. 1293)


10-205. PROCEEDS OF SALE (AUCTION).

The proceeds of any sale or auction, after meeting expenses of said sale or auction, shall be transferred to the city clerk for deposit into the general fund of the city. (Ord. 1293)


10-206. CLAIMING PROPERTY; PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.

Unless the property is of such a nature that this code requires destruction, the police department shall be required to make a reasonable effort to locate the owner of any property in storage. However, the responsibility for claiming and identifying any such property shall rest solely with the owner. Claimants to any such property in police storage shall be required to present reasonable proof of ownership and no property shall be released unless such reasonable proof is presented to the chief of police or his/her designee. (Ord. 1293)


ARTICLE 3. LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND


10-301. ESTABLISHMENT.

There is hereby established a fund of the city treasury entitled the special law enforcement trust fund established in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 60-4117, as amended. (Ord. 1293)


10-302. USE OF FUND.

The special law enforcement trust fund shall not be considered a source of revenue to meet normal operating expenses. All monies contained in said fund shall be expended by the police department through the normal city appropriation system and shall be used for such special, additional law enforcement purposes as the chief of police deems appropriate. Neither future forfeitures nor the proceeds therefrom shall be used in planning or adopting the police department budget. (Ord. 1293)


10-303. ANNUAL REPORT.

The police department shall compile and submit annually a special law enforcement trust fund report to the governing body which report shall specify, for such period, the type and approximate value of the forfeited property received, the amount of any forfeiture proceeds received, and how any of those proceeds were expended. (Ord. 1293)


CHAPTER XI. PUBLIC OFFENSES

Article 1.    Uniform Offense Code

Article 2.    Local Regulations

Article 3.    Adult-Oriented Businesses

Article 4.    Animals and Motorized Vehicles on Sidewalks and Trails


ARTICLE 1. UNIFORM OFFENSE CODE


11-101. INCORPORATING UNIFORM PUBLIC OFFENSE CODE.

There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating public offenses within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie, Kansas, that certain code known as the "Uniform Public Offense Code," Edition of 2018, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas, save and except such articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed. No fewer than three copies of said Uniform Public Offense Code shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to which shall be attached a copy of the ordinance codified in this section, and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours.

(Ord. 1296; Ord. 1324; Ord. 1385, Sec. 1; Ord. 1417, Sec. 1; Ord. 1468, Sec. 1)


11-102. SAME; SUPPLEMENTS.

Article 9. Offenses Against Public Peace

9.01.010.    Definitions. As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:

(a)    “Automatic Dialing Device” means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal any type of message indicating a need for public response.

(b)    “Burglary Alarm” means an alarm signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by a system.

(c)    “City” means the city of Tonganoxie.

(d)    “False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent conditions.

(e)    “Local alarm system” means an alarm system which when activated causes and audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated and is intended to be seen and/or heard by others outside of the protected premises.

9.01.020    Certain Interconnections Prohibited.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to program an automated dialing device to select “9-1-1” or any city primary trunk line or secondary trunk line.

(b)    Within sixty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select “9-1-1,” a city primary trunk line or a secondary trunk line shall be reprogrammed or disconnected.

9.01.030    Additional Regulations, Requirements and Duties.

(a)    Local alarm systems shall be equipped to automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within ten minutes of activation.

(b)    Alarm users shall notify the policy communications center prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation, and of such completion.

(c)    It is unlawful for any person to activate any burglary, robbery or residential emergency alarm for the purpose of summoning police, except in the event of an actual or attempted robbery, burglary, medical emergency or other emergency requiring police assistance.

(d)    The chief of police shall develop such rules as may be necessary for the implementation and administration of this chapter.

9.01.040    False alarms—Fees Required When.

(a)    At the time of the 9th false alarm within any calendar year, the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative shall notify the user by mail of the alarm and the fee. No fee shall be assessed for the first nine alarms.

(b)    Any alarm user which has recorded ten or more false alarms within a calendar year shall pay an administrative fee to the city in the following amount:

(1)    Tenth alarm in one calendar year, ten dollars;

(2)    Eleventh alarm in one calendar year, ten dollars;

(3)    Twelfth alarm in one calendar year, twenty dollars;

(4)    Thirteenth alarm in one calendar year, twenty dollars;

(5)    Fourteenth alarm and each additional alarm in excess of fourteenth in one calendar year, thirty dollars.

9.14    Obstruction of Ingress and Egress. Definitions, prohibitions and enforcement.

(a)    It shall be unlawful to:

(1)    Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.

(2)    Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction of interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public street, building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon, and thereto.

(3)    Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some unlawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises.

(b)    When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse.

Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a Class C violation.

9.15    Window Peeping, Prohibited

(a)    It is unlawful for anyone engage in window peeping, which is the going upon or remaining on property owned or occupied by another to look into any window, door, skylight or other opening of a house, room, apartment or other building belonging to or occupied by another without such person’s consent for the purpose of conducting voyeuristic activity, regardless of whether the person is actually able to see inside the house, room, apartment or other building.

(b)    Violation/Penalty. Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1000.00) or by imprisonment of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

9.16    Unlawful Discharge of Fireworks.

(a)    Any person who shall discharge or fire off any cartridge, cane, cannon or fireworks of any kind or explode any fireworks of any kind in the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or other public places in the city shall be guilty of unlawful discharge of fireworks, except:

Fireworks may be discharged on private property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on June 30th, July 1st, July 2nd, July 3rd and July 4th of each year or as authorized by the governing body.*

Provided nothing in this section shall prohibit the governing body of the City of Tonganoxie from granting permission to responsible persons to give pyrotechnic displays in the city in places to be designated by the governing body or the discharge of fireworks.*

Provided further, that nothing herein shall prevent the discharge of firearms of peace officers in the discharge of official duties, nor the discharge of firearms in any licensed shooting gallery, nor shall this section be construed to apply to firing squads for ceremonials, nor to legitimate gunsmith in pursuit of his trade, within the city.

*    Editor’s note: These paragraphs were amended at the request of the city for consistency with Ordinance 1321, codified in section 7-303.

9.17    Bottle Rockets; Sale or Use Prohibited; Exceptions.

(a)    Except as provided in subsection (c):

(1)    It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, offer to sell, or to possess with intent to sale or offer for sale a bottle rocket; and

(2)    It shall be unlawful to ignite, fire, set-off or otherwise use a bottle rocket.

(b)    Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100.

(c)    The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the possession or transportation of bottle rockets by a manufacturer or wholesaler thereof for sale outside this state if such manufacturer or wholesaler is currently registered with the state fire marshal pursuant to K.S.A. 31-156.

(d)    As used in this act, "bottle rocket" means any pyrotechnic device which:

(1)    Is classified as a class C explosive by the United States department of transportation under 49 C.F.R. 173.100 (1977);

(2)    is mounted on a stick or wire; and

(3)    projects into the air when ignited, with or without reports, and includes any device with the same configuration, with or without reports, which may be classified as a pipe or trough rocket. "Bottle rocket" does not include helicopter-type rockets.

9.18    Curfew.

(a)    That a curfew for the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas and the same is attached with the following provisions, to-wit:

(1)    Juvenile Under 16 Years of Age. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under 16 years of age to be or remain upon any private premises, or any public street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley, vacant lot or any other public place, including but not limited to any motor vehicle, in the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except at the residence of such juvenile or any other parental authorized residence, unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other person lawfully entitled to such juvenile’s care, custody or control, or unless such juvenile is engaged in some business or occupation which such person may lawfully engage in making it necessary to be in such place or places after 10:30 p.m.:

Provided, that all such juveniles engaged in such a business or police of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, and an affidavit from such person’s employer or supervisor must be presented prior to the issuance of any permit thereunder.

(2)    Juvenile 16 Years of Age or older but under 18 Years of Age. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile over 16 years of age and under the age of 18 years of age to be or remain upon any private premises, or any public street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley, vacant lot or any other public place, including but not limited to any motor vehicle, in the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. except at the residence of such juvenile or any other parental authorized residence, unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other person lawfully entitled to such juvenile’s care, custody or control, or unless such juvenile is engaged in some business or occupation which such person may lawfully engage in making it necessary to be in such place or places after 12:30 a.m.

Provided, that all such juveniles engaged in such a business or occupation must have a permit issued and signed by the chief of police of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, and an affidavit from such juvenile’s employer or supervisor must be presented prior to the issuance of any permit thereunder, or unless the juvenile specified in this section is attending, with the consent of a parent, legal guardian, or other person lawfully entitled to such juvenile’s care, custody and control, an approved school function that would extend beyond the curfew deadline specified in this paragraph.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person lawfully entitled to the care, custody and control of any juvenile under the age of 16 years of age to knowingly suffer or permit any such juvenile under the age of 16 years, unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person lawfully entitled to such juvenile’s care, custody or control to be or remain upon any public street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley, vacant lot or any other public place, including but not limited to any motor vehicle, in the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

(c)    It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person lawfully entitled to the care, custody and control of any person over 16 years of age and under the age of 18 years of age to knowingly suffer or permit any such person over 16 years of age and under the age of 18 years, unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person lawfully entitle to such person’s care, custody, or control, is attending an approved school function that would extend beyond the curfew deadline, to be or remain upon any private premises, except the residence of such person, or remain upon any public street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley, vacant lot, or any other public place, including but not limited to any motor vehicle, in the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class C violation.

Article 11. Offenses Against Public Morals

11.13.000    Controlled Substances Act Incorporated

There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference the Uniform Controlled Substances Act found in Chapter 21, Article 36a01 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and any amendments thereto and are hereby made the laws of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas and a part of this code as if the same had been set out in full herein.

11.13.010    Possession of controlled substances.

(a)    Except as authorized by the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, K.S.A. 21-36a01, et seq., or any amendments thereto, it is unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, have under such person’s control, prescribe, administer, deliver, distribute, dispense, compound, sell, offer for sale or have in such person’s possession with intent to sell, any controlled substance.

(b)    "Controlled substance" means any drug, substance or immediate precursor of the following:

(1)    As defined in 21-36a01, any depressant designated in subsection (e) of K.S.A. 65-4105, subsection (e) of K.S.A. 65-4107, subsection (b) or (c) of K.S.A. 65-4109, or subsection (b) of K.S.A. 65-4111, or any amendments     thereto;

(2)    Any stimulant designated in subsection (d) or (f) of K.S.A. 65-4107 or subsection (e) of K.S.A. 65-4109, or any amendments thereto;

(3)    Any hallucinogenic drug designated in subsection (d) of K.S.A. 65-4105, or any amendments thereto;

(4)    Any substance designated in subsections (c), (d), (e) or (f) of K.S.A. 65-4111, or any amendments thereto; or

(5)    Any substance designated in K.S.A. 65-4113, or any amendments thereto.

(c)    Possession of a controlled substance is a Class A violation.

11.13.020    Possession of drug paraphernalia.

(a)    Except as authorized by the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, K.S.A. 21-36a01, et seq., or any amendments thereto, it is unlawful for any person to use or possess, deliver, possess with an intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or cause to be delivered, any drug paraphernalia knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, re-pack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Section 11.13.010 of the Tonganoxie Municipal Code.

(b)    "Drug Paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing in the human body a controlled substance in violation of 11.13.010 of the Tonganoxie Municipal Code, or amendments thereto. "Drug Paraphernalia" shall include, but is not limited to:

(1)    Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

(2)    Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, production, processing or preparing controlled substances;

(3)    Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

(4)    Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances.

(5)    Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

(6)    Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, which are use or intended for use in cutting controlled substances;

(7)    Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from or otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;

(8)    Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or intended for use in compounding controlled substances;

(9)    Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.

(10)    Containers and other objects used or intended for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

(11)    Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;

(12)    Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

(a)    Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls,

(b)    Water pipes,

(c)    Carburetion tubes and devices,

(d)    Smoking and carburetion masks,

(e)    Roach clips (objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand),

(f)    Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials,

(g)    Chamber pipes,

(h)    Carburetor pipes,

(i)    Electric pipes,

(j)    Air-driven pipes,

(k)    Chillums,

(l)    Bongs, and

(m)    Ice pipes or chillers.

(c)    To determine whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the following factors will be considered:

(1)    Statements by an owner or person in control of the object concerning its use;

(2)    Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or person in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;

(3)    The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, or Section 11.13.010 of the Tonganoxie Municipal Code, or amendments thereto;

(4)    The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

(5)    The existence of any residue of controlled substance on the object;

(6)    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or person in control of the object, to deliver it to a person the owner or person in control of the object knows, or should reasonably know, intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, or Section 11.13.010 of the Tonganoxie Municipal Code, or amendments thereto. The innocence of an owner or person in control of the object as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, or Section 11.12.010 of the Tonganoxie Municipal Code, or amendments thereto, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use as drug paraphernalia;

(7)    Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use;

(8)    Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

(9)    National and local advertising concerning the object’s use;

(10)    The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

(11)    Whether the owner or person in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of similar or related items to the community, such as distributor or dealer of tobacco products;

(12)    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;

(13)    The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

(14)    Expert testimony concerning the object’s use.

(d)    Possession of drug paraphernalia is a Class A violation, the sentence for which shall be a definite term of confinement in the city or county jail, which shall be fixed by the court and shall not exceed one year. In addition to or instead of confinement prescribed herein, a person convicted of violating this section may be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars.

11.14    Sewer and Utilities.

(a)    Wasting water, gas, etc., is willfully causing the waste of any water, gas, steam or hot air conveyed by or through any pipe without the consent of the person owning or having control of such pipe.

11.15    Water Supply.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave or permit to remain, or to bury dead animals or fowl within the city limits; or to throw, place or leave filth or cleanings of any privy vault or cesspool, or to erect or maintain any privy vault or cesspool stables, hog pen, barn tent, residence or building of any kind within 50 feet of the normal edge of the waters or the waters of the river.

Violation of this section is a Class C violation.

11.16    Urination and Defecation in Public

(a)    Urination and Defection in Public - Prohibited.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate upon any public property, street, highway, or alley, unless the property is specifically set aside or designated for that purpose.

(2)    It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate upon any private property in open view of the public.

(b)    Violation - Penalty. A violation of this section constitutes a Class C violation. However, the minimum fine shall be $100.

11.17    Public Nudity

(a)    The Governing Body finds the appearance of persons in a state of nudity in public places which are not provided or set apart for nudity, generally increases incidents of prostitution, sexual assaults and batteries, attracts other criminal activity to our community, and facilitates other activities which break down family structure and values. Without regulation, appearing in a state of nudity in a public place which is not a public place provided or set apart for nudity constitutes harmful conduct. The regulation of public nudity will protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the people of our community.

(b)    It shall be a class B public violation for any person to knowingly or intentionally appear in a state of nudity in a public place.

(c)    Definitions. As used in this ordinance:

(1)    "Public Place" means a place to which the general public is admitted or area generally visible to public view, whether for free or upon payment of an admission charge.

(2)    "Nudity" means to show or expose with less than a fully opaque covering, the human male or female genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, or buttock, or female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple.

(d)    Exemptions. The prohibitions in this ordinance shall not apply:

(1)    To any child under ten (10) years of age;

(2)    To the breast feeding of a child;

(3)    When the conduct of being nude cannot constitutionally be prohibited by this ordinance because it constitutes conduct which is protected by the United States or Kansas Constitution.

11.18    Littering

(a)    Littering is intentionally or recklessly depositing or causing to be deposited any object or substance into, upon or about:

(1)    Any public street, highway, alley, road, right-of-way, park or other public place, or any lake, stream, watercourse, or other body of water except by direction of some public officer or employee authorized by law to direct or permit such acts; or any private property with the consent of the owner or occupant of such property.

(b)    Should such object or substance be deposited from a motor vehicle, the driver may be cited for any litter thrown, placed or dropped from the motor vehicle, unless any other person in the motor vehicle admits to or is identified as having committed the act.

(c)    Littering is a Class C violation.

11.19    Failure to appear

(a)    Failure to appear is willfully incurring a forfeiture of an appearance bond and failing to surrender oneself within thirty days following the date of such forfeiture by one who is charged with an offense and has been released on bond for appearance before any court of this city, for trial or other proceeding prior to conviction, or willfully incurring a forfeiture of an appearance bond and failing to surrender oneself within thirty days after conviction of an offense has become final by one who has been released on an appearance bond by any court of this city

(b)    Any person who is released upon their own recognizance, without surety, or who fails to appear in response to a summons or traffic citation, or a notice to appear, shall be deemed a person released on bond for appearance within the meaning of subsection A of this section.

(c)    Failure to appear is a Class A violation.

11.20    Unlawful interference with law enforcement officer

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with a law enforcement officer by committing any of the following acts:

(1)    Knowingly and intentionally interfering with, molesting, or assaulting, any law enforcement officer engaged in the performance of his or her duties;

(2)    Knowingly and intentionally obstructing, interfering with or impeding the efforts of any law enforcement officer to reach the location of where a public offense has been committed or a public offender is present;

(3)    Knowingly or intentionally giving false information to any law enforcement officer with the intent of:

(a)    Concealing the actual identity, age, date of birth, or address of the person about whom the law enforcement officer seeks the information, or

(b)    Concealing the facts of a public offense, and with the intent that a law enforcement officer shall act in reliance upon such information.

(b)    Every person convicted of violating this section shall be imprisoned for not more than one year or fined not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars for both such fine and imprisonment.

11.21    Unlawful wearing of uniform, badge or insignia of law enforcement officer.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to wear any uniform, badge or insignia which resembles a law enforcement officer’s uniform, badge or insignia with the intent to falsely give the impression that said person is in any way connected with federal, state or any political subdivision of government. It is unlawful for any person to make a statement with the intent to falsely give the impression that said person is in any way connected with federal, state or any political subdivision of government.

(b)    A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class A violation.

11.22    Any violation of any section not specifically defined shall be considered a Class C violation.

Article 14. Malt Beverage Offenses Concerning Alcoholic Liquor and Cereal

14.1    Definitions.

(a)    As used in this article, the word and phrases defined in this section shall have the following meaning, unless the context otherwise requires.

(1)    Alcoholic Liquor as used in this article includes the four varieties of liquor as defined in this section, namely alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but does not include any beer or cereal malt beverage containing not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.

(2)    Cereal Malt Beverage includes any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed or made from malt or a mixture of malt and/or malt substitute, but does not include any such liquor which contains more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.

14.2.    Cereal Malt Beverage in Public Places; Unlawful Acts.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to sell, serve, dispense or consume any cereal malt beverage in or upon any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk, public way, public or private parking lot, or upon provided that it is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession in such place, any open cereal malt container; provided further that the governing body may authorize the sale and consumption of cereal malt beverage on public property pursuant to a valid application being submitted to said body and when said body determines that such activity would not be detrimental to the health, safety, and morals of the community.

Violation of this section is a Class C violation.

14.3    Placement of Buildings for Consumption.

(a)    No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or alter, for the use of selling, giving away, furnishing, disposing of, procuring, exchanging or delivering of any cereal malt or alcoholic liquor for consumption in such building or structure, or for consumption upon such land or premises, if such consumption is within 200 feet from the nearest property line of any existing hospital, school, church, or library.

(b)    Except, nothing herein shall prohibit use of a building, structure, land, or premises located within 200 feet from the nearest property line of any existing hospital, school, church, or library for a drinking establishment licensed by the State of Kansas which derives from sales of food for consumption on the licensed premises not less than 30% of all the establishment’s gross receipts from sales of food and beverages as defined by K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq. on such premises.

Violation of this section is a Class C violation.

14.4    Furnishing to Persons from Buildings Within 200 of a Hospital, School, Church, or Library.

(a)    No person shall knowingly or unknowingly sell, give away, furnish, dispose of, procure, exchange or deliver, or permit the selling, giving away, furnishing, disposing of, procuring, exchanging or delivering of any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor, in any eating and drinking establishment building, structure or for consumption upon such land or premises if such consumption is within 200 feet from the nearest property line of any existing hospital, school, church or library.

(b)    Except, nothing herein shall prohibit a person otherwise qualified to do so from selling, furnishing, disposing of, procuring or delivering cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor as part of the operation of a drinking establishment licensed by the State of Kansas which derives from sales of food for consumption on the licensed premises not less than 30% of all the establishment’s gross receipts from sales of food and beverages as defined by K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq. for consumption on such premises within 200 feet from the nearest property line of any existing hospital, school, church or library.

Violation of this section is a Class C violation.

14.5    Private Property.

(a)    Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent, regulate or control the consumption of cereal malt and alcoholic liquor upon private property by those occupying such private property as the owner, or as a lessee of an owner and by the guests of the owner or lessee, provided that no charge is made by the owner or lessee for the serving or mixing of any drink or drinks of cereal malt or alcoholic beverages or for any substance co-mixed with such beverages.

14.6    Alcoholic Beverage in Public Places; Unlawful Acts.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to sell, serve, dispense or consume any alcoholic liquor in or upon any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk, public way, public or private parking lot, or upon private property provided that it is unlawful for any person to have in his possession in such place, any open alcoholic liquor container; provided further that the governing body may authorize the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor on public property pursuant to a valid application being submitted to said body and when said body determines that such activity would not be detrimental to the health, safety, and morals of the community.

Violation of this section is a Class C violation.

14.7    Employment by Licensed Businesses of Minors Prohibited.

(a)    No person under the age of 21 years of age shall be employed to dispense cereal malt beverages except: an employee who is not less than 18 years of age may dispense or sell cereal malt beverage if:

1)    The place of business is licensed only to sell cereal malt beverage at retail in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises of; or

2)    The place of business is a licensed food service establishment, as defined by K.S.A. 36-501 and amendments thereto, and not less than 50% of gross receipts from the place of business are derived from the sale of food for consumption on the premises of the place of business.

(Ord. 1296)


ARTICLE 2. LOCAL REGULATIONS


11-201. VARIOUS NOISE, REGULATING.

(a)    Purpose. It is found and declared that:

(1)    The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises within the limits of the city is a condition that has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing;

(2)    The making, creation, or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual, and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city; and

(3)    The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, are in issuance of and for the purpose of securing and promotion of the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants.

(b)    Standards. The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of this article exists shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:

(1)    Volume of the noise;

(2)    Intensity of the noise;

(3)    Origin of the noise is usual or unusual;

(4)    Origin of the noise is nature or unnatural;

(5)    Volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;

(6)    Proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

(7)    Nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

(8)    Density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

(9)    Time of day or night the noise occurs;

(10)    Duration of the noise;

(11)    Noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and

(12)    Noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.

(c)    Prohibition Generally.

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or association to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. The provisions of this article shall not apply to such occasional and infrequent uses as authorized by special permit of the city council upon showing by an applicant and determination by the city council that the proposed use is not detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare.

(2)    The acts mentioned in the following sections of this chapter among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.

(d)    Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc.

(1)    The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any reasonable loud or harsh sound; and the sound of any such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time is unlawful.

(2)    The use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.

(3)    The use of exhaust brakes shall be prohibited where posted.

(e)    Radios, Phonographs, Loudspeakers, Etc.

(1)    The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, loudspeakers, phonograph, tape players, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who voluntary listens thereto is unlawful.

(2)    The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article.

(f)    Construction or Repairing of Buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. is unlawful, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while emergency continues. If the building inspector determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the inspector may grant permission from such work to be done within the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.

(Ord. 1296)


ARTICLE 3. ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES


11-301. DEFINITIONS.

Adult-oriented business means any sexually oriented business as defined in K.S.A. 12-770 and any amendments thereto. All definitions of words and phrases in K.S.A. 12-770 and any amendments thereto are incorporated herein and made the definitions of the same words wherever they appear in this article unless the context clearly requires otherwise. (Ord. 1322)


11-302. LICENSE REQUIRED.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an adult-oriented business in the city unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has obtained an adult-oriented business license from the city, or to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the city.

(b)    Any business that engages in the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures, films or other media, if such business is not open to the public in general but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection by those officials of only those business records necessary for the limited purpose of determining whether such business enterprise is an adult-oriented business as defined herein. This entry and inspection shall take place during hours when such business is open to the public, unless otherwise requested by the business, and shall not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of such business.

(Ord. 1322)


11-303. LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MANAGERS, SERVERS AND ENTERTAINERS.

It is unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult-oriented business without first obtaining a license to do so from the city, or to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult-oriented business after such person’s license to do so has been revoked or suspended. (Ord. 1322)


11-304. LICENSES AND FEES.

(a)    The license year for all fees required herein shall be from January 1st through December 31st. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated herein by cash, certified or cashier’s check, or money order, and no application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid.

(b)    All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nontransferable, and license fees shall be nonrefundable.

(c)    For the issuance of a license for each adult entertainment center, entertainer, server or manager as required by this chapter, the owner shall pay to the city such license fee in the amount of $500.

(Ord. 1322)


11-305. LICENSE LIMITED TO ONE IDENTIFIABLE TYPE OF ADULT USE.

All adult-oriented business licenses shall be issued only for the one adult-oriented business use listed on the application. Any change in the type of adult use shall invalidate the adult-oriented business license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use. A separate license is required for each adult use. (Ord. 1322)


11-306. LICENSE APPLICATIONS.

(a)    Adult-Oriented Business License. All persons desiring to secure a license to operate an adult-oriented business as required herein shall make a verified application with the city clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person who owns the adult-oriented business. The application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by its president. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by all partners. In all other instances where the owner is not an individual, where applicable, the application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the owner. The city clerk may require proof of authorization before accepting an application. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk, and shall require the following information:

(1)    The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation, date, place of birth, and Social Security number of the applicant.

(2)    The tax identification number and registered agent if the owner is required to have a tax identification number or registered agent.

(3)    The name of the adult-oriented business, a description of the type of adult-oriented business to be performed on the licensed premises, and the name of the owner of the premises where the adult-oriented business will be located.

(4)    The names, residence addresses, Social Security numbers and dates of birth of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership or limited liability partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the same information for all corporate officers and directors and stockholders or members who own more than 25% interest in the corporation.

(5)    A statement from the applicant whether the applicant, or any corporate officer or director, or stockholder, partner or member who owns more than 25% interest in such entity previously operating in this or another city, county or state, has had an adult-oriented business license of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity subjected to the suspension or revocation.

(6)    A statement from the applicant, all partners or each corporate officer and director that each such person has not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony, whichever event is later, within five years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses, or controlled substances, illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Kansas Statutes or municipal ordinances.

The statement shall also indicate that the applicant, each partner or each corporate officer and director have not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within two years immediately preceding the application where such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution, sale of controlled substances, illegal drugs or narcotics.

(7)    If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a current certificate of registration issued by the Kansas Secretary of State.

(8)    A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating adult-oriented businesses.

Failure to provide the information and documentation required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The city clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within 10 working days of the date the application is received by the city clerk.

(9)    Sign a waiver allowing a background check be conducted on applicant.

(b)    Manager, Server or Entertainer License. All persons desiring to secure a license to be a manager, server or entertainer shall make a verified application with the city clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be a manager, server or entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall require all of the following information:

(1)    The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, Social Security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining.

(2)    If applicable, the name and address of each adult business where the applicant intends to work as a manager, server or entertainer.

(3)    A statement from the applicant that the applicant has not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony, whichever event is later, within five years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography and related offenses, or controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Kansas Statutes or municipal ordinances.

The statement shall also indicate that the applicant has not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within two years immediately preceding the application where such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics.

The statement shall also authorize background checks to be conducted.

(4)    The applicant shall present to the city clerk, who shall copy, documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:

(A)    A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state, bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(B)    A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(C)    An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America;

(D)    An immigration card issued by the United States of America;

(E)    Any other form of picture identification issued by a governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the city clerk; or

(F)    Any other form of identification deemed reliable by the city clerk.

Failure to provide the information required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The city clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within 10 working days of the date the application was received by the city clerk.

(Ord. 1322)


11-307. APPLICATION PROCESSING.

Upon receipt of an application for an adult-oriented business license, or a manager, server or entertainer license, the city clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of the application to the chief of police for investigation of the application. In the case of an adult-oriented business license application, the city clerk shall also transmit a copy of the application to the city planner and the building official. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such application to determine whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the application meets the requirements herein for issuance. The chief of police shall report the results of the investigation to the city clerk not later than 10 working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the city planner and the building official to determine whether the structure where the adult-oriented business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable zoning code, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances, and health regulations. The city planner and the building official shall report the results of their investigation to the city clerk not later than 10 working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. Upon receipt of the reports from the chief of police, city planner and the building official, the city clerk shall forward the application for consideration by the governing body, who shall approve or disapprove the license. (Ord. 1322)


11-308. EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION, ISSUANCE OF LICENSE, DISAPPROVAL.

(a)    The governing body shall examine an application for an adult-oriented business license, or a manager, server, or entertainer license, within 30 days of the date such application was received by the city clerk. After such examination, the governing body shall approve the issuance of a license only if the appropriate license fee has been paid, the applicant is qualified, and all the applicable requirements set forth herein are met. No license shall be approved for any person ineligible pursuant to the provisions herein. All incomplete applications shall be denied.

(b)    The governing body’s report on license examination shall be in writing and show the action taken on the application. If the license is granted, the mayor shall direct the city clerk to issue the proper license.

(c)    If an application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be immediately notified by certified mail, and the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a license application may appeal the denial to the district court.

(Ord. 1322)


11-309. RENEWAL.

(a)    A license may be renewed by making application to the city clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on December 31st of each calendar year, and renewal applications for such licenses shall be submitted between November 1st and December 10th.

(b)    Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be renewed by issuance of a new license in the manner provided herein.

(c)    If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time provided herein, the expiration of such license shall not be affected and a new application shall be required.

(Ord. 1322)


11-310. LICENSE - INELIGIBILITY AND DISQUALIFICATION.

No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to:

(a)    An applicant for an adult-oriented business license if one or more of the following conditions exist:

(1)    The operation of an adult-oriented business is not permitted within the zoning district in which the business is located.

(2)    The proposed adult-oriented business is to be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following within the corporate limits of the city:

(A)    A boundary of a residential district;

(B)    A church or synagogue;

(C)    A school (grades K through 12);

(D)    A group day care center or kindergarten; or

(E)    A public park or playground, if any portion of the park or playground or a street abutting any portion of the park or playground is within or abuts a residential district.

For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where an adult-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or rectory, school, group day care center or kindergarten or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park or playground or residential district.

(3)    The proposed adult-oriented business is to be located within 500 feet of another adult-oriented business. The distance between two adult-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior walls of the structures in which the businesses are located.

(4)    The proposed adult-oriented business is to be located in the same building, structure or portion thereof in which an existing adult-oriented business is located.

(5)    The applicant knowingly failed to supply all of the information requested on the application.

(6)    The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application.

(7)    The applicant’s proposed business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the city; provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration by the governing body.

(8)    The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein during the time period set forth herein.

(9)    The applicant has had an adult-oriented business license or comparable license revoked or suspended in this or any other city during the past five years.

(b)    An applicant for a manager, server or entertainer license if one or more of the following conditions exist:

(1)    The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein during the time period set forth herein;

(2)    The applicant knowingly failed to provide all of the information required on the application;

(3)    The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application;

(4)    The applicant has had a manager, server or entertainer license revoked or suspended in this or any other city during the past five years; or

(5)    The applicant is applying for a license for a manager, server or entertainer in a bath house or body painting studio and has not produced a health certificate as required herein.

(Ord. 1322)


11-311. STANDARDS OF OPERATION.

The following standards of operation shall be adhered to by all adult-oriented businesses, their employees and all managers, servers and entertainers and patrons of adult-oriented businesses, while on or about the premises of the business:

(a)    Identification Cards. All or any manager, server or entertainer issued a license under the provisions contained herein shall, at all times when working in an adult-oriented business, have in their possession a valid identification card issued by the city, bearing the permit number, the employee’s physical description and a photograph of such employee. Such identification cards shall be laminated to prevent alteration.

(b)    Age Restriction. Only persons 18 years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of any adult-oriented entertainment business.

(c)    Exterior Observation. The premises of all adult-oriented businesses will be so constructed as to ensure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with an anteroom or foyer will be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building.

(d)    Exterior Display. No adult-oriented business will be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of live performers engaged in an erotic depiction or dance or any material or persons depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.

(e)    Nudity or Semi-Nudity Prohibited. No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron in an adult-oriented business shall be nude or semi-nude, or clothed in less than opaque attire.

(f)    Touching Prohibited. No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron in an adult-oriented business shall touch the "specified anatomical areas" defined in K.S.A. 12-770(a)(15) of any other manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron.

(g)    Lighting Required. The premises of all adult-oriented businesses shall be lighted in every place to which customers are permitted access, at an illumination of not less than one footcandle, as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is present on the premises.

(h)    Closed Booths or Rooms Prohibited. No part of any booth, cubical, room or stall open to the public, with the exception of restrooms, shall be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.

(i)    Hours of Operation. No adult-oriented business may be open or in use between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day other than a Sunday, when the business may not be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and noon.

(Ord. 1322)


11-312. SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, NON-RENEWAL OR APPEAL.

Whenever the governing body has information that:

(a)    The owner or operator of an adult-oriented business has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this article; or

(b)    There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this article which have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or operator of an adult-oriented business knew or should have known that such violations were committed; or

(c)    The license was knowingly obtained through false statements in the application for such license or renewal thereof; or

(d)    The licensee knowingly failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or

(e)    The owner, operator or any partner, or any corporate officer or director, holding an adult-oriented business license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided herein;

then the governing body shall, upon five days’ written notice to the licensee, conduct a hearing to determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the governing body may take any of the following actions:

(1)    Suspend the license for up to 90 days;

(2)    Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year; or

(3)    Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one year, on the condition that no further violations of the ordinance occur during the period of probation. If a violation does occur, and after a hearing the violation is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year.

A license holder may appeal a suspension or revocation to the district court in the same manner as a license application disapproval.

(Ord. 1322)


11-313. REGULATIONS.

The city administrator shall have the power to promulgate regulations as may be necessary and feasible for the carrying out of the duties of his/her office and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 

(Ord. 1322)


11-314. PENALTY.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. Upon conviction thereof, the general penalty and continuing violations set forth in section 1-116 shall apply. 

(Ord. 1322)


ARTICLE 4. ANIMALS AND MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS


11-401. ANIMALS AND MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS PROHIBITED.

(a)    Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section it shall be unlawful for any person to have any animal, except a properly restrained or leashed dog or cat, on the city’s sidewalks and trails.

(b)    Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section it shall be unlawful for any person to have or operate any motorized vehicles on the city’s sidewalks and trails.

(c)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, motorized vehicles operated by the city of Tonganoxie, Leavenworth County or the State of Kansas, or motorized vehicles owned and operated by persons contracted with the city, county or state, or any motorized wheelchair or electric scooter for the use of a person with a disability may be used and operated on the city’s sidewalks. Any vehicle meeting the exception of this subsection shall not exceed five miles per hour.

(d)     A violation of this section shall be considered a traffic infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Upon a violation of this section a police officer may issue a citation with a notice to appear in the municipal court of Tonganoxie to answer the charge. 

(Ord. 1402, Sec. 1)


CHAPTER XII. PUBLIC PROPERTY

Article 1.    City Parks

Article 2.    Right-of-Way Management


ARTICLE 1. CITY PARKS


12-101. CITY LAWS EXTENDED TO PARK.

The laws of the city shall extend to and cover all city parks. (Code 2004)


12-102. POLICE JURISDICTION OVER PARKS.

The city shall have police regulations governing any public parks belonging to the city and the chief of police and law enforcement officers of the city shall have full power to enforce city laws governing city parks and shall maintain order therein. (Code 2004)


12-103. DAMAGING PARK PROPERTY.

It shall be unlawful for any person, except duly authorized city employees, to willfully or wantonly remove, injure, tarnish, deface or destroy any building, walk, bench, tree or improvement or property of any kind belonging to any park owned by the city. (Code 2004)


12-104. DANGEROUS WEAPONS NOT ALLOWED.

(a)    Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person to carry or have in his or her possession any firearm or dangerous weapon or to shoot or discharge the same within the limits of any city parks.

(b)    The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not apply to duly authorized law enforcement officers in the performance of official duty.

(Code 2004)


12-105. VEHICLE REGULATIONS.

(a)    Motor vehicles, including any vehicle licensed to operate on public streets, roads and highways and motorbikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and other motorized off-the-road vehicles shall be operated in a safe and prudent manner at all times in park areas.

(b)    Except as provided in subsection (d), it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in any area not designated for such purpose.

(c)    Except as provided in subsection (d), it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within any city park except upon roads, drives and parking areas established by the city.

(d)    Subsections (b) and (c) above shall not apply to authorized city employees while engaged in the maintenance and care of the park.

(e)    It shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle in any park area at a speed in excess of 20 m.p.h.

(Code 2004)


12-106. HUNTING.

It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue, catch, trap, maim, kill, shoot or take any wildlife, either bird or animal, in any manner at any time while in any city park. (Code 2004)


12-107. FIRES.

It shall be unlawful for any person to build or kindle any fire in any city park except in the ovens, stoves, or grills provided for that purpose by the city, and such fire must be extinguished by the person, persons or parties starting such fire, immediately after use thereof. (Code 2004)


12-108. CAMPING PROHIBITED.

Overnight camping is hereby prohibited in city parks except where posted. (Code 2004)


12-109. SANITATION.

All waste material, paper, trash, rubbish, tin cans, bottles, containers, garbage and refuse of any kind whatsoever shall be deposited in disposal containers provided for such purposes. No such waste or contaminating material shall be discarded otherwise. No sticks, stones, trash or other objects shall be thrown or discarded in or on any park lands, fountains, pools, drinking fountains, sanitary facilities, or other improvements. (Code 2004)


12-110. PROHIBITION AGAINST ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES.

It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use, consume or have on the premises of any park or other city property within the city any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage. (Code 2004)


12-111. PRESERVATION OF NATURAL STATE.

It shall be unlawful for any person, except duly authorized city employees, to take, injure, or disturb any live or dead tree, plant, shrub, or flower, or otherwise interfere with the natural state of city parks. (Code 2004)


12-112. GENERAL REGULATIONS.

The city may post such rules and regulations, as are approved by the governing body, pertaining to the use of the city parks in a conspicuous place in each city park. Violations of these posted rules shall constitute a violation of this code. (Code 2004)


Article 2. RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT


12-201. DEFINITIONS.

(a)    Public right-of-way means only the area of real property in which the city has a dedicated or acquired right-of-way interest in the real property. It shall include the area on, below or above the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, roads, highways, parkways or boulevards dedicated or acquired as right-of-way. The term does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service, easements obtained by utilities or private easements in platted subdivisions or tracts.

(b)    Occupant means any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, which enters upon the right-of-way of the city, or in any manner establishes a physical presence on, upon, in or over the right-of-way of the city, for the purpose of installing, construction, maintaining or operating lines, conduits, wires, fiber optic wires, cables, pipes, pipelines, poles, towers, vaults or appliances, or related facilities or appurtenances thereto.

(Ord. 1167)


12-202. AUTHORIZATION FROM CITY REQUIRED.

(a)    No person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity shall enter upon the right-of-way of the city, or in any manner establish a physical presence on, upon, in or over the right-of-way of the city, for the purpose of installing, construction, maintaining or operating lines, conduits, wires, fiber optic wires, cables, pipes, pipelines, poles, towers, vaults or appliances, or related facilities or appurtenances thereto, without the express written permission of the city. The permission of the city may be granted by a franchise agreement pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq. or by such other agreement as the governing body determines best protects the public interest in the right-of-way.

(b)    Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as granting an occupant the authority to construct, maintain or operate any facility or related appurtenance on property owned by a city outside of the public right-of-way.

(c)    The city shall process each valid and administratively complete application for use of the right-of-way within 30 days.

(Ord. 1167)


12-203. HEALTH, SAFETY, AND WELFARE REGULATIONS.

The authority of a provider to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall always be subject and subordinate to the reasonable public health, safety and welfare requirements and regulations of the city. (Ord. 1167)


12-204. SPECIFIC PORTIONS OF RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTRICTED.

The city hereby prohibits, as permitted by K.S.A. 17-1902(e), the use or occupation of the following specific portions of public right-of way: no restrictions at this time. (Ord. 1167)


12-205. COMPLIANCE WITH MANUAL OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.

Any occupant of the public right-of-way shall comply with the provisions of Standards and Guidelines for Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction, Maintenance, Utility, and Incident Management Operations Part VI of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 1988 Edition, Revision 3, dated September 3, 1993, which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1167)


12-206. EMERGENCIES.

If there is an emergency necessitating response work or repair, any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity which has been granted permission to occupy the public right-of-way may begin that repair or emergency response work or take any action required under the circumstances; provided, that the person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity notifies the city promptly after beginning the work and timely thereafter meets any permit or other requirement had there not been such an emergency. (Ord. 1167)


12-207. REPAIR.

Any occupant of the public right-of-way is hereby required to repair all damage to a public right-of-way caused by the activities of that occupant, or of any agent affiliate, employee, or subcontractor of that occupant, while occupying, installing, repairing or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way and to return the right-of-way to its functional equivalence before the damage pursuant to the reasonable requirements and specifications of the city. If the occupant fails to make the repairs required by the city, the city may effect those repairs and charge the occupant the cost of those repairs. (Ord. 1167)


12-208. RELOCATION.

Whenever requested by the city, in order to accomplish construction and maintenance activities directly related to improvements for the health, safety and welfare of the public, an occupant promptly shall remove its facilities from the public right-of-way or shall relocate or adjust its facilities within the public right-of-way at no cost to the political subdivision. Such relocation or adjustment shall be completed as soon as reasonably possible within the time set forth in any request by the city for such relocation or adjustment. Any damages suffered by the city or its contractors as a result of such occupant’s failure to timely relocate or adjust its facilities shall be borne by such occupant. (Ord. 1167)


12-209. FEES.

The following fees shall be assessed against occupants of the public right-of-way:

(a)    Repair and restoration costs associated with repairing and restoring the public right-of-way because of damage caused by the provider, its assigns, contractors, and/or subcontractors in the right-of-way; and

(b)    A $5,000 performance bond, in a form acceptable to the city, from a surety licensed to conduct surety business in the State of Kansas, insuring appropriate and timely performance in the construction and maintenance of facilities located in the public right-of-way.

(Ord. 1167)


12-210. INDEMNITY.

(a)    Occupants shall indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused by the negligence of the occupant, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate or subcontractor of the provider, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors or representatives, while installing, repairing or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way.

(b)    The indemnity provided by this subsection does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, contractors or subcontractors. If an occupant and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under state or federal law.

(c)    This section is solely for the benefit of the city and occupant and does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity.

(Ord. 1167)


12-211. CLAIM NOTIFICATION.

An occupant shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or demand against the provider or the city related to or arising out of the occupant’s activities in a public right-of-way. (Ord. 1167)


12-212. PENALTY PROVISION.

Any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, or agent, contractor or subcontractor thereof, violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a municipal offense, and shall upon conviction be subject to a maximum fine of $500. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 1167)

 


CHAPTER XIII. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Article 1.    Sidewalks

Article 2.    Streets

Article 3.    Trees and Shrubs

Article 4.    Snow and Ice


ARTICLE 1. SIDEWALKS


13-101. PERMIT REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk within the city until the plans first have been approved by the governing body and a permit issued for such work by the city clerk. (Code 2004)


13-102. SIDEWALK GRADE.

Hereafter all sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in the city shall be constructed on the established grade. When the governing body shall order a sidewalk constructed as hereafter provided, the city shall pay the cost of bringing the street to grade for the sidewalk. Where no grade has been established, the owner of abutting property may construct a sidewalk on the natural grade. If the grade has been established, the city clerk shall furnish the property owner with the official grade by reference to a stated distance above or below the street grade. (K.S.A. 12-1801, 12-1807; Code 2004)


13-103. SAME; SPECIFICATIONS.

Hereafter all sidewalks shall be of single-course construction and shall be constructed and laid in accordance with standard plans and specifications hereby adopted by reference and filed in the office of the city clerk as provided by K.S.A. 12-1802. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk except as provided by this article. (Code 2004)


13-104. SAME; PETITION.

When a petition signed by no fewer than 10 citizens owning real estate in the city requesting construction of a sidewalk is filed with the city clerk, the governing body may in its discretion, by a resolution, order such sidewalk constructed as herein provided. (K.S.A. 12-1803; Code 2004)


13-105. SAME; CONDEMNATION, RECONSTRUCTION.

When any sidewalk, in the opinion of the governing body, become inadequate or unsafe for travel thereon, the governing body may adopt a resolution condemning such walk and providing for the construction of a new walk in the place of the walk condemned. (K.S.A. 12-1804; Code 2004)


13-106. NOTICE; PUBLICATION.

The resolution providing for the construction or reconstruction of a sidewalk, as the case may be, shall give the owner of the abutting property not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after its publication one time in the official city paper in which to construct or cause to be constructed or reconstructed the sidewalk at his or her own expense. If the sidewalk is not constructed by the property owner within the time specified, the governing body shall cause the work to be done by contract. (K.S.A. 12-1805; Code 2004)


13-107. RIGHT OF ABUTTING OWNER.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the owner of property abutting on a street, who desires to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk at his or her own expense and in accordance with official plans and specifications for the purpose and which meet such other requirements as would have to be met if the sidewalk were constructed or reconstructed by the city, to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk without any petition or a condemning resolution by the governing body. If such property owner desires the sidewalk to be constructed and reconstructed by the city and an assessment levied as provided by law in other cases, he or she shall file a request with the governing body. The governing body, in its discretion, may provide for the construction or reconstruction of the sidewalk requested in the same manner as in other cases where citizens or taxpayers petition the governing body. (K.S.A. 12-1806; Code 2004)


13-108. REPAIRS BY OWNER OR CITY.

(a)    It shall be the duty of the owner of the abutting property to keep the sidewalk in repair, but the city may, after giving five days’ notice to the owner or his or her agent, if known, of the necessity for making repairs or without notice if the lot or piece of property is unoccupied, make all necessary repairs at any time. The same shall be done and the cost thereof assessed against the lot or piece of land abutting the sidewalk so repaired as may be provided by law. This obligation of the owner of abutting property shall not apply to trails in the city designated as bike trails, walking trails or hiking trails.

(b)    Definitions. Trails designated by the city as hiking trails, walking trails or bicycle trails shall be defined as improved trails eight feet wide or wider for the purposes of public pedestrian and/or bicycle traffic located in or on public easements, rights-of-way or other public property. Trails shall not include properties maintained by school districts or properties maintained by county, state, or federal authorities.

(K.S.A. 12-1808; Code 2004; Ord. 1345; Ord. 1347)


13-109. PERFORMANCE, STATUTORY BOND.

In any case where the reconstruction or construction of a sidewalk is required to be done by contract as provided in section 13-106 hereof, the governing body may require the contractor to give a bond for the faithful performance of the contract and for the construction of the sidewalk in accordance with the plans and specifications, ordinances of the city or laws of Kansas, and for all contracts exceeding $1,000 entered into by the city for any such purpose a statutory lien bond required by K.S.A. 60-1111 shall be furnished. (Code 2004)


13-110. OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to build or construct any step or other obstruction, whether temporary or permanent, or to store, leave or allow to be left any implements, tools, merchandise, goods, containers, benches, display or show cases, on any sidewalks or other public ways in the city or to obstruct the same longer than is necessary for loading or unloading any such article or object. (Code 2004)


13-111. SAME; EXCEPTION.

The governing body may authorize the granting of temporary permits in connection with a building or moving permit for limited times only to the owner of property abutting on any sidewalk to use or encumber such sidewalk or public way of the city during the construction of any building or improvement thereon. No permit shall be issued for such purpose until plans for warning and safeguarding the public during such use of sidewalks shall have been submitted by the owner or his or her contractor and approved by the governing body. (Code 2004)


ARTICLE 2. STREETS


13-201. EXCAVATION PERMIT.

No person, other than authorized city employees, shall dig or excavate any hole, ditch, trench or tunnel in or under any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public property or public easement through private property without first having secured a permit for such excavation. Application shall be made to the city clerk. (Code 2004)


13-202. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 689, Sec. 1:2; Code 2004; Ord. 1167)


13-203. SAME; FILED.

If the application is approved by the city, the city clerk shall issue a permit upon payment of a fee of $25. Each permit issued under the provisions of this section shall cover only one specified excavation. (Code 2004; Ord. 1459, Sec. 2)


13-204. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 689, Sec. 4; Code 2004; Ord. 1167)


13-205. SAME; UNLAWFUL ACTS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, except those having authority from the city or any officer thereof to throw down, interfere with or remove any barriers, barricades, or lights placed in any street to guard and warn the traveling public of any construction work thereon or adjacent thereto. (Code 2004)


13-206. DRAINAGE BETWEEN STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS.

(a)    When a curb of a public street is absent or has been altered or removed to accommodate a smooth entrance into a paved driveway, the property owner must provide that a low profile gutter (valley gutter) be installed to convey proper drainage along the street. The valley gutter must be separated from the driveway by an expansion material no farther than two feet from the street. The valley gutter shall be poured by using city driveway construction standards.

(b)    The city will maintain valley gutters that serve as drainage conveyance at the edge of public streets up to two feet from the edge of the street. If a driveway is poured monolithically to the street, the property owner will be responsible for the maintenance of the pavement to the street. (Ord. 1392, Sec. 1)


13-207. ALTERING DRAINAGE.

No person shall change or alter any gutter, storm sewer, drain or drainage structure which has been constructed, or is being lawfully maintained or controlled by the city unless such change or alteration has been authorized or directed by the governing body. (Code 2004)


13-208. UNFINISHED PAVEMENT.

No person shall walk upon, drive or ride over or across any pavement, sidewalk or incomplete grading which has not been opened for traffic. (Code 2004)


13-209. USING STREETS.

(a)    No person shall occupy any portion of any street, alley or sidewalk for the purpose of temporarily storing building materials without first obtaining a permit for such temporary use from the governing body.

(b)    No person may use any portion of any sidewalk or street right-of- way for the purpose of displaying or offering for sale wares, goods, merchandise or other items. Nothing in this article, however, shall be construed as prohibiting the city governing body from temporarily waiving the prohibition of this subsection in connection with community promotions or community-wide celebrations when such waiver is considered to be in the best interest of the city.

(Code 2004)


13-210. DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or cause to be placed or thrown in or on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds of the city, any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, wire or other dangerous objects that might wound any person or animal, or cut or puncture any pneumatic tire while passing over the same. (Code 2004)


13-211. PETROLEUM PRODUCTS IN STREETS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit or throw any waste oil, fuel oil, kerosene, gasoline or other products of petroleum or any acids into or upon any street or public grounds of the city, or willfully to permit the same to be spilled, dripped or otherwise to come into contact with the surface of any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city. (Code 2004)


13-212. DISCHARGING WATER ON STREETS.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw or discharge water into any ditch, street, avenue or alley in the city or to cause any water to stand or form pools or to flow in a stream thereon. This section shall not apply to persons cleaning or flushing such streets, avenues or alleys under the authority of the governing body, nor to members of the fire department. (Code 2004)


13-213. BURNING IN STREETS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made, any fire upon any of the paved streets, alleys, or street intersections within the city. (Code 2004)


13-214. THROWING IN STREETS.

It shall be unlawful to throw or bat any ball, stone, or other hard substance into, on or across any street or alley or at or against any building or vehicle. (Code 2004)


13-215. HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.

It shall be unlawful to haul over the streets or alleys of this city any loose material of any kind except in a vehicle so constructed or maintained as to prevent the splashing or spilling of any of the substances therein contained upon the streets or alleys. (Code 2004)


13-216. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 689, Secs. 3, 5; Code 2004; Ord. 1167) 




13-217. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 689, Sec. 6; Ord. 1167)


13-218. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 689, Sec. 7; Ord. 1167)


ARTICLE 3. TREES AND SHRUBS


13-301. PUBLIC TREE CARE.

The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure safety when servicing city utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of public grounds. The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. (Code 2004)


13-302. DISEASED TREES; DETERMINATION.

Whenever any competent city authority or competent state or federal authority shall file with the governing body a statement in writing based upon a laboratory test or other supporting evidence that trees or tree materials or shrubs located upon private property within the city are infected or infested with or harbor any tree or plant disease or insect or larvae, the uncontrolled presence of which may constitute a hazard to or result in the damage or extinction of other trees or shrubs in the community, describing the same and where located, the governing body shall direct the city clerk to forthwith issue notice requiring the owner or agent of the owner of the premises to treat or to remove any such designated tree, tree material or shrub within a time specified in the notice. (Ord. 578, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


13-303. SAME; NOTICE SERVED.

Notice shall be served by a police officer by delivering a copy thereof to the owner, and the person in possession of such property, or if the same be unoccupied or the owner a nonresident of the city, then the city clerk shall notify the owner by mailing a notice by certified mail to his last known address. (Ord. 578, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


13-304. SAME; FAILURE OF OWNER; DUTY OF CITY.

If the owner or agent shall fail to comply with the requirements of the notice within the time specified in the notice, then the chief of police shall proceed to have the designated tree, tree material or shrub treated or removed and report the cost thereof to the city clerk. In lieu of city employees performing any such work, the governing body may contract with any competent person, company or corporation for the performance of such work. (Ord. 578, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


13-305. SAME; PREVENT SPREAD OF DISEASE.

No tree, tree materials or shrubs as mentioned herein which have been cut down, either by the property owner or by the city, shall be permitted to remain on the premises, but shall be immediately treated, removed and burned or immediately burned upon the premises, if safe to do so, so as to prevent the spread of the tree disease. (Code 2004)


13-306. DANGEROUS, DEAD OR DISEASED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.

(a)    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 14 feet above the surface of the street or right-of-way. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.

(b)    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dangerous, dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property. The city will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. The owners, within 30 days of the notice, may request a hearing covering the ordered removal. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove the trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner’s property tax notice.

(Code 2004)


13-307. TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; COST BORNE BY CITY.

The city shall have the authority to treat or to remove any tree as defined in section 13-301 of this article, or to remove any dead tree as mentioned herein, which is located within the limits of any public right-of-way within the city. The adjacent property owners shall not be responsible for the cost of treatment or removal of any such trees within the public right-of-way and this expense shall be borne by the city at large. (Code 2004)


13-308. COSTS ON TAX ROLLS.

The city clerk shall, at the time of certifying other city taxes to the county clerk, certify the unpaid costs for treatment or removal performed under the authority of sections 13-304:306 and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the county against the lot or parcel of ground. The cost of such work shall be paid from the general fund or other proper fund of the city, and such fund shall be reimbursed when payments therefor are received or when such assessments are collected and received by the city. (Ord. 578, Sec. 3; Code 2004)


13-309. INJURING TREES AND SHRUBS.

No person shall willfully break, cut, take away, destroy, injure, mutilate, or attempt to willfully break, cut, take away, destroy, injure or mutilate any tree, shrub, vine, flower or landscaping standing, growing, or being upon the premises in the possession of another, or growing on any public ground, street, sidewalk, promenade or park in the city. (Code 2004)


13-310. FIRE HYDRANTS, PLANTINGS ADJACENT TO.

No person shall plant or cause to be planted nor allow to grow upon property owned by him or her any shrubs, trees, or planting of any kind within 10 feet of any fire hydrant in the city, in order that every fire hydrant shall be in full view day or night, to fire apparatus approaching from any direction. (Code 2004)


13-311. HEIGHT OF BUSHES.

It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any hedge, fence, or other type of bush or shrubs bordering on any of the streets, avenues, sidewalks, or alleys in the city to permit the same to grow to a height of more than 3% feet above the center line grade level of such adjacent or adjoining street, avenue, sidewalk, or alley. (Ord. 578, Sec. 4)


13-312. TREES AND SHRUBS; TRAVEL SAFETY.

(a)    No hedge or shrubbery or object on private property or in the city right-of-way which abuts on a public street or which adjoins a public street within a distance of 15 feet shall be higher than two feet above the traveled portion of the street when such hedge, shrubbery, or object obstructs the vision of any person using the public streets.

(b)    Every owner or occupant of any real estate shall keep the shade and the ornamental trees within 15 feet of the traveled portion of any street trimmed so that the branches thereof shall not be lower than 7% feet from the surface of such street.

(c)    No owner or occupant of any real estate shall permit any street or branch thereof situated on such real estate to overhang a public street or adjoining property where such tree or branch so overhanging is liable to fall and do injury to the traveling public or adjoining property by reason of its insecure and unsafe condition, whether occasioned by decay or any other cause.

(d)    The foregoing as defined in subsections (a):(c) are hereby declared nuisances and shall be abated by any person, firm, or corporation erecting or maintaining such nuisance within 10 days after written notice by the city has been given so the owner of record or the occupant of the property or upon failure to abate such nuisance within 10 days, the city may abate the same and assess the cost thereof against the property upon which the nuisance existed.

(Ord. 577, Secs. 1:4)


13-313. CITY TREE BOARD.

(a)    Creation of City Tree Board. There is hereby created and established a city tree board of the city, consisting of five members (three members shall be citizens and residents of the city), who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council.

(b)    Term of Office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be only one year, and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.

(c)    Compensation. Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation.

(d)    Duties and Responsibilities. The board shall study, investigate, consider, develop and administer a comprehensive written tree plan for the selection, planting, care, removal and disposition of trees and shrubs located in the city right-of-way and on land owned or controlled by the city.

Such comprehensive tree plan shall be reviewed annually and coordinated with the city planning commission. Any changes shall be presented to the city council for consideration and upon acceptance and approval shall constitute the official adjunct to the comprehensive city plan for the city.

The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.

(e)    Operation. The board shall choose its own offices and develop its own set of by-laws, subject to city council approval, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.

(Ord. 987, Secs. 1:6; Ord. 1127, Sec. 1)


ARTICLE 4. SNOW AND ICE


13-401. SNOW AND ICE TO BE REMOVED.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or the occupant of any lots abutting upon any sidewalks to fail to cause to be removed from such sidewalks all snow and ice within 12 hours from the time that the snow fall or ice storm ceases. If the snow falls or ice accumulates upon the sidewalks in the nighttime, removal of same must be made within 12 hours after sunrise on the following day.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to place snow removed from private property upon any public street, alley or sidewalk.

(c)    This obligation of the owner or occupant of abutting property to remove snow or ice shall not apply to trails in the city designated as bike trails, walking trails or hiking trails.

(d)    Definitions. Trails designated by the city as hiking trails, walking trails or bicycle trails shall be defined as improved trails eight feet wide or wider for the purposes of public pedestrian and/or bicycle traffic located in or on public easements, rights-of-way or other public property. Trails shall not include properties maintained by school districts or properties maintained by county, state, or federal authorities.

(Code 2004; Ord. 1345; Ord. 1347)


13-402. SAME: EXCEPTION; ALTERNATE REMEDY.

Where there shall be ice or compacted snow on any such sidewalk of such a character as to make it practically impossible to remove the same, the sprinkling of ashes, sand or other noncorrosive chemicals on the accumulation of ice or snow in such a manner as to make such sidewalk reasonably safe for pedestrian travel shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with the provisions of this article until the ice or snow can be removed. (Code 2004)


13-403. SAME; PENALTY.

That any person violating the provisions of section 13-401 shall, upon conviction, be fined $25. (Code 2004)


13-404. REMOVAL MAY BE MADE BY CITY.

If any owner or occupant of any lot or lots shall refuse or neglect to clean or remove from the sidewalk abutting the lot or lots all snow and ice within the time specified, the city may cause such snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks and the cost thereof shall be assessed against such abutting lot or lots, and the city clerk shall certify the same to the county clerk for collection as provided by law. (Code 2004)


13-405. COSTS ON TAX ROLLS.

The city clerk shall, at the time of certifying other city taxes to the county clerk, certify the unpaid costs for removal of snow or ice performed under the authority of section 13-404 and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the county against the lot or parcel of ground. The cost of such work shall be paid from the general fund or other proper fund of the city, and such fund shall be reimbursed when payments therefor are received or when such assessments are collected and received by the city. (Code 2004)

 


CHAPTER XIV. TRAFFIC

Article 1.    Standard Traffic Ordinance

Article 2.    Local Traffic Regulations

Article 3.    Abandoned Motor Vehicles on Public Property

Article 4.    Hazardous Materials

Article 5.    Parade Regulations

Article 6.    Commercial Motor Carriers


ARTICLE 1. STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE


14-101. INCORPORATING STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE.

There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating traffic within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie, Kansas, that certain standard traffic ordinance known as the "Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities," Edition of 2018, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, save and except such articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed, such incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009 through 12-3012, inclusive, as amended. No fewer than three copies of said standard ordinance shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to which shall be attached a copy of the ordinance codified in this section, and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 1294; Ord. 1323; Ord. 1384, Sec. 1; Ord. 1416, Sec. 1; Ord. 1467, Sec. 1)


14-102. SAME; AMENDMENTS.

Sec. 33. Maximum Speed Limits; Public Highways and Street; Private Property.

(a)    Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with Section 32 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, incorporated by reference in Section 33 of this Article, the limits specified in this Section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of such maximum limits, except where otherwise posted:

(1)    Twenty (20) miles per hours in any business district;

(2)    Thirty (30) miles per hours in any residential district, except where otherwise posted;

(3)    Twenty (20) miles per hour in any park;

(4)    As posted in all school zones between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and five o’clock (5:00) P.M., on regular school days as designated by the school calendar of the school with the zone;

(5)    On any county or township highway, fifty-five (55) miles per hour, except where otherwise posted;

(6)    On all other highways, sixty five (65) miles per hour, except where otherwise posted.

(7)    Except as provided in subsection (b) and (c) the maximum speed limit on Fall Creek Drive within the City limits of Tonganoxie shall be 20 miles per hour.

(b)    The maximum speed limits in this Section may be altered as authorized in K.S.A. 8-1559 and K.S.A. 8-1560, and amendments thereto.

(c)    Whenever the person in possession or control of any private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic by permission of the owner, shall cause to be posted at each entrance thereto a permanently lettered and clearly legible sign with the following legend: Traffic Regulations of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, enforced on this property. Speed Limit_____. Then such private property shall thereafter be deemed to be under the traffic regulations of the city as provided by law.

Sec. 103.1 Loud Amplification Systems; noises from vehicles.

(a)    No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit operation of any sound producing device or any amplification system from within a vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the vehicle.

Sec. 104.1. Careless Driving

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle upon a highway or a street or public access private property - parking lot - in a careless or heedless manner or in an inattentive manner, or without due caution or circumstances, or in any manner not constituting reckless driving but so as to endanger any person or property. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined an amount not more than $150.00 and may be imprisoned for a period of not more than 10 days.

Sec. 116.1 Bicycling on Specific Sidewalks Prohibited.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to use a bicycle on the sidewalks on 4th Street from Main to Green Streets.

Sec. 136. Use of Coasters, Skate Boards, Roller Blades, Rollers Skates and Similar Devices Restricted.

(a)    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, roller blades, skate boards, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street at a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to use a coaster, roller skates, skateboards, roller blades or any other similar device on the streets or sidewalks on 4th Street from Main Street to Green Street.

Section 182.1 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance Seat Belts (a) Except as provided in section 182 of the standard traffic ordinance and in subsection (b) or (c) each front seat occupant of a passenger car manufactured with safety belts in compliance with federal motor vehicle safety standard no. 208, who is eighteen (18) years of age or older, shall have a safety belt properly fastened about such person’s body at all times when the passenger car is in motion.

(b)    Each occupant of a passenger car manufactured with safety belts in compliance with federal motor vehicle safety standard no. 208, who is at least 14 years of age but less than 18 years of age, shall have a safety belt properly fastened about such person’s body at all times when the passenger car is in motion.

(c)    This section does not apply to:

(1)    An occupant of a passenger car who possesses a written statement from a licensed physician that such person is unable for medical reasons to wear a safety belt system.

(2)    Carriers of the United States mail while actually engaged in delivery and collection of mail along their specific routes.

(3)    newspaper delivery persons while actually engaged in delivery of newspapers along their specified routes; or

(4)    An occupant of a passenger car required to be protected by a safety restraining system under the child passenger safety act.

(d)    Law enforcement officers shall not stop drivers for violations of subsection (a) by a back seat occupant in the absence of another violation of law. A citation for violation of subsection (a) by a back seat occupant shall not be issued without citing the violation that initially caused the officer to effect the enforcement stop.

(e)    (1) from and after June 30, 2010, until July 1, 2011, persons violating subsection (a) of 182.1 and amendments thereto, shall be fined $5 including court costs; and (2) from and after July 1, 2011, persons violating subsection (a) of and amendments thereto, shall be fined $10 including court costs; and (3) from and after January 1, 2008, (4) persons violating subsection (b) of K.S.A. 8-2503, and amendments thereto, shall be fined $60 including court costs.

(f)    No court shall report violation of this act to the department of revenue.

(g)    Evidence of failure of any person to use a safety belt shall not be admissible in any action for the purpose of determining any aspect of comparative negligence or mitigation of damages.

Pursuant to Kansas Senate Bill 89, Section 182.1(d) of the 2016 Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities, adopted by reference in the City of Tonganoxie by Ordinance No. 1416, is hereby amended to read as follows:

(d)    (1) Persons violating subsection (a)(1) shall be fined $30 and no court costs; and

(2)    Persons violating subsection (a)(2) shall be fined $60 and no court costs.

As required by Kan. Stat. Ann. 12-4120(c), on and after July 12, 2017, the amount of $20 from each fine imposed for a violation of 2016 Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities, Section 182.1(a)(1) shall be remitted by the Municipal Court Clerk to the state treasurer.

Art. 5, Sec. 23 Accident Involving Death or Personal Injuries; Penalties. 

(a)    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to, great bodily harm to, or death of any person or damage to any attended vehicle or property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, but shall then immediately return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of Section 25. 

(b)    A person who violates subsection (a) when an accident results in:

(1)    Total property damages of less than $1,000 shall be punished as provided in Section 201. 

(2)    Injury to any person or total property damages in excess of $1,000 or more shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than one year or by a fine of not more than $2,500, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 

(c)    The driver shall comply with the provisions of section 26.1 (K.S.A. Supp. 8-1602)

Art. 19, Sec. 200. Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance.

(a)    Every owner shall provide motor vehicle liability insurance coverage in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101, et. seq., for every motor vehicle owned by such person, unless such motor vehicle: (1) is included under an approved self-insurance plan as provided in K.S.A. 40-3104(f); (2) is used as a driver training motor vehicle, as defined in K.S.A. 2-5015, and amendments thereto, in an approved driver training course by a school district or an accredited nonpublic school under an agreement with a motor vehicle dealer, and such motor vehicle liability insurance coverage is provided by the school district or accredited nonpublic school; (3) is included under a qualified plan of self-insurance approved by an agency of the state in which such motor vehicle is registered and the form prescribed in subsection (b) of K.S.A. 40-3106, and amendments thereto, has been filed: or (4) is expressly exempted from the provisions of the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act. 

(b)    An owner of an uninsured motor vehicle shall not permit the operation thereof upon a highway or upon property open to use by the public, unless such motor vehicle is expressly exempted from the provisions of the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act. 

(c)    No person shall knowingly drive an uninsured motor vehicle upon a highway or upon property open to use by the public, unless such motor vehicle is expressly exempted from the provisions of the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act. 

(d)    (1) Any person operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or upon property open to use by the public shall display, upon demand, evidence of financial security to a law enforcement officer. Such evidence of financial security which meets the requirements of subsection (e) may be displayed on a cellular phone or any other type of portable electronic device. The law enforcement officer to whom such evidence of financial security is displayed shall view only such evidence of financial responsibility. Such law enforcement officer shall be prohibited from viewing any other content or information stored on such cellular phone or other type of portable electronic device. The law enforcement officer shall issue a citation to any person who fails to display evidence of financial security upon such demand. The law enforcement officer shall transmit a copy of the insurance verification form prescribed by the secretary of revenue with the copy of the citation transmitted to court. 

(2)    No citation shall be issued to any person for failure to provide proof of financial security when evidence of financial security meeting the standards of subsection (e) is displayed upon demand of a law enforcement officer. Whenever the authenticity of such evidence is questionable, the law enforcement officer may initiate the preparation of the insurance verification form prescribed by the secretary of revenue by recording information from the evidence of financial security displayed. The officer shall immediately forward the form to the department of revenue, and the department shall proceed with verification in the manner prescribed in the following paragraph. Upon return of a form indicating that insurance was not in force on the date indicated on the form, the department shall immediately forward a copy of the form to the law enforcement officer initiating preparation of the form. 

(e)    Unless the insurance company subsequently submits an insurance verification form indicating that insurance was not in force, no person charged with violating subsections (b), (c) or (d) shall be convicted if such person produces in court, within 10 days of the date of arrest or of issuance of the citation, evidence of financial security for the motor vehicle operated, which was valid at the time of arrest or of issuance of the citation. Such evidence of financial security may be produced by displaying such information on a cellular phone or any other type of portable electronic device. Any person to whom such evidence of financial security is displayed on a cellular phone or other type of portable electronic device shall be prohibited from viewing any other content or information stored on such cellular phone or other type of portable electronic device. For the purpose of this subsection, evidence of financial security shall be provided by a policy of motor vehicle liability insurance, an identification card or certificate of insurance issued to the policyholder by the insurer which provides the name of the insurer, the policy number, make and year of the vehicle, and the effective and expiration dates of the policy, or a certificate of self-insurance signed by the commissioner of insurance. 

(f)    Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance and subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term of not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, except that any person convicted of violating any provision of this section within three years of any such prior conviction shall be guilty of violation of this ordinance and subject to a fine of not less than $800 nor more than $2,500 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. (K.S.A. Supp. 40-3104). 

(Ord. 1294; Ord. 1313; Ord. 1344; Ord. 1388, Secs. 1:2; Ord. 1390; Ord. 1425, Sec. 1)


14-103. SAME; TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS AND TRAFFIC OFFENSES.

(a)    An ordinance traffic infraction is a violation of any section of this article that prescribes or requires the same behavior as that prescribed or required by a statutory provision that is classified as a traffic infraction in K.S.A. Supp. 8-2118.

(b)    All traffic violations which are included within this article, and which are not ordinance traffic infractions as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be considered traffic offenses.

(Ord. 1294; Ord. 1323)


14-104. PENALTY FOR SCHEDULED FINES.

The fine for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or any other traffic offense for which the municipal judge establishes a fine in a fine schedule shall not be less than $10 nor more than $500, except for speeding which will not be less than $55 nor more than $500. A person tried and convicted for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or other traffic offense for which a fine has been established in a schedule of fines shall pay a fine fixed by the court not to exceed $500. (Ord. 1294; Ord. 1323; Ord. 1341) 


ARTICLE 2. LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS


14-201. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS.

The Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted is hereby modified by adding thereto the following: The governing body may, by resolution, establish and fix the location of such traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary to guide and warn traffic under the provisions of this chapter, other traffic ordinances and the state laws. The city shall place and maintain such traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as may be required by the authority of the governing body to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances for the regulation of traffic. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to this section shall be marked and labeled on a map of the city of Tonganoxie for the purpose of displaying all such traffic control devices and shall be filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours of business. (Ord. 1294)


14-202. SCREECHING OF TIRES OR SPINNING OF WHEELS.

The operation of any motor vehicle in such a way as to cause the tires thereof to screech or spin except where the same is necessarily caused in an emergency in an attempt by the operator to avoid an accident or the causing of damage or injury is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1294)


14-203. PRIVATELY OWNED PARKING LOTS OR AREAS.

(a)    When the owner or other person in possession and control of any lot or parcel of ground in the city has by sign or other notice posted thereon designated such lot or parcel of ground as reserved for the parking of vehicles of persons who have special permission for such use, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter onto, stop, stand or park any other vehicle in such parking lot or parking area, without having first obtained permission so to do from the owner or the person in possession or control of such parking lot or parking area.

(b)    The police department of the city may enforce such specific provisions in subsection (a) of this section, as to such lot or parcel of ground in the city, as the owner or person in possession may authorize from time to time.

(Ord. 1294) 


14-204. OPERATION OF WORK-SITE VEHICLES AND MICRO UTILITY VEHICLES, AND RECREATIONAL USE OF UTILITY TASK VEHICLES (UTVs).

(a)    Work-Site Vehicles.

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a work-site utility vehicle:

(A)    On any interstate highway, federal highway, or state highway; or

(B)    Within the corporate limits of any city unless authorized by such city.

(2)    Definitions.

(A)    Slow-moving vehicles emblem has the same meaning as contained in K.S.A. 8-1717 and amendments thereto.

(B)    Work-site utility vehicle means any motor vehicle which is not less than 48 inches in width, has an overall length, including the bumper, of not more than 135 inches, has an unladen weight, including fuel and fluids, of more than 800 pounds and is equipped with four or more low pressure tires, a steering wheel and bench or bucket type seating allowing at least two people to sit side by side, and may be equipped with a bed or cargo box for hauling materials. Work-site utility vehicle does not include a micro utility truck as defined in the Standard Traffic Ordinance adopted by subsection (b) of this section, and amendments thereto.

(3)    Operation.

(A)    Work-site utility vehicles are restricted to work-site to work-site by the most direct route. Work-site utility vehicles may operate upon the public highway, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie to get from work-site to work-site.

(B)    No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any public highway, street, road or alley between sunset and sunrise unless such vehicle is equipped with lights as required by law for motorcycles.

(C)    No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any interstate highway, federal highway or state highway; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a work-site utility vehicle from crossing a federal or state highway.

(D)    No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any public highways, streets, roads, and alleys within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie with posted speed limits greater than 30 miles per hour; provided, however, that provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a work-site utility vehicle from crossing any public highways, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie with posted speed limits greater than 30 miles per hour.

(E)    Every person operating a work-site vehicle on the public highways, streets, roads and alleys of the city of Tonganoxie shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a motor vehicle imposed by law, including but not limited to the applicable provisions of the Standard Traffic Ordinance adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto.

(4)    Driver License Requirements.

(A)    No person shall operate a work-site utility vehicle on any public highway, street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has a valid driver’s license. Violation of this is punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(5)    Insurance Requirements.

(A)    Every owner of a work-site utility vehicle shall provide liability coverage in accordance with Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto, and the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101 et seq., and amendments thereto prior to operating such vehicle upon the public highways, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie.

(B)    All provisions of Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto, including penalty provisions, shall be applicable to all owners and operators of work-site utility vehicles.

(6)    Display of Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem.

(A)    It shall be illegal to operate a work-site utility vehicle on any public highway, street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such vehicle displays a slow moving vehicle emblem on the rear of the vehicle. The slow moving vehicle emblem shall be mounted and displayed in compliance with K.S.A. 8-1717 and amendments thereto.

(7)    Penalty.

(A)    Unless specifically provided for herein, a violation of this article shall be deemed an ordinance traffic infraction. Upon an entry of a plea of guilty or no contest or upon being convicted of such violation, the penalty imposed shall be in accordance with Section 201 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto, or such other similar provision as the city may then have in effect.

(b)    Micro Utility Vehicles.

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a micro utility truck:

(A)    On any interstate highway, federal highway, or state highway; or

(B)    On any public highway or street within the corporate limits of any city unless authorized by such city.

(2)    Definitions.

(A)    Micro utility truck means any motor vehicle which is not less than 48 inches in width, has an overall length, including the bumper, of not more than 160 inches, has an unladen weight, including fuel and fluids, of more than 1,500 pounds, can exceed 40 miles per hour as originally manufactured and is manufactured with a metal cab. Micro utility truck does not include a work-site utility vehicle as defined in the Standard Traffic Ordinance adopted by subsection (a) of this section, and amendments thereto.

(3)    Operation.

(A)    Micro utility trucks are restricted to work-site to work-site by the most direct route. Micro utility trucks may operate upon the public highways, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie to get from work-site to work-site.

(B)    No micro utility truck shall be operated on any public highway or street, unless such truck complies with the equipment requirements under Article 17 of Chapter 8 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto.

(C)    No micro utility truck shall be operated on any interstate highway, federal highway or state highway; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a micro utility truck from crossing a federal or state highway.

(D)    Micro utility trucks are defined as motor vehicles; they meet the definition of "passenger car" in K.S.A. 8-1343a and amendments thereto. If originally equipped with safety belts, the Child Safety Act and Safety Belt Use Act apply on public roads.

(E)    Every person operating a micro utility truck on the public highways, streets, roads and alleys of the city of Tonganoxie shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a motor vehicle imposed by law, including but not limited to the applicable provisions of the Standard Traffic Ordinance adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto.

(4)    Driver License Requirements.

(A)    No person shall operate a micro utility truck on any public highway, street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has a valid driver’s license. Violation of this is punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(5)    Insurance Requirements.

(A)    Every owner of a micro utility truck shall provide liability coverage in accordance with Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto, and the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101 et seq., and amendments thereto, prior to operating such vehicle upon the public highways, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie.

(B)    All provisions of Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto, including penalty provisions, shall be applicable to all owners and operators of micro utility trucks.

(6)    Penalty.

(A)    Unless specifically provided for herein, a violation of this article shall be deemed an ordinance traffic infraction. Upon an entry of a plea of guilty or no contest or upon being convicted of such violation, the penalty imposed shall be in accordance with Section 201 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto, or such other similar provision as the city may then have in effect.

(c)    Recreational Use of Utility Task Vehicle.

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a UTV:

(A)    On any interstate highway, federal highway, or state highway; or

(B)    Within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie, unless authorized by city as listed below.

(2)    Definitions.

(A)    UTV, or "side by side," as identified by all of the following required features:  a properly installed roll over protection system (ROPS); properly installed and functioning headlights, tail lights and brake lights; safety harness or seat belt for each passenger; steering wheel; weight of at least 1,000 pounds.

(3)    Operation.

(A)    UTVs are restricted to city streets with speed limits of 30 miles per hour or less.

(B)    UTVs must be in compliance with the city’s noise ordinance as adopted by section 11-201, public offenses, and amendments thereto.

(C)    Every person operating a UTV shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a motor vehicle imposed by law, including but not limited to the applicable provisions of the standard traffic ordinance adopted by Section 14-101 and amendments thereto.

(D)    Registration sticker, as obtained below, must be displayed on UTV.

(4)    Driver License Requirements.

(A)    No person shall operate a UTV on any public street within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has a valid driver’s license. Violation of this is punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(B)    All provisions of Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, Adopted.

(5)    Insurance Requirements.

(A)    Every owner of a UTV shall provide liability coverage in accordance with Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, adopted by section 14-101, and amendments thereto, and the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101, et seq., and amendments thereto, prior to operating such vehicle upon streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie.

(6)    Registration/Inspection with the City of Tonganoxie.

(A)    All UTVs require an annual inspection, to be performed by the Tonganoxie police department, which verifies adherence to requirements. Applicable registration and inspection fees must be collected at the time of registration.

(B)    UTV owner must provide proof of paid Kansas personal property tax on UTV.

(C)    Liability waiver must be executed by owner.

(7)    Fines.

(A)    Fine for operating an unregistered vehicle is $500, of which $300 will be applied to the cost of annual registration/inspections.

(Ord. 1294; Ord. 1469, Sec. 1)


14-205. TRUCK WEIGHT RESTRICTED.

(a)    No truck type motor vehicle having a road load in excess of five tons shall travel on the city streets for any purpose except upon streets within the industrial park and trucks making service deliveries to commercial establishments or residences. This article will not apply to buses, which are designed primarily for the purpose of carrying passengers.

(b)    Any government vehicle is exempt from this provision.

(Ord. 1294)


14-206. PARKING ON UNIMPROVED SURFACES.

(a)    Definitions. As used in this section:

“Building line” means a line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line and beyond which buildings or fences may not be erected.

“Corner lot” means a residential property located at the intersection or confluence of two or more streets such that public street rights-of-way are directly adjacent to at least two contiguous sides of the lot.

“Driveway” means the primary improved or unimproved parking surface which provides egress and ingress from a garage, carport or off-street parking area to an adjacent street or alley.

“Front yard” means the area from the front face of a residential structure to the front property line or street right-of-way line or, when a structure does not exist, the area from the front building line to the front property line or street right-of-way.

“Improved parking surface” means an area used for the parking or storage of vehicles that is overlaid or otherwise paved with concrete, asphalt, paving stones or other hard surfaced durable material approved by the building official.

“Rear yard” means the area from the rear face of a residential structure to the rear property line. 

“Side yard” means the area from the side of a residential structure to the side property line.

“Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway and shall include any automobile, bus, truck, tractor, motor house, farm machinery, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, boats, aircraft, recreational vehicles, golf carts, go-carts, trailers, fifth wheel trailers, campers, camper shells, wheeled towing frames, semi-tractor trailers, truck beds mounted on chassis and mobile homes. This definition does not include nonmotorized bicycles, small engine lawn mowers and devices of similar scale.

(b)    Regulations.

(1)    Parking on unimproved surfaces is prohibited. A person commits an offense if, upon a residential single-family, duplex or townhouse lot or tract:

(A)    The person causes, permits or allows the parking or storage of any vehicle in the front yard upon any surface other than an improved parking surface.

(B)    The person causes, permits or allows the parking or storage of any vehicle in the side yard.

(C)    The person causes, permits or allows the parking or storage of any vehicle in the rear yard upon any surface other than an improved parking surface.

(2)    No driveway or improved parking surface shall cover more than 67 percent of a front yard, and/or more than 30 percent of a rear yard. Driveways and improved parking surfaces are strictly prohibited in the side yard.

(3)    Any newly created improved parking surface shall be in conformance with the city’s zoning code, Section 20 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations).

(4)    An acceptable improved parking surface shall be solid and uniform in area, and shall comprise an area slightly larger than the vehicle parked on it.

(c)    Maintenance. All improved parking surfaces shall be maintained in a good and safe condition and be free of holes, cracks or other failures that may affect the use, safety, appearance or drainage of the improved parking surface or of an adjoining property.

(d)    Penalty. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.

(Ord. 1479, Sec. 1)


14-207. PARKING; WHERE PROHIBITED, PRIVATE PROPERTY.

No person shall stop, stand, park or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or not attended, in any private driveway, yard, parking area or upon any other private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 

(Ord. 1294)


14-208. REMOVAL OF PARKED VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.

(a)    Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle standing in violation of section 14-207 either through his or her personal knowledge or upon complaint of the owner or manager of the private property, he or she is hereby authorized to remove such motor vehicle or request the owner thereof to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended, the officer is authorized to remove the violating vehicle to a public garage or other place of safety as expeditiously as possible.

(b)    Any motor vehicle so removed and taken into custody by the police of this city shall be held by the police until the owner or his or her authorized agent applies for the release of the same and pays the costs of removing and storing the vehicle.

(Ord. 1294)


14-209. PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.

Reserved. 

(Ord. 1294)


14-210. SNOWSTORM; PARKING REGULATIONS; VEHICLES.

(a)    All persons having vehicles parked on the streets of the city shall remove the same therefrom within two hours after any snowfall which shall leave a covering of four inches or more, to be measured by the Tonganoxie street department.

(b)    All cars remaining in the street two hours after such snowfall as described in this section and obstructing snow removal operations of the street department shall be towed off the street. All tow-in charges shall be paid by the owner of any vehicle so removed from the street.

(Ord. 1294)


14-211. PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN CITY STREETS.

(a)    No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with direction of a police officer or traffic control device where official “No Parking” signs or signs of lesser restriction have been installed.

(b)    No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on city streets in the Urban Hess Business Park or the Highland Ridge Business Park, to include Woodfield Drive, Commerce Drive, Michaels Court, and Industrial Drive, except for the following:

(1)    While waiting to load or unload at or near an existing business; or

(2)    In compliance with direction of a police officer; or 

(3)    In compliance with a traffic control device. 

(c)    A violation of this section shall result in a conviction of a traffic infraction. The penalty of a violation of this section may result in a fine not to exceed $500 and the towing of illegally parked vehicles or trailers.

(d)    Any vehicle towed at the expense of the city shall not be released until the owner or owner’s representative has paid in full all expenses of removal including towing and storage charges.

(Ord. 1294; Ord. 1406, Sec. 1)


14-212. TIME LIMITATION ON PARKING.

No person shall park or place any vehicle upon the streets, alleys, boulevards or other public ways continuously for a period of more than 72 hours. The police department may cause such vehicles parked in excess of 72 hours to be removed and impounded.

(Ord. 1294)


14-213. DRIVING, STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN BIKE LANE PROHIBITED.

It shall be unlawful to drive, stop, park or allow a motor vehicle to stand in any path or roadway area set aside and marked as a bike lane. A motorized bicycle shall not be considered as a motor vehicle for purposes of this section. 

(Ord. 1294)


14-214. VARIANCES ALLOWED IN PARKING REGULATIONS.

Whenever by reason of unusual or peculiar conditions pertaining to a particular building, structure, lot or tract as related to the existing or appropriate development within the immediate vicinity the strict application of a provision in this article will work an unnecessary hardship, the governing body shall have the power to grant a variance or exemption from such provision. Such variances shall be in harmony with both the spirit and intent of this article and such variance or exemption does not change the classification of the property nor make any changes in zoning ordinances. 

(Ord. 1294)


ARTICLE 3. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY


14-301. DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings:

(a)    Highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Where the word "highway" or the word "street" is used in this article, it means street, avenue, boulevard, thoroughfare, alley, and other public way for vehicular travel by whatever name, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

(b)    Motor vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.

(c)    Owner or occupant means a party having fee simple title in the real property, or a party having a leasehold interest in the real property, or a party who is the beneficiary of a private easement for the purpose of egress or ingress to or from said real property.

(Ord. 1294)


14-302. IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.

The police department may cause to be impounded:

(a)    Any motor vehicle unlawfully parked on a highway in violation of any provision of a city ordinance which prohibits the parking of vehicles at the place where or time when the impounded motor vehicle is found.

(b)    Any motor vehicle that has been abandoned and left on a highway or other property open to use by the public for a period in excess of 48 hours pursuant to K.S.A. 8-1102.

(c)    Any vehicle which interferes with public highway operations.

(d)    Any motor vehicle which:

(1)    Is subject to removal pursuant to K.S.A. 8-1570 or 8-1102; or

(2)    Is subject to seizure and forfeiture under the laws of the state; or

(3)    Is subject to being held for use as evidence in a criminal trial.

(e)    Any motor vehicle, the continued presence of which, because of the physical location or condition of the motor vehicle, poses a danger to the public safety or to the motor vehicle.

(f)    Any motor vehicle which has been abandoned or parked on any real property, other than public property or property open to use by the public, may be moved and disposed of in accordance with the terms of this article by the police department upon the request of the owner or occupant of such real property. The real property referred to herein shall not be owned or leased by the person who abandons or parks said vehicle or by the owner or lessee of such vehicle. The city or any person, partnership, corporation or their agent conducting a business enterprise for the purpose of towing vehicles which removes such vehicle from the real property at the request of the police department shall have a possessory lien on such vehicle for the cost incurred in removing, towing and storing such vehicle. For purposes of this article, common areas shall be construed not to mean public property or property open to the public.

(Ord. 1294)


14-303. SAME.

The police department may authorize storage of such impounded motor vehicles at any location, public or private, which is zoned for the storage of motor vehicles. (Ord. 1294)


14-304. NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT; STORAGE OF VEHICLE.

(a)    When Owner Present. When the police department intends to impound a motor vehicle pursuant to section 14-302 and the owner of the motor vehicle is then present, the police department shall, before the motor vehicle is removed, provide the owner with a notice, in the form prescribed by the police department, that the motor vehicle is being impounded, that towing and storage charges will be assessed against the impounded motor vehicle, that the owner may claim and regain possession of the impounded motor vehicle at the location to which it is being removed for storage without prepayment of towing and storage charges and that the owner may request a hearing as to the propriety of the impoundment and as to the amount of and the owner’s liability for the towing and storage charges. The notice shall also state the location where the impounded motor vehicle will be stored and the place where the owner may make his or her request for the hearing. The notice shall also state, in prominent language, that failure by the owner to request a hearing within five days after receipt of the notice may act as a waiver of his or her right to a hearing and that this may result in the placing of a lien against the motor vehicle for the towing and storage charges without further notice to the owner; and that the motor vehicle be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash after 15 days from the date of the mailing of the notice. The owner of the impounded motor vehicle shall sign the notice as an acknowledgment that he or she has received a copy of the notice and a copy of the notice shall be provided to the owner.

(b)    When Owner Not Present. When the police department impounds and removes a motor vehicle pursuant to section 14-302(a) and the owner of the motor vehicle is not present at the time of the impoundment, the police department shall, if such motor vehicle has displayed thereon a registration plate issued by the Division of Vehicles and has been registered with said division, mail a notice by certified mail to the registered owner thereof, addressed to the address as shown on the certificate of registration, and to the lienholder, if any, of record in the county in which the title shows the owner resides, if registered in this state. The notice shall be in the form prescribed by the police department containing the same information as required by section 14-304(a). The police department shall use reasonable diligence in determining the title owner, or if from a non-title state, the registered owner, of the vehicle, and shall inquire by mail of the office of the register of deeds of the county in which the title shows the owner resides, if registered in this state, as to whether there are any lienholders of record. If the owner cannot be served by certified mail at the address on the motor vehicle registration and there is no other known address of the owner, the owner shall be deemed to be a resident of the state whose whereabouts are unknown and service shall be made on the Secretary of State as provided in K.S.A. 8-401. If the owner does not reside in the state, as appears from the motor vehicle registration, and the owner cannot be served by certified mail at the address on the motor vehicle registration and there is no other known address of the owner, the owner shall be deemed a nonresident of the state and service shall be made on the Secretary of State as provided in K.S.A. 8-401.

(c)    Failure or Refusal to Sign Notice. If any person required by this section to sign a notice of impoundment willfully fails or refuses to do so, or if such person cannot be found, the police department shall note this fact on the face of the notice, which shall constitute prima facie evidence of delivery or service of notice as required by this section.

(Ord. 1294)


14-305. IMPOUNDMENT AFTER REQUEST TO LEAVE MOTOR VEHICLE.

In all cases wherein the owner or operator of a motor vehicle which is on a public street has requested that the motor vehicle be left unattended at that location, in lieu of impoundment of the motor vehicle pursuant to section 14-302, the police department may honor said request for a period of time not exceeding 24 hours, after which time the motor vehicle shall either be removed from the location by the owner or operator or be impounded by the police department pursuant to section 14-304. The police department shall be immune from liability for any damage, loss or destruction of the motor vehicle occasioned by its being left unattended pursuant to the request of the owner or operator thereof, in lieu of impoundment. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the police department to order the removal of a motor vehicle by its owner or operator or to impound a motor vehicle pursuant to section 14-304 at any time whenever in his or her judgment the presence of the unattended motor vehicle constitutes a danger to the public safety. (Ord. 1294)


14-306. RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLE FROM IMPOUNDMENT.

(a)    Generally. Unless the vehicle is impounded pursuant to section 14-302(b) herein, the owner of an impounded motor vehicle may secure the release of the motor vehicle from impoundment upon requesting such release and presenting proof of ownership satisfactory to the custodian of the place where the motor vehicle is stored. If the custodian is satisfied that the person making the request is the owner or his or her authorized agent, he or she shall release the motor vehicle to the owner or his or her agent. Nothing in the preceding sentence shall preclude the owner of the impounded motor vehicle or his or her agent from paying any towing and storage charges that may be assessed against the motor vehicle, but neither the police department nor the custodian of the storage space may require payment of any towing or storage charges as a condition precedent to such release. At the same time as the owner or his or her agent requests release of the impounded motor vehicle, and if such request is made within 40 days after the owner receives a copy of the notice of impoundment, the police department shall provide him or her an opportunity to make a request for a hearing on the propriety of the impoundment and on the amount and his or her liability for the towing and storage charges occasioned by the impoundment; provided, that if the owner or his or her agent requests release of the impounded motor vehicle more than 40 days after the owner receives a copy of the notice of impoundment, no hearing may be requested on the impoundment or on the towing and storage charges and the owner shall be conclusively presumed to have consented to the impoundment and to the amount of and his or her liability for the towing and storage charges.

(b)    Security for Payment of Charges. If the ownership of the impounded motor vehicle is evidenced by a title certificate issued by the Kansas Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles, the owner or his or her agent may secure the release of the motor vehicle from impoundment without the payment of any towing or storage charges or the deposit of any security for the payment thereof. If the ownership of the impounded motor vehicle is evidenced by a foreign title instrument, or if the jurisdiction in which title is recorded is not evidenced from the document establishing ownership, the owner or his or her agent, before the custodian of the place where the motor vehicle is stored authorizes release of the motor vehicle from impoundment, shall deposit with the custodian cash in the amount of the towing and storage charges to the date of the request. If the owner or his or her agent refuses to provide the cash deposit, the custodian shall not authorize release of the impounded motor vehicle but if the request is timely made, a date shall be set for the hearing on the impoundment and charges.

(Ord. 1294)


14-307. HEARING.

If the owner of an impounded motor vehicle or his or her agent timely requests the release of the motor vehicle from impoundment and a hearing on the impoundment and charges, as provided in section 14-306, a date shall be set, not more than five days after the date of request, for the hearing. The city attorney shall provide a hearing examiner to conduct the hearings required by this section. At the hearing, the owner, his or her agent, or his or her attorney shall be afforded an opportunity to present, by oral testimony or documentary evidence, his or her objections to (a) the impoundment of the motor vehicle and (b) (1) the amount of the towing and storage charges and (2) his or her liability for the payment thereof. If the owner or his or her agent requested the hearing more than five days but not more than 40 days after the owner received a copy of the notice of impoundment, the owner, his or her agent or his or her attorney shall be required at the hearing, as a condition precedent to the presentation of any objections by the owner, to show good cause for the delay in making the request more than five days after the owner received a copy of the notice of impoundment; if good cause cannot be shown, the hearing officer shall dismiss the hearing and make the finding stated in subsection (b) of this section; otherwise, the hearing examiner shall proceed to hear the owner’s objections. At the conclusion of the hearing on the owner’s objections, the hearing examiner shall render his or her decision. If the hearing examiner:

(a)    Finds that the impoundment was improper, he or she shall:

(1)    Find that the owner is not liable for any towing or storage charges occasioned by the impoundment; and

(2)    Determine whether and to what extent the city shall be liable for the expense of the towing and storage charges; or

(b)    Finds that the impoundment was proper, he or she shall establish:

(1)    The amount of the towing and storage charges to be assessed against the impounded motor vehicle; and

(2)    The extent of the liability of the owner for payment of the towing and storage charges so established.

The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, and a copy of the decision shall be furnished to the owner of the impounded motor vehicle, to the custodian of the place where the motor vehicle is stored and to the city attorney. In the event that the impoundment was pursuant to K.S.A. 8-1102(b), the owner or occupant of the real property upon which the abandoned vehicle was located shall not be assessed the costs of towing and storage of the vehicle.

Further, nothing within this article shall be construed to modify or affect the validity of the possessory lien of the person removing such vehicle from the real property established by K.S.A. 8-1102(b).

(Ord. 1294)


14-308. CHARGES CONSTITUTE A LIEN.

The towing and storage charges occasioned by the impoundment of a motor vehicle pursuant to section 14-302 shall be and constitute a lien upon the impounded motor vehicle, except as provided in this section. If the hearing examiner finds pursuant to section 14-307 that the impoundment was improper and if he or she determines that the city shall bear part or all of the towing and storage charges, the lien created by this section shall be discharged. If the hearing examiner finds pursuant to section 14-306 that the impoundment was proper but that the towing and storage charges should be in an amount less than the amount of the lien, the lien created by this section shall be discharged to the extent that it exceeds the amount established by the hearing examiner. The holder of a lien created by this section may perfect such lien in any manner provided by law, but he or she may not retain possession of the motor vehicle when it has been released pursuant to section 14-306(a). In the event that the impounded motor vehicle is released from impoundment and the owner or his or her agent has provided security for payment of charges as required by section 14-306(b), the lien created by this section shall also be a lien against the security so provided, subject to being wholly or partially discharged as provided in this section. (Ord. 1294)


14-309. SATISFACTION OF LIEN; NOTICE OF PUBLIC SALE.

The holder of a lien against a motor vehicle created by section 14-308, to the extent that such lien has not been discharged as provided in section 14-308 or otherwise satisfied, may enforce such lien in any manner provided by law after 60 days from the date the motor vehicle is impounded by the police department. If the owner of the motor vehicle or his or her agent has provided security for the payment of the lien as provided in section 14-306(b), the lien shall first be satisfied out of the security so provided and, if any portion of the lien remains unsatisfied and undischarged, may then be enforced in any manner provided by law. If the motor vehicle against which the lien is created pursuant to section 14-308 is still under impoundment 60 days from the date it is impounded by the police department and the owner has not requested release of the motor vehicle from impoundment nor paid the towing and storage charges that are the basis for the lien, the motor vehicle shall be sold at public sale to the highest and best bidder for cash to satisfy the lien. Notice of the sale shall be given in accordance with K.S.A. 8-1102. Publication, required by K.S.A. 8-1102, may be made before the termination of the 60-day period for a sale thereafter. (Ord. 1294)


14-310. REDEMPTION.

If the city is to conduct the sale:

(a)    Any holder of a recorded lien or retained title on a motor vehicle to be sold by the city under the provisions of section 14-309 may claim and take possession thereof, upon payment of accrued charges and estimated costs of publication of the notice of sale to the police department and the deposit with the police department of sufficient assurance by surety bond or otherwise, approved by the city attorney, that the motor vehicle will be forthcoming for public sale thereof or upon claim of the rightful owner prior to the sale. The police department shall, within three days, make a report to the city treasurer and deliver the charges and costs so paid to the city treasurer, taking a receipt therefor and filing it, together with a duplicate copy of the report to the city treasurer, with the records in his or her office. The funds shall be held in a trust account until final disposition of the motor vehicle. Not less than five days before the date for sale of the motor vehicle, the police department shall notify the lienholder or retained titleholder of the time and place for the sale, and the lienholder or retained titleholder shall deliver such motor vehicle to the police department at or before 12:00 noon of the day before the sale. At the sale the amount paid shall be credited on the bid of the lienholder or retained titleholder. If the lienholder or retained titleholder is the successful bidder for the motor vehicle, the police department shall report this fact to the city treasurer and then the funds previously paid by the lienholder or retained titleholder shall be relieved of the trust previously impressed and become the same as other funds received by the city for storage and costs of impounded motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is sold for a higher bid to any person other than the lienholder or retained titleholder, the police department shall report this fact to the city treasurer and the lienholder or retained titleholder shall be refunded the amount previously paid by him out of the trust account; and

(b)    If the rightful owner of the motor vehicle claims the same before the sale by payment of the accrued charges, the police department shall immediately notify the Iienholder or retained titleholder in possession of the motor vehicle and he or she shall return the same to the police department within 12 hours. The police department shall report this redemption by the rightful owner to the city treasurer and the lienholder or retained titleholder shall be refunded the amount previously paid by him or her out of the trust account.

(Ord. 1294)


14-311. SALE PROCEEDS.

The proceeds of a public sale held pursuant to section 14-309 whether such sale was conducted by the city or by any other person, after payment of the towing and storage charges and costs and expenses incident to the sale, shall be deposited with the city treasurer, if the owner of the motor vehicle is absent from the sale, for credit to the trust account. The funds deposited in the trust account pursuant to this section shall remain in the account subject to the order of the person legally entitled thereto, but if no claim is made for these funds within a period of one year after the sale, the funds shall become the property of the city, be released from the trust account and be paid into the general fund as miscellaneous revenues. (Ord. 1294)


14-312. STATUTORY PROCEDURES.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to augment, diminish, supersede or otherwise interfere with any statutory procedure established by the legislature for the collection of unpaid towing and storage charges. The procedures in this article are supplementary and cumulative to any statutory procedures. (Ord. 1294)


14-313. IMPLEMENTATION OF ARTICLE.

The police department and city treasurer are authorized to make rules for the implementation and administration of this article. (Ord. 1294)


14-314. REIMBURSEMENT FOR DISCHARGED LIENS.

If a lien created by section 14-308 and held by a private wrecker or towing firm is discharged by section 14-308 pursuant to a determination by a hearing examiner that an impoundment was improper and that the city shall bear part or all of the towing and storage charges, the city shall pay to the firm the amount determined by the hearing examiner. No payment shall be made until it is authorized by the city attorney. (Ord. 1294)


ARTICLE 4. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS


14-401. HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DEFINED.

As used in this article, the term hazardous material shall mean any material or combination of materials which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, biological, or infectious characteristics, poses a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or safety or the environment if released into the workplace or environment or when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed. (Ord. 1294)


14-402. SAME; EXCEPTIONS.

The provisions of this article shall not apply to any container which shall have a capacity of 150 gallons or less which shall be used for the purpose of supplying fuel for the vehicle on which it is mounted. These provisions shall also not apply to vehicles, trailers, containers or tanks containing anhydrous ammonia or other material primarily used by farmers for fertilizer purposes when such vehicles, trailers, containers or tanks are parked or housed upon property designated for the placement of such vehicle, trailer, container or tank by any farmers’ cooperative, elevator company or farm supply store located within the city limits. (Ord. 1294)


14-403. TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.

Except as provided in section 14-404 it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to transport any hazardous material upon any street, avenue, highway, road, alley or any other public right-of-way in the city. (Ord. 1294)


14-404. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ROUTES.

The provisions of section 14-403 shall apply to all streets, avenues, highways, roadways, alleys or other public rights-of-way within the city except those specified within this section where transportation of hazardous materials shall be allowed. Transportation of hazardous materials shall be allowed upon the following streets, avenues, highways or roadways:

(a)    (Reserved).

(b)    (Reserved).

(c)    (Reserved).

(Ord. 1294)


14-405. PARKING OF VEHICLES OR TRAILERS CARRYING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.

(a)    Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to park any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer carrying any hazardous material within any of the following city zoning districts as defined in Chapter 16:

(1)    (Reserved).

(b)    Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers parked for continuous periods of time not to exceed one hour where such vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers are parked along those routes specified in section 14-404.

(c)    Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer carrying any hazardous material where such vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is not parked within 500 feet of any structure used for human habitation.

(Ord. 1294)


14-406. REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED TRAILERS.

If any vehicle, trailer or a semi-trailer is found parked in violation of the provisions of this article, the fire chief or assistant chief or any law enforcement officer may require the owner, operator or lessee of the trailer to move it within two hours. If such removal is not accomplished on the order of any such officer, it may be accomplished by any such officer, by any reasonable means, if the continued presence of the trailer or semi-trailer at its parked location constitutes, adds to or prevents correction of a situation threatening imminent injury or damage to persons or property. (Ord. 1294)


ARTICLE 5. PARADE REGULATIONS


14-501. DEFINITIONS.

The definitions of certain terms relating to parade regulations shall be as follows:

(a)    Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city.

(b)    Parade permit is a permit as required by this article.

(Ord. 1294)


14-502. PERMIT REQUIRED.

(a)    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city chief of police.

(b)    This article shall not apply to:

(1)    Funeral processions;

(2)    Students going to and from school classes or participating in education activities; provided, that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.

(3)    A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.

(Ord. 1294)


14-503. PROCEDURE.

A person seeking a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer.

(a)    An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 48 hours before the date on which it is supposed to conduct the parade.

(b)    The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:

(1)    The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade;

(2)    If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization;

(3)    The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;

(4)    The date the parade is to be conducted;

(5)    The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;

(6)    The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles that will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles;

(7)    The hours when such parade will start and terminate;

(8)    A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets to be traversed;

(9)    The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;

(10)    The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas;

(11)    The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade;

(12)    If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;

(13)    Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.

(c)    The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than 24 hours before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.

(Ord. 1294)


14-504. STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.

The governing body shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it finds that:

(a)    The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;

(b)    The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city;

(c)    The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;

(d)    The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;

(e)    The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;

(f)    The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create disturbance;

(g)    The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;

(h)    The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit.

(Ord. 1294)


14-505. ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.

The governing body in denying an application for a parade permit shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall within 10 days after notice of the action of the governing body file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. (Ord. 1294)


14-506. NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS.

Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following:

(a)    All members of the governing body;

(b)    City clerk;

(c)    City attorney;

(d)    City engineer;

(e)    Fire chief.

(Ord. 1294)


14-507. CONTENTS OF PERMIT.

Each parade permit shall state the following information:

(a)    Starting time;

(b)    Minimum speed;

(c)    Maximum speed;

(d)    Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;

(e)    The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;

(f)    The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;

(g)    Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article.

(Ord. 1294)


14-508. DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.

(a)    A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.

(b)    The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade.

(Ord. 1294)


14-509. PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.

The following rules of public conduct shall be observed during parades:

(a)    No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.

(b)    No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.

(c)    The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article.

(Ord. 1294)


14-510. REVOCATION OF PERMIT.

The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth. (Ord. 1294)


ARTICLE 6. COMMERCIAL MOTOR CARRIERS


14-601. COMMERCIAL MOTOR CARRIERS.

(a)    There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating motor carrier traffic within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie, Kansas, that certain standard motor carrier regulations known as known as Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, 2013 Edition or newer, prepared and published in book form from J.J. Keller & Associates, Inc., Neenah, Wisconsin, save and except such articles, sections parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed. No less than three copies of said book shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy” as adopted by ordinance with a copy of the ordinance codified in this section attached thereto, and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. The police department, municipal judge, municipal prosecutor and all administrative departments of the city charged with the enforcement of these regulations shall be supplied, at the cost of the city, such number of official copies of said book as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. 

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. The judge of the municipal court may, in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 12-4305 or any amendments thereto, establish a schedule of fines for violations of any section of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. The schedule of fines for violations of this section shall not be limited by section 14-104 or any other section of the city code. Any person who violates any provision of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations for which a fine is not scheduled shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in this section. 

(Ord. 1355; Ord. 1371, Sec. 1)


CHAPTER XV. UTILITIES

Article 1.    General Provisions

Article 2.    Water and Sewer

Article 3.    Public Sewer System

Article 4.    Sanitary Code

Article 5.    Cross Connections

Article 6.    Water Conservation

Article 7.    Storm Water Management Program and Utility


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS


15-101. DEFINITION.

For purposes of this article utility services shall include water, electrical, sewer, solid waste (refuse) and other utility services provided by the city. (Code 2004)


15-102. DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.

Unless otherwise provided, water, electric, sewer, solid waste (refuse) or other utility service shall be terminated for nonpayment of service fees or charges in accordance with sections 15-103:104. (Code 2004)


15-103. NOTICE; HEARING.

(a)    If a utility bill has not been paid on or before the due date as provided in this chapter, a delinquency and termination notice shall be issued by the city clerk within five days after the delinquency occurs and mailed to the customer at his or her last known address. A copy also shall be mailed to the occupant of the premises if the occupant and the customer are not the same person.

(b)    The notice shall state:

(1)    The amount due, plus delinquency charge;

(2)    Notice that service will be terminated if the amount due is not paid within 10 days from the date of the notice unless the date on the notice to pay the charges due shall be on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event such notice will give the consumer until the close of the next business day in which to pay the charges;

(3)    Notice that the customer has the right to a hearing before the designated hearing officer;

(4)    Notice that the request for a hearing must be in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than three days prior to the date for termination of service.

(c)    Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the city clerk shall advise the customer of the date, time and place of the hearing which shall be held within three working days following receipt of the request.

(Code 2004)


15-104. SAME; FINDING.

Following the hearing, if the hearing officer shall find that service should not be terminated, then notice of such finding shall be presented to the city clerk. If the officer finds that service should be terminated, an order shall be issued terminating service five days after the date of the order. The customer shall be notified either in person or by mailing a letter to his or her last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. However, if the order is made at the hearing in the presence of the customer, then no further notice need be given. The hearing officer has a right, for good cause, to grant an extension, not to exceed 10 days, for the termination of such service. (Code 2004)


15-105. CONNECTION/RECONNECTION FEE.

(a)    Each new customer making application for utility service shall pay a connection fee in the amount of $30 for each new connection.

(b)    In the event the utility service has been disconnected or discontinued for failure to pay any bill due the city for such utility, a reconnection fee of $30 shall be assessed.

(c)    Any person requesting disconnection or any residence temporarily disconnected for any reason from water service for a period of more than 24 hours shall be charged a connection/reconnection fee to resume service.

(Ord. 1215)


15-106. BAD DEBT CHARGES.

All bills which are determined to be bad debt and turned over for outside collection, including the State of Kansas set-off program, shall be subject to a fee of 25% of the total of the delinquent amount. This bad debt administrative charge shall be applied prior to referral for collection. (Ord. 1261)


15-107. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 1215)


15-108. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 1215)


15-109. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.

(Ord. 1215)


ARTICLE 2. WATER AND SEWER


15-201. WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.*

There are hereby incorporated by reference within the corporate limits of the city of Tonganoxie those certain regulations known as the Water and Sewer Regulations save excepted articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereinafter omitted, deleted, modified, or changed, such incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009 through 12-3012, including any amendments thereto, and K.S.A. 12-3301 and 12-3302. Not less than three copies of the Water and Sewer Regulations for the city of Tonganoxie shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy as Incorporated by Reference in the City Code of the City of Tonganoxie” with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted clearly marked to show any such omission, and filed with the city clerk to be open for inspections and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 1100, Sec. 1; Ord. 1197, Secs. 1:2; Ord. 1214, Secs. 1:2; Ord. 1379, Secs. 1:3; Ord. 1476, Secs. 2:3)

*    Code reviser’s note: The water and sewer regulations incorporated by reference by Ordinance 1100 have been amended by Ordinances 1197, 1214, 1379 and 1476. Ordinance 1478, Section 1, amends Ordinance 1476 to provide a temporary adjustment (through June 30, 2021) for meters larger than one inch.


ARTICLE 3. PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM


15-301. USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS AND DRAINS, PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL, THE INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWERS, AND THE DISCHARGE OF WATERS AND WASTES INTO THE PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEMS(S) REGULATIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.

There is hereby incorporated by reference within the corporate limits of the City of Tonganoxie that certain regulations known as the Use of Public and Private Sewers and Drain Regulations as adopted by Ordinance No. 674; save and excepted articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereinafter omitted, deleted, modified, or changed, such incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009 through 12-301 2, including any amendments thereto and K.S.A. 12-3301 and 12-3302. Not less than three copies of the use of public and private sewers and drains regulations for the City of Tonganoxie shall be marked or stamped “Official Copy as Incorporated by Reference by Ordinance No. 1101* of the City of Tonganoxie” with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or changes, and filed with the city clerk to be open in inspections and available to the public at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 1101, Sec. 1; Ord. 1476, Sec. 1)

*    Code reviser’s note: The Use of Public and Private Sewers and Drain Regulations incorporated by reference by Ordinance 1101 have been amended by Ordinance 1476. Ordinance 1478, Section 1, amends Ordinance 1476 to provide a temporary adjustment (through June 30, 2021) for meters larger than one inch.


ARTICLE 4. SANITARY CODE


15-401. SANITARY CODE ADOPTED.

The Sanitary Code of Leavenworth County, Kansas, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set forth at the length and the provision therein shall be controlling with the area of jurisdiction of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, such code being made a part of the ordinances of the city as if the same had been set out in full herein, all as authorized and in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 12-3009 and 12-3012, including any amendments thereto. No fewer than three copies of the Sanitary Code of Leavenworth County, Kansas, and they shall be marked "Official Copy as Incorporated by the City of Tonganoxie" and shall be filed with the city clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours of business.


ARTICLE 5. CROSS CONNECTIONS


15-501. CROSS CONNECTION ORDINANCE ADOPTED.

(a)    The Cross Connection Control Model Ordinance for the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, be and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully set forth at length herein, and that provisions there in shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

(b)    There shall be no less than three copies of the Cross Connection Control Model Ordinance for the City of Tonganoxie Kansas, marked and stamped Official Copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 830 with all sections and portions thereof intended to be omitted and clearly marked to show any such omissions or showing the sections, articles, chapters, parts or portions that are incorporated, as the case may be, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporated ordinance, to file with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours.

(Ord. 830, Secs. 1:2)


ARTICLE 6. WATER CONSERVATION


15-601. PURPOSE.

The purpose of this article is to provide for the declaration of a water supply watch, warning or emergency and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the city in the event such a watch, warning or emergency is declared. (Ord. 1072, Sec. 1; Code 2004)


15-602. DEFINITIONS.

(a)    Water shall mean water available to the city for treatment by virtue of its water rights or any treated water introduced by the city into its water distribution system, including water offered for sale at any coin-operated site.

(b)    Customer shall mean the customer of record using water for any purpose from the city’s water distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.

(c)    Waste of Water includes, but is not limited to (1) permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain, or (2) failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing.

(d)    The following classes of uses of water are established:

Class 1: Water used for outdoor watering, either public or private, for gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, parks, golf courses, playing fields, swimming pools or other recreational areas; or the washing of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, or the exterior of any building or structure.

Class 2: Water used for any commercial or industrial, including agricultural, purposes, except water actually necessary to maintain the health and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employees are engaged in the performance of their duties at their place of employment.

Class 3: Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in either classes 1 or 2.

Class 4: Water necessary only to sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation.

(Ord. 1072, Sec. 2; Code 2004)


15-603. DECLARATION OF WATER SUPPLY WATCH.

Whenever the governing body of the city finds that conditions indicate that the probability of a drought or some other condition causing a major water supply shortage is rising, it shall be empowered to declare, by resolution, that a water watch exists and that it shall take steps to inform the public and ask for voluntary reductions in water use. Such a watch shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the existence and end of a water watch shall be effective upon their publication in the official city newspaper. (Ord.1072, Sec. 3)


15-604. DECLARATION OF WATER SUPPLY WARNING.

Whenever the governing body of the city finds that drought conditions indicate or some other condition causing a major water supply shortage are present and supplies are starting to decline, it shall be empowered to declare, by resolution, that a water warning exists and that it will recommend restrictions on nonessential uses during the period of the warning. Such a warning shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the beginning and ending of a water warning shall be effective upon their publication in the official city newspaper. (Ord. 1072, Sec. 4)


15-605. DECLARATION OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY.

Whenever the governing body of the city finds that an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water supply needed for essential uses, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution that a water supply emergency exists and that it will impose mandatory restrictions on water use during the period of the emergency. Such an emergency shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the Governing Body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the existence and end of a water supply emergency shall be effective upon their publication in the official city newspaper. (Ord. 1072, Sec. 5)


15-606. VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION MEASURES.

Upon the declaration of a water supply watch or water supply warning as provided in sections 15-603:604, the mayor (or the city administrator) is authorized to call on all water consumers to employ voluntary water conservation measures to limit or eliminate non-essential water uses including, but not limited to, limitations on the following uses:

(a)    Sprinkling of water on lawns, shrubs or trees (including golf courses).

(b)    Washing of automobiles.

(c)    Use of water in swimming pools, fountains and evaporative air conditioning systems.

(d)    Waste of water.

(Ord. 1072, Sec. 6; Code 2004)


15-607. MANDATORY CONSERVATION MEASURES.

Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency as provided in section 15-605, the mayor (or the city administrator) is also authorized to implement certain mandatory water conservation measures, including, but not limited to, the following:

(a)    Suspension of new connections to the city’s water distribution system, except connections of fire hydrants and those made pursuant to agreements entered into by the city prior to the effective date of the declaration of the emergency;

(b)    Restrictions on the uses of water in one or more classes of water use, wholly or in part;

(c)    Restrictions on the sales of water at coin-operated facilities or sites;

(d)    The imposition of water rationing based on any reasonable formula including, but not limited to, the percentage of normal use and per capita or per consumer restrictions;

(e)    Complete or partial bans on the waste of water; and

(f)    Any combination of the foregoing measures.

(Ord. 1072, Sec. 7; Code 2004)


15-608. EMERGENCY WATER RATES.

Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency as provided in section 15-605, the governing body of the city shall have the power to adopt emergency water rates by ordinance designed to conserve water supplies. Such emergency rates may provide for, but are not limited to:

(a)    Higher charges for increasing usage per unit of the use (increasing block rates);

(b)    Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit rate); or

(c)    Extra charges in excess of a specified level of water use (excess demand surcharge).

(Ord. 1072, Sec. 8; Code 2004)


15-609. REGULATIONS.

During the effective period of any water supply emergency as provided for in section 15-605, the mayor (or city manager or water superintendent) is empowered to promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, any water supply emergency resolution, or emergency water rate ordinance. Such regulations shall be subject to the approval of the governing body at its next regular or special meeting. (Ord. 1072, Sec. 8; Code 2004)


15-610. VIOLATIONS, DISCONNECTIONS AND PENALTIES.

(a)    If the mayor, city manager, water superintendent, or other city official or officials charged with implementation and enforcement of this article or a water supply emergency resolution learn of any violation of any water use restrictions imposed pursuant to sections 15-607 or 15-609, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property where the violation occurred and the customer of record and any other person known to the city who is responsible for the violation or its correction shall be provided with either actual or mailed notice. The notice shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately or within such specified time as the city determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the city may terminate water service to the customer subject to the following procedures:

(1)    The city shall give the customer notice by mail or actual notice that water service will be discontinued within a specified time due to the violation and that the customer will have the opportunity to appeal the termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the city governing body or a city official designated as a hearing officer by the governing body.

(2)    If such a hearing is requested by the customer charged with the violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard before termination is ordered; and

(3)    The governing body or hearing official shall make findings of fact and order whether service should continue or be terminated.

(b)    A fee of $50 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service terminated pursuant to subsection (a). In the event of subsequent violations, the reconnection fee shall be $200 for the second violation and $300 for any additional recon nections.

(c)    Violations of this article shall be a municipal offense and may be prosecuted in municipal court. Any person so charged and found guilty in municipal court of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a municipal offense. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty for an initial violation shall be a written warning. The penalty for a second violation shall be mandatory fine of $100. The penalty for a third or subsequent conviction shall be a mandatory fine of $200. In addition, such customer may be required by the court to serve a definite term of confinement in the city or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not exceed 30 days.

(Ord. 1072, Sec. 10; Code 2004)


15-611. EMERGENCY TERMINATION.

Nothing in this article shall limit the ability of any properly authorized city official from terminating the supply of water to any or all or all customers upon the determination of such city official that emergency termination of water service is required to protect the health and safety of the public. (Ord. 1072, Sec. 11; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 7. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND UTILITY


15-701. DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:

(a)    Billing period means the service period identified on the utility bill. Each account shall be billed monthly in arrears of the service period. A developed property that receives a city of Tonganoxie water or sewer utility service shall be billed monthly in arrears of the service.

(b)    City manager means the city manager for Tonganoxie, Kansas, or his or her designee.

(c)    Customer means anyone receiving and being billed for utility services from the city.

(d)    Developed property means real property which has been altered from its natural state by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures, or other impervious area.

(e)    Dwelling unit means a singular unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

(f)    Exempt property means public rights-of-way, public streets, public alleys, and public sidewalks, as well as any property that the governing body classifies as exempt.

(g)    Fee or storm water utility fee means the charge established under this article to be billed to customers/owners to fund the costs of storm water management program and of operating, maintaining, and improving the storm water system in the city.

(h)    Fiscal year means the 12-month period commencing on the first day of January of any year.

(i)    Governing body means the mayor and elected city council members as set out in Chapter 1 of this code.

(j)    Impervious area means the number of square feet of hard surfaced areas which either prevent or retard the entry of water into soil mantle, as it entered under natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions as undeveloped property, including, but not limited to, roofs, sidewalks, patios, most conventionally surfaced streets, pavement, driveways, parking lots, athletic courts and any other oiled, graveled, or compacted surface.

(k)    Nonresidential property means any property that is designated by the utility billing system as nonresidential.

(l)    Property owner means the property owner of record as listed in the county assessment roll. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver, or personal representative.

(m)    Residential property means any property designated by the utility billing system as residential.

(n)    Storm water management fund or fund means the enterprise fund created by this article to operate, maintain, and improve the city’s storm water system and for such other purposes as stated in this article.

(o)    Storm water management program means the planning, design, construction, regulation and enforcement, improvement, repair, maintenance, control measures, public education, citizen participation, and operation of facilities and programs relating to water, floodplains, flood control, grading erosion, tree conservation, and sediment control.

(p)    Storm water system means the system or network of storm and surface water management facilities including but not limited to inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches on city property, drainage easements, city-owned retention and detention basin, infiltration facilities and other components.

(q)    Undeveloped property means real property that has not been altered from its natural state by dredging, filling, removal of trees and vegetation, or other activities which have disturbed or altered the topography or soils on the property.

(r)    Utility billing system means the system utilized by the city of Tonganoxie to create a periodic utility bill and any or all upgrades or modifications to that system.

(s)    Storm water utility fee system means the utility created by this article for the purpose of implementing and funding the storm water management program.

(t)    Water means any storm water, surface water, snow melt or ground water.

(u)    Vacant improved property means unoccupied developed property that contains impervious area.

(Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-702. FINDINGS AND STATEMENTS OF POLICY.

(a)    The city maintains a system of storm and surface water management facilities including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, city-owned retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities, and other components. The storm water system in the city needs regular maintenance and improvements.

(b)    All developed property in the city either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the storm water system. The extent of use of the storm water system by each property is dependent on factors that influence runoff, including land use and the amount of impervious surface on the property.

(c)    The costs of improving, maintaining, operating, and monitoring the storm water system should be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all developed properties based on the impact of runoff from the impervious areas of the property on the storm water management system.

(d)    Management of the storm water system to protect the public health, safety, and welfare requires adequate revenues and it is in the interest of the public to finance storm water management adequately with a user fee system that is reasonable and equitable so that each user of the system pays to the extent to which the user contributes to the need for it. The city is responsible for the provision of a planned and orderly system for managing and mitigating the effects of development on storm water and appropriate balancing between development and preservation of the natural environment. To accomplish these ends, the city desires to create a storm water management program and storm water utility pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 28.

(e)    The storm water management program will also initiate innovative and proactive approaches to storm water management within the city to address problems in areas of the city that currently are prone to flooding, protect against replication of these types of problems and the creation of similar problems in newly developing areas of the city, and assist in meeting the mandates of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as created by the Federal Clean Water Act and associated state and federal laws and their supporting regulations.

(f)    The storm water utility fee imposed by this article is neither a tax nor a special assessment, but a charge (in the nature of tolls, fees or rents) for services rendered or available.

(Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-703. ESTABLISHMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND STORM WATER UTILITY.

Pursuant to the City Charter Ordinance No. 28, the city’s general home rule authority, its nuisance abatement authority, its police powers and all other authority, the governing body does hereby establish both a storm water management program and a storm water utility and hereby declares its intention to operate the same. (Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-704. ADMINISTRATION OF THE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM; THE STORM WATER UTILITY.

The city manager, not in contravention of any city ordinance, resolution or regulation, shall have the power to undertake the following activities to administer the storm water management program: (a) To advise the governing body on matters relating to the storm water management program and to make recommendations to the governing body concerning the adoption of ordinances, resolutions, policies and regulations in furtherance of the objectives of the storm water management program. (b) The acquisition by gift, purchase or eminent domain of real and personal property, easements thereon and/or interests therein, necessary to construct, operate, and maintain storm water control facilities. (c) To undertake the engineering and design, debt service and related financing expenses, construction costs for new facilities, and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities, operation and maintenance of the storm water system. (d) Regulate, establish standards, review and inspect land use or property owner activities when such activities have the potential to affect the quantity, timing, velocity, erosive forces, quality, environmental value or other characteristics of storm water which would flow into the storm water management system or in any way affect the implementation of the storm water management program. (e) Monitoring, surveillance, and inspection of storm water control devices. (f) Water quality monitoring and water quality programs. (g) Retrofitting developed areas for pollution control. (h) Inspection and enforcement activities. (i) Analyze the cost of services and benefits provided by the storm water utility and the structure of fees, service charges, credits, and other revenues on a regular basis and make recommendations to the governing body regarding the same. (j) To undertake expenditures as required to implement these activities, including costs of capital improvements, operations and maintenance and other costs as may be required. (k) Other activities which are reasonably required. (Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-705. CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINATION OF THE STORM WATER UTILITY FEE.

For purposes of determining the storm water utility fee, all properties in the city are classified into one of the following classes:

(a)    Residential Property.

(1)    Residential Fee. The council has determined that a flat storm water utility fee shall be charged against all residential properties classified as a dwelling unit. The council reserves the right to amend or adjust this storm water utility fee or to establish a formula for calculating the storm water utility fees at any time.

(b)    Nonresidential Property.

(1)    Nonresidential Property Fee. The council has determined that a flat storm water utility fee shall be charged against all nonresidential properties. The council reserves the right to amend or adjust this storm water utility fee or to establish a formula for calculating the storm water utility fees at any time.

(c)    Vacant Improved Property.

(1)    Vacant Improved Property Fee. The storm water utility fee for vacant improved property shall be the same as the fee applied to property if it were occupied. The storm water utility fee shall be assessed to the owner of record according to the billing procedures provided for in section 15-708.

(d)    Undeveloped Property.

(1)    Undeveloped Property Fee. There shall be no fee for undeveloped property.

(e)    Exempt Property.

(1)    Exempt Property Fee. There shall be no fee for undeveloped and exempt property.

(Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-706. STORM WATER UTILITY FEE.

Effective April 30, 2018, a monthly service charge is imposed upon all developed property in the city to fund storm water management programs. Thereafter, the monthly service charge shall be calculated annually on January 1st and assessed monthly during the following 12-month period. This service charge shall be known as the storm water utility fee (“fee”). The fee shall be calculated to insure adequate revenues to fund the costs of the storm water management program and to provide for the operation, maintenance, and capital improvements of the storm water system in the city. The city manager shall make an annual recommendation to the governing body as to the monthly charge necessary to fulfill the proposed purpose of the storm water management program. The fees shall be as approved by the city council. (Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-707. CHARGES FOR TAX-EXEMPT PROPERTIES.

The governing body finds that all real property in the city contributes to runoff and either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the storm water system. Therefore, except as otherwise provided in section 15-705, all developed property in the city, including property that is tax exempt from property tax, shall be charged the storm water utility fee. (Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-708. WHEN STORM WATER UTILITY FEE PAYABLE; INTEREST AND PENALTIES; LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY; ABATEMENT OF SMALL AMOUNTS DUE.

The storm water utility fee shall become part of the monthly utility bill sent to utility customers to be paid in accordance with sections 15-101:106 and/or if the fee is not paid within the 30-day period following the date of the utility bill the cost shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments against the lot or parcel of land from which the bill is due, and the city clerk, at the time of certification of other city taxes, shall certify the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levy of a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest are paid in full. Any account that is inactive in the utility billing system shall not be charged for the storm water utility fee until the account becomes activated. (Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


15-709. REQUESTS FOR APPEAL OR CORRECTION OF THE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEE.

A customer/owner may request an appeal or correction of the fee by submitting the request in writing to the city manager within 30 days after the date of the contested bill. Grounds for appeal or correction of the fee include: (a) incorrect classification of the property for purposes of determining the fee; (b) errors in the identification of the property subject to the fee. The city manager shall make a determination within 30 days after receipt of the customer/owner’s completed written request for appeal or correction of the fee. The city manager’s decision on a request for appeal or correction of the fee shall be final. A customer/owner must comply with all rules and procedures adopted by the city when submitting a request for appeal or correction of the fee and must provide all information necessary for the city manager to make a determination on a request for correction of the fee. The burden of proof shall be on the customer/owner to demonstrate, by clear and convincing evidence, that the determination of the city manager, from which the appeal is being taken, is erroneous. The city manager shall notify the customer/owner in writing of the decision. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for denial of the request. The filing of a notice of appeal shall not stay the imposition or duty to pay the fee. If the city manager determines that the fee should not be paid or the amount is less than the amount appealed, the city shall issue a refund in the appropriate amount to the customer/owner. All refunds shall be without interest. (Ord. 1437, Sec. 1)


CHAPTER XVI. ZONING AND PLANNING 

Article 1.    City Planning Commission/Board of Zoning Appeals

Article 2.    Zoning and Subdivision Regulations

Article 3.    Floodplain Management 


ARTICLE 1. CITY PLANNING COMMISSION/BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS


16-101. COMMISSION ESTABLISHMENT.

The Tonganoxie City Planning Commission which is composed of seven members of which five members shall be residents of the city and two members shall reside outside the city, but within the designated planning area of the city which is within at least three miles of the corporate limits of the city. The planning commission was originally created by Ordinance No. 514 which was passed and approved on July 20, 1959. (Code 2003)


16-102. MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, INTEREST AND COMPENSATION.

The members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the governing body at the first regular meeting of the governing body in May of each year and take office at the next regular meeting of the commission. All members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years each. The appointments shall be so made that the terms of office of the members residing outside of the corporate limits of the city do not expire within the same year. By the establishment of the commission, all current members continue to serve their present terms of office. In case of death, incapacity, resignation or disqualification of any member, appointment to such a vacancy on the commission shall be made of the unexpired term of the member leaving the membership. Should any member have a conflict of interest, either directly or indirectly, in any matter coming before the commission, he or she shall be disqualified to discuss or vote on the matter. The governing body may adopt rules and regulations providing for removal of members of the commission. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties as deemed desirable by the governing body. (Code 2003)


16-103. MEETINGS, OFFICERS AND RECORDS.

The members of the planning commission shall meet at such time and place as may be fixed in the commission’s bylaws. The commission shall elect one member as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson who shall serve one year and until their successors have been elected. A secretary shall also be elected who may or may not be a member of the commission. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson or in the chairperson’s absence by the vice-chairperson. The commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and hearing procedures. All actions by the commission shall be taken by a majority vote of the entire membership of the commission; except that, a majority of the members present and voting at the hearing shall be required to recommend approval or denial of an amendment to the zoning regulations, a rezoning amendment or a special use permit. A proper record of all the proceedings of the commission shall be kept. The commission, from time to time, may establish subcommittees, advisory committees or technical committees to advise or assist in the activities of the commission. (Code 2003)


16-104. POWERS AND DUTIES.

The governing body and planning commission shall have all the rights, powers and duties as authorized in K.S.A. 12-741 et seq., and amendments thereto, which are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this section and shall be given full force and effect as if the same had been fully set forth. The commission is hereby authorized to make or cause to be made, adopted and maintained a comprehensive plan for the city and any unincorporated territory lying outside of the city but within Leavenworth County in which the city is located, which in the opinion of the commission forms the total community of which the city is a part. The commission shall also cause to be prepared, adopted and maintained zoning and subdivision regulations on all land within the jurisdiction designated by the governing body. The comprehensive plan and zoning and subdivision regulations are subject to final approval of the governing body by ordinance. Periodically, the governing body may request the commission to undertake other assignments related to planning and land use regulations. (Code 2003)


16-105. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.

The planning commission is hereby designated to also serve as the city’s board of zoning appeals with all the powers and duties as provided for in K.S.A. 12-759. The board shall adopt rules in the form of bylaws for its operation which shall include hearing procedures. Such bylaws shall be subject to the approval of the governing body. Public records shall be kept of all official actions of the board which shall be maintained separately from those of the commission. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing evidence presented, findings of fact, decisions and the vote upon each question or appeal. A majority of the members of the board present and voting at the hearing shall be required to decide any appeal. Subject to subsequent approval of the governing body, the board shall establish a scale of reasonable fees to be paid in advance by the appealing party. (Code 2003)


16-106. BUDGET.

The governing body shall approve a budget for the planning commission and make such allowances to the commission as it deems proper, including funds for the employment of such employees or consultants as the governing body may authorize and provide, and shall add the same to the general budget. Prior to the time that moneys are available under the budget, the governing body may appropriate moneys for such purposes from the general fund. The governing body may enter into such contracts as it deems necessary and may receive and expend funds and moneys from the state or federal government or from any other resource for such purposes. (Code 2003)


ARTICLE 2. ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS


16-201. ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS INCORPORATED.

(a)    The zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations of the city of Tonganoxie, Kansas, 2003, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference, in its entirety and incorporated as fully as if set forth in length herein, and that the provisions therein shall be controlling with the area of jurisdiction of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

(b)    There is hereby incorporated by reference within the corporate limits of the City of Tonganoxie that certain regulations known as the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations 2003; save and except articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereinafter omitted, deleted, modified, or changed, such incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009 through 12-3012, including any amendments thereto and K.S.A. 12-3301 and 12-3302. Not less than three copies of said Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations 2003 for the City of Tonganoxie shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Incorporated by Reference by Ordinance No. 1138 of the City of Tonganoxie," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or changes, and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspections and available to the public at all reasonable hours.

(Ord. 1138; Code 2004)


ARTICLE 3. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, and Purposes


16-301. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.

(a)    Approval of Draft Ordinance by Kansas Chief Engineer Prior to Adoption. The following floodplain management regulations, as written, were approved in draft form by the Chief Engineer of the Division of Water Resources of the Kansas Department of Agriculture on June 2, 2009.

(b)    Kansas Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Kansas has in K.S.A. 12-741 et seq., and specifically in K.S.A. 12-766, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the governing body of the city of Tonganoxie ordains as follows.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-302. FINDINGS OF FACT. 

(a)    Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation. The special flood hazard areas of the city of Tonganoxie, Kansas, are subject to inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(b)    General Causes of the Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by (1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.

(c)    Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that is the basis of this article uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards, which consists of a series of interrelated steps.

(1)    Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations, which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this article is representative of large floods, which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this article. The base flood is the flood that is estimated to have a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator’s FIS, and illustrative materials dated July 16, 2015, as amended, and any future revisions thereto.

(2)    Calculation of water surface profiles that are based on a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.

(3)    Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any point.

(4)    Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood height.

(5)    Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base flood.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282; Ord. 1391)


16-303. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in section 16-302(a); to establish or maintain the community’s eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 CFR 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) and K.A.R. 5-44-4 by applying the provisions of this article to:

(a)    Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities; and

(b)    Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and

(c)    Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)

General Provisions


16-304. LANDS TO WHICH ARTICLE APPLIES. 

This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Tonganoxie identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones, AE, AO, and AH Zones, on the Index Map dated July 16, 2015, of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as amended and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this article, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the city of Tonganoxie or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the city of Tonganoxie or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in sections 16-314:319. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282; Ord. 1391)


16-305. COMPLIANCE.

No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-306. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.

It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-307. INTERPRETATION.

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by Kansas statutes. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-308. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.

The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article shall not create a liability on the part of the city of Tonganoxie, any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-309. SEVERABILITY.

If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)

Administration


16-310. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.

A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described in section 16-304. No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other development. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-311. DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.

The city administrator or his/her qualified designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-312. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.

Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

(a)    Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; and

(b)    Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by federal, state, or local law; and

(c)    Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding; and

(d)    Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications; and

(e)    Notify adjacent communities and the Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and

(f)    Assure that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished and shall be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse; and

(g)    Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; and

(h)    Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved nonresidential structures have been flood proofed; and

(i)    When flood-proofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential structure, the floodplain administrator shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-313. APPLICATION FOR FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.

To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall:

(a)    Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work;

(b)    Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit;

(c)    Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;

(d)    Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement;

(e)    Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway;

(f)    Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development;

(g)    Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the floodplain administrator;

(h)    Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and

(i)    Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)

Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction


16-314. GENERAL STANDARDS.

(a)    No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered or unnumbered A Zones, AE, AO, and AH Zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied.

(b)    All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A Zones is subject to all provisions of this article. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources.

(c)    Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within any unnumbered or numbered A Zones or AE Zones on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.

(d)    All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require:

(1)    Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;

(2)    Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;

(3)    Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;

(4)    All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;

(5)    New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination from them during flooding; and

(6)    Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:

(A)    All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(B)    All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

(C)    Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and

(D)    All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data.

(e)    Storage, Material, and Equipment.

(1)    The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.

(2)    Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning.

(f)    Agricultural Structures. Structures used solely for agricultural purposes in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock, may be constructed at-grade and wet-flood proofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; there is no permanent retail, wholesale, or manufacturing use included in the structure; a variance has been granted from the floodplain management requirements of this article; and a floodplain development permit has been issued.

(g)    Accessory Structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than 400 square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet-flood proofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this article; and a floodplain development permit has been issued.

(h)    Critical Facilities.

(1)    All new or substantially improved critical nonresidential facilities including, but not limited to, governmental buildings, police stations, fire stations, hospitals, orphanages, penal institutions, communication centers, water and sewer pumping stations, water and sewer treatment facilities, transportation maintenance facilities, places of public assembly, emergency aviation facilities, and schools shall be elevated above the 500-year flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood proofed so that below the 500-year flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in section 16-312(I).

(2)    All critical facilities shall have access routes that are above the elevation of the 500-year flood.

(3)    No critical facilities shall be constructed in any designated floodway.

(i)    Nonconforming Use. A structure, or the use of a structure or premises, that was lawful before the passage or amendment of this article, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, may be continued subject to the following conditions:

(1)    If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building shall conform to this article.

(2)    If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of the pre-damaged market value of the structure. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, safety codes, regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination.

(j)    Hazardous Materials. All hazardous material storage and handling sites shall be located out of the special flood hazard area.

(k)    Cumulative Improvement. A structure may be improved (remodeled or enlarged) without conforming to current requirements for elevation so long as the cumulative value of all work done within the last five calendar years does not exceed 50% of the structure’s current market value. If the cumulative value of the improvement exceeds 50% of the structure’s current market value, the structure must be brought into compliance with section 16-315(a) which requires elevation of residential structures to one foot above the base flood elevation or the elevation/flood proofing of nonresidential structures to one foot above the base flood elevation.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-315. SPECIFIC STANDARDS.

(a)    In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones, AE, and AH Zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 16-314(b), the following provisions are required:

(1)    Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above base flood elevation. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer.

(2)    Nonresidential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood proofed to a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in section 16-312(g):(i).

(3)    Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, which fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(A)    A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and

(B)    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-316. MANUFACTURED HOMES.

(a)    All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones, AE, and AH Zones on the community’s FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

(b)    Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered or numbered A Zones, AE, and AH Zones, on the community’s FIRM on sites:

(1)    Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

(2)    In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

(3)    In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

(4)    In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer.

(c)    Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones, AE and AH Zones, on the community’s FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, be elevated so that either:

(1)    The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one foot above the base flood level; or

(2)    The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer.

(Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-317. AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO and AH ZONES).

Located within the areas of special flood hazard as described in section 16-304 are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. The following provisions apply:

(a)    AO Zones.

(1)    All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).

(2)    All new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) or together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities be completely flood proofed to that level so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

(3)    Adequate drainage paths shall be required around structures on slopes, in order to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

(b)    AH Zones.

(1)    The specific standards for all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation has been provided shall be required as set forth in section 16-315.

(2)    Adequate drainage paths shall be required around structures on slopes, in order to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

(Ord. 1282)


16-318. FLOODWAY.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-304 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply:

(a)    The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point.

(b)    The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(c)    If subsection (b) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 16-314:319.

(d)    In unnumbered A Zones, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources as set forth in section 16-314(b).

(Formerly 16-317. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-319. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones, AE, AH, and AO Zones on the community’s FIRM either:

(a)    Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

(b)    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or

(c)    Meet the permitting, elevation, and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this article.

*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.

(Formerly 16-318. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)

Floodplain Management Variance Procedures


16-320. ESTABLISHMENT OF APPEAL BOARD.

The board of zoning appeals, as established by the city of Tonganoxie, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements of this article. (Formerly 16-319. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-321. RESPONSIBILITY OF APPEAL BOARD.

Where an application for a floodplain development permit is denied by the floodplain administrator, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit directly to the board of zoning appeals, as defined in section 16-320.

The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. (Formerly 16-320. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-322. FURTHER APPEALS.

Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the district court as provided in K.S.A. 12-759 and 12-760. (Formerly 16-321. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-323. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT VARIANCE CRITERIA.

In passing upon such applications for variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and the following criteria:

(a)    Danger to life and property due to flood damage;

(b)    Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(c)    Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(d)    Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(e)    Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(f)    Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for the proposed use;

(g)    Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(h)    Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(i)    Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(j)    Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(k)    Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets; and bridges.

(Formerly 16-322. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-324. CONDITIONS FOR APPROVING FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT VARIANCES.

(a)    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, providing subsections (b):(f) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(b)    Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, repair, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination, provided the proposed activity will not preclude the structure’s continued historic designation and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

(c)    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any significant increase in flood discharge would result.

(d)    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(e)    Variances shall only be issued upon: (1) showing of good and sufficient cause, (2) determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (3) determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(f)    A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that: (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article.

(Formerly 16-323. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-325. CONDITIONS FOR APPROVING VARIANCES FOR AGRICULTURAL OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.

Any variance granted for an agricultural or accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building’s unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in sections 16-323 and 16-324.

In order to minimize flood damages during the 1% annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood, and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-flood proofed:

(a)    Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

(b)    Use of agricultural structures must be limited to agricultural purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the floodplain management regulations of this article shall demonstrate that the varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the agricultural structure. Residential structures, such as farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.

(c)    For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with section 16-314(d)(2).

(d)    The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with section 16-314(d)(1). All of the building’s structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.

(e)    Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or flood proofed so that they are contained within a watertight, flood-proofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section 16-314(d)(4).

(f)    The accessory structures must meet all NFIP opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 1% annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with section 16-315(a)(3).

(g)    The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of section 16-318(b). No variances may be issued for agricultural structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.

(h)    The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of section 16-318(b). No variances may be issued for accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.

(i)    Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage.

(j)    No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures.

(k)    A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article.

(l)    Wet-flood proofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction.

(Formerly 16-324. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-326. CONDITIONS FOR APPROVING VARIANCES FOR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.

Any variance granted for a temporary structure shall be decided individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building’s unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in sections 16-323 and 16-324.

(a)    A temporary structure may be considered for location within the 1% annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood, only when all of the following criteria are met:

(1)    Use of the temporary structure is unique to the land to be developed and cannot be located outside of the floodplain nor meet the NFIP design standards;

(2)    Denial of the temporary structure permit will create an undue hardship on the property owner;

(3)    Community has adopted up-to-date NFIP and building regulations to direct placement and removal of the temporary structure; and

(4)    Community has sufficient staff to monitor the placement, use, and removal of the temporary structure throughout the duration of the permit.

(b)    Once all of the above conditions are met, an application for a special use permit must be made to the planning commission. The planning commission shall forward the application along with their recommendation to the city council. The city council shall consider all applications for special use permits for a temporary structure based on the following criteria:

(1)    The placement of any temporary structure within the special flood hazard areas as shown on the community’s adopted FEMA/NFIP map shall require an approved special use permit. The special use permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 180 days.

(2)    Special use permits applications, for a temporary structure to be located in special flood hazard areas, shall conform to the standard public hearing process prior to any community action on the permit request.

(3)    An emergency plan for the removal of the temporary structure that includes specific removal criteria and time frames from the agency or firm responsible for providing the manpower, equipment, and the relocation and disconnection of all utilities shall be required as part of the special use permit application for the placement of any temporary structure.

(4)    On or before the expiration of the end of the 180-day special use permit period, the temporary structure shall be removed from the site. All utilities, including water, sewer, communication, and electrical services shall be disconnected.

(5)    To ensure the continuous mobility of the temporary structure for the duration of the permit, the temporary structure shall retain its wheels and tires, licenses, and towing appurtenance on the structures at all times.

(6)    Under emergency flooding conditions, the temporary structure shall be removed immediately or as directed by the community and as specified in the emergency removal plan.

(7)    Location of any temporary structure within the regulatory floodway requires the provision of a "no-rise" certificate by a registered professional engineer.

(8)    Violation of or noncompliance with any of the stated conditions of the special use permit during the term thereof shall make the permit subject to revocation by resolution of the governing body of the community. Issuance of permit revocation notice shall be made to the landowner, the occupant of the land, and to the general public under the provisions for public notice as set forth in section 16-328 (Amendments).

(9)    Any deviation from the approved site plan shall be deemed a violation of the special use permit approval and the uses allowed shall automatically be revoked. The subsequent use of the land shall be as it was prior to the special permit approval. In event of any violation, all permitted special uses shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall be illegal, nonconforming uses and shall be summarily removed and abated.

(10)    If the temporary structure is to be returned to its previously occupied site, the process for issuing a special use permit must be repeated in full. Any subsequent permit shall be valid for 180 days only.

(Formerly 16-325. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-327. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Tonganoxie or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Formerly 16-326. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-328. AMENDMENTS.

The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Tonganoxie. At least 20 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the FEMA Region VII office. The regulations of this article are in compliance with the NFIP regulations. (Formerly 16-327. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)


16-329. DEFINITIONS.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.

100-Year Flood. See Base flood.

Accessory structure means the same as Appurtenant structure.

Actuarial Rates. See Risk premium rates.

Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator.

Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Agricultural commodities means agricultural products and livestock.

Agricultural structure means any structure used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities.

Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.

Appurtenant structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.

Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

Base flood means the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

Basement means any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

Building. See Structure.

Chief Engineer means the Chief Engineer of the Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture.

Chief executive officer or chief elected official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.

Community means any state, area, or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.

Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.

Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

Eligible community or participating community means a community for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."

Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (a) the overflow of inland waters; (b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and (c) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (a) of this definition.

Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) means an official map of a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.

Flood elevation determination means a determination by the Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.

Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.

Flood fringe means the area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.

Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A Zones.

Flood hazard map means the document adopted by the governing body showing the limits of: (a) the floodplain; (b) the floodway; (c) streets; (d) stream channel; and (e) other geographic features.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.

Flood proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents.

Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see Flooding).

Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.

Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps.

Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.

Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

Historic structure means any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable flood proofing design requirements of this article.

Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."

Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

Map means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Market value or fair market value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.

Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.

New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.

NFIP means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

Participating community, also known as an "eligible community," means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance.

Permit means a signed document from a designated community official authorizing development in a floodplain, including all necessary supporting documentation such as: (a) the site plan; (b) an elevation certificate; and (c) any other necessary or applicable approvals or authorizations from local, state or federal authorities.

Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including federal, state, and local governments and agencies.

Principally above ground means that at least 51% of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.

Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the SFHA and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.

Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently able to be towed by a light-duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with federal, state, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.

Risk premium rates means those rates established by the Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations, which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" includes provisions for operating costs and allowances.

Special Flood Hazard Area. See Area of special flood hazard.

Special hazard area means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A, AO, AE, or AH.

Start of construction includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

State Coordinating Agency means the Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture, or other office designated by the Governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state.

Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure," for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation, or a travel trailer, without wheels on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.

Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (a) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (b) any alteration of a "historic structure"; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a "historic structure."

Temporary structure means a structure permitted in a district for a period not to exceed 180 days and is required to be removed upon the expiration of the permit period. Temporary structures may include recreational vehicles, temporary construction offices, or temporary business facilities used until permanent facilities can be constructed, but at no time shall it include manufactured homes used as residences.

Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community.

Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain riverine areas.

(Formerly 16-328. Ord. 1036; Ord. 1282)

 


APPENDIX A - CHARTER ORDINANCES

NOTE: The charter ordinances included herein are for information only. Each of them contains the substance as adopted by the governing body but enacting clauses, publication clauses and signatures have been omitted to conserve space. Complete copies of each charter ordinance as adopted are on file in the office of the city clerk and with the Kansas secretary of state. Date of passage by the governing body of each charter ordinance is shown in parentheses at the end of the text.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 1 

CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM SECTION 15-731 OF THE GENERAL STATUTES SUPPLEMENT OF 1961, RELATING TO THE ISSUANCE OF BONDS TO PAY THE COSTS OF CERTAIN STREET AND HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENTS BY CITIES OF THE THIRD CLASS, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

(04-08-63)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO.2 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 7, 8 AND 44 CHAPTER 274, SESSIONS LAWS OF 1968, (NOW K.S.A. 25-2107, 25-2108 & 15-201) AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT CONCERNING ELECTIONS, DATES OF CITY ELECTIONS, TERMS OF OFFICE, QUALIFICATION, AND MATTERS RELATED THERETO.

This Charter Ordinance was passed on July 24, 1972, as shown by the Record of Proceedings of the Governing Body, page 296, by a vote of 5 for and 0 against, but not being less than two-thirds of the members-elect of the governing body, published in the Tonganoxie Mirror, the official city newspaper, on July27 and August 3, 1972, being once each week for two consecutive weeks. A petition of protest containing 160 signatures being filed demanding that it be submitted to a vote, the Ordinance was submitted to a vote on November 7, 1972 and failed to carry.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO.3 

CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 7, 8 AND 44 CHAPTER 274, SESSION LAWS OF 1968, (NOW K.S.A. 25-2107, 25-2108, & 15-201) AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT MATTER CONCERNING ELECTIONS, TERMS OF OFFICE, QUALIFICATION, AND MATTERS RELATED THERETO.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it Sections 7, 8 and 44 of Chapter 274, Session Laws of 1968, (now K.S.A. 25-2107, 25-2108, & 15-201) and provide substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter set forth in this ordinance.

Section 2. The general election of city officers shall be held on the first Tuesday in April of each odd numbers year and the terms of city officers shall be four years. There shall be no primary election for city officers.

Section 3. In April, 1975 and every four years thereafter in the City of Tonganoxie there shall be elected a mayor and two councilmen. In April, 1977 and every four years thereafter there shall be elected three councilmen. All such elected councilmen and mayors shall hold their offices for four years and until there successors are elected and qualified. Elected officials in office at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be continued in office for the unexpired term for which they were elected. Provided that all councilmen shall be elected in April, 1975, as follows:

The two councilmen receiving the highest vote total in April, 1975, shall hold their office for four years and the three councilmen receiving the next highest votes in April, 1975, shall hold their offices for two years.

Section 4. The mayor shall appoint by and with the consent of the council, a municipal judge of the municipal court, a municipal judge pro tern, a city marshal, chief of police, a city clerk, a city treasurer, a city attorney, and may appoint policemen and such other officers as they deem necessary. Officers so appointed and confirmed shall hold their offices for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The council shall by ordinance specify their duties and compensation and by ordinance may abolish any office created by them whenever they deem it expedient.

(01-13-75)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO.4 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF THE 1978 SUPPLEMENTS TO THE KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED 75-1117, 75-1120, 75-1121, 75-1122, SO AS TO NOT REQUIRE SAID CITY TO MAINTAIN FIXED ASSET RECORDS AND ACCOUNTINGS.

(04-14-80)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 5 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM K.S.A. 79-5011; PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT; AND AUTHORIZING THE LEVYING OF TAXES TO CREATE A SPECIAL FUND FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING EMPLOYEE BENEFIT COSTS.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 79-5011, and to provide substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter set forth in this charter ordinance. K.S.A. 79-5011 is a part of an enactment of the legislature applicable to the city but not applicable uniformly to all cities.

Section 2. The provisions of K.S.A. 79-5001 to 79-5016, inclusive, shall not apply to or limit the levy of taxes by the City of Tonganoxie for payment of: Employee Benefit Costs.

Section 3. The provisions of Article 50 of Chapter 79 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated shall not apply to any taxes levied by the City of Tonganoxie, levied under any tax levies required for the payment of employer contributions to any pension and retirement program, or to any other taxes authorized by state law to be levied in addition to or exempt from the aggregate levy limitation of the City of Tonganoxie.

Amounts produced from any levy specified or authorized in this Charter Ordinance, including any levy or purpose authorized to be levied in addition to or exempt from the aggregate levy limit of the city, shall not be used in computing any aggregate limitation under Article 50 of Chapter 79 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated.

Section 4. The City of Tonganoxie is hereby authorized to levy a tax for the purpose of paying the city’s share of employee benefits costs. As used in this charter ordinance, "employee benefits costs" shall include payments made by the city for employee benefits, exclusive of any salary, wages, or other direct payments to such employees, as may be prescribed by ordinance of the governing body.

(12-10-84)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 6 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 13, CHAPTER 90, SESSION LAWS OF 1967 (NOW K.S.A. 15-209) AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT CONCERNING QUALIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND MATTERS RELATED THERETO.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it Section 13, Chapter 90, Session laws of 1967 (now K.S.A. 15-209) and providing substitute and additional provisions therefore as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Qualifications of Officers; How Vacancies Filled. The officers elected or appointed pursuant to Charter Ordinance 3 and K.S.A. 15-204 shall be qualified electors of the City of Tonganoxie except the city may appoint non residents as city clerk, city attorney, municipal judge and as law enforcement officers when deemed necessary, including the appointment of nonresidents who also serve as city attorney, municipal judge or law enforcement officers of another municipality or public agency:

Provided, that nothing herein shall authorize appointment of non-residents of the State of Kansas. The city clerk shall be a qualified elector of Leavenworth County, Kansas. The city attorney shall be a qualified elector of Leavenworth County, Kansas or an adjoining county. The removal from such city or county of any officer elected or appointed under this act, who is required to be a qualified elector thereof, shall create a vacancy in such office. All vacancies in office, except in the office of mayor and councilpersons may be filled until the next regular time for appointment by appointment by the governing body. Every appointment to office, and the date thereof, shall be entered on the journal of proceedings of the council.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-4112 AND ANY AMENDMENTS THERETO, SHALL NOT APPLY TO THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS AND EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS THEREFROM, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT; PROVIDING FOR THE AUTHORIZATION FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF COURT COSTS IN CASES HEARD IN THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS.

(Repealed by C.O. No. 10)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7(A) 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 15-104 AS IT RELATES TO TAX LEVIES FOR TOWNSHIPS AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the constitution of the State of Kansas; hereby elects to exempt itself from, and makes inapplicable to itself, the provisions of K.S.A. 15-104 as it relates to tax levies for townships and to provide substitute provisions as hereinafter set forth by this ordinance. Referenced provisions are enactments, which are applicable to the City of Tonganoxie but are not uniformly applicable to all cities.

Section 2. The City of Tonganoxie, its citizens and the property lying within its boundaries, is hereby exempt and shall not be subject to any tax levy for any township.

Section 3. The City of Tonganoxie shall otherwise remain a part of the corporate limits of Tonganoxie Township.

(06-22-92)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO.8 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE PLEDGING THE GENERAL PURPOSE FOR THE FUTURE USE OF THE REVENUES TO BE RECEIVED BY THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE FROM THE ONE PERCENT COUNTY WIDE SALES TAX IF THE SAME IS APPROVED BY THE VOTERS.

(Repealed by C.O. No. 11)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 9 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 79-1953, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT AND AUTHORIZING AND LIMITING THE LEVY IN ANY ONE YEAR ON EACH DOLLAR OF ASSESSED TANGIBLE VALUATION FOR THE LIBRARY FUND.

Section 1. In accordance with the authority granted to cities by K.S.A. 795036(a), as amended and Article 12, Section 5 of the constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and to make applicable to the City of Tonganoxie, the provisions of K.S.A. 79-1953 as it concerns libraries as set forth in this ordinance. The provisions of the above-mentioned statute apply to the City of Tonganoxie, but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

Section 2. The governing body of the City of Tonganoxie is hereby authorized and empowered to levy taxes in each year for the general fund and other city purposes. Said purposes shall include all of the operations of the city library except as limited by the provisions of Section 3 of this ordinance. The governing body may levy an amount necessary to meet the requirements of its adopted budget.

Section 3. The rate of levy in any one year for library purposes shall not exceed 5.95 mills.

(10-13-97)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 10 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-4112 AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT RELATING TO THE ASSESSMENT PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT RELATING TO THE ASSESSMENT OF COSTS IN THE MUNICIPAL COURT AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7 OF THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-4112 and to provide for substitute and additional provisions.

Section 2. In lieu of the provisions of K.S.A. 12-4112 the governing body of the City of Tonganoxie hereby adopts the following provisions.

"Every person entering a plea of guilty or no contest or found guilty of a violation of the ordinances of the City of Tonganoxie shall be assessed costs for the administration of justice in the municipal court of the City of Tonganoxie in an amount as set by Ordinance."

Section 3. Charter Ordinance No. 7 is hereby repealed.

(06-22-98)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 11 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE PLEDGING THE GENERAL PURPOSE FOR THE FUTURE USE OF THE REVENUES TO BE RECEIVED BY THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE FROM THE ONE PERCENT COUNTYWIDE SALES TAX AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 8.

Section 1. That the general purposes for the future use of the city’s share of the 10 year county-wide sales tax is pledged as follows:

(a)    The city shall, from its share of the one percent citywide sales tax, annually remit to Leavenworth County Treasurer an amount prorated in conjunction with the incorporated cities of Leavenworth County an amount sufficient to pay the principal and interest on general obligation bonds issued by the county to finance the judicial center, said bond to be amortize over 10 years an not to exceed $21,700,000 in principal amount.

(b)    The city shall use a part of the sales tax revenue to finance capital improvement projects, facilities and the purchases of equipment.

(07-26-99)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 12 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE AMENDING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 6 OF THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE RELATED TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 13, CHAPTER 90, SESSION LAWS OF 1967 (NOW K.S.A. 15-209).

Section 1. That line 6 of Section 2 of Charter Ordinance No. 6 is hereby amended by inserting the following:

The city clerk shall be a qualified elector of Leavenworth County or an adjoining county."

This charter ordinance was passed on January 8, 2001, by a vote of 5 for and 0 against, but not being less than two-thirds of the members-elect of the governing body, published in the Tonganoxie Mirror, the official city newspaper, on January 10 and January 17, 2001, being once each week for two consecutive weeks. A petition of protest containing more than the 42 signatures being filed demanding that it be submitted to a vote, the ordinance was submitted to a vote on May 22, 2001 and failed to carry.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 13 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM ALL THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1696, RELATING TO DEFINITIONS PERTAINING TO TRANSIENT GUEST TAX; FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1697 (a), RELATING TO THE LEVY OF TRANSIENT GUEST TAX; FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1698 (e), RELATING TO CITY TRANSIENT GUEST TAX FUND; FROM ALL THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-16,101, RELATING TO A COMMITTEE TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROGRAMS AND EXPENDITURES; AND FROM ALL THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-16,113, RELATING TO AN ANNUAL ACCOUNTING OF EXPENDITURES; PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, a city of the third class, by the power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt, and does exempt itself from all the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1696, which reads as follows:

As used in this act, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein:

(a)    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other association of persons;

(b)    Hotel, motel or tourist court means any structure or building which contains rooms furnished for the purposes of providing lodging, which may or may not also provide meals, entertainment or various other personal services to transient guests, and which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are sought for pay or compensation by transient or permanent guests and having more than two bedrooms furnished for the accommodation of such guests;

(c)    Transient guest means a person who occupies a room in a hotel, motel or tourist court for not more than 28 consecutive days;

(d)    Business means any person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting living quarters, sleeping accommodations, rooms or a part thereof in connection with any motel, hotel or tourist court;

(e)    Convention and tourism promotion means: (1) Activities to attract visitors into the community through marketing efforts, including advertising, directed to at least one of the five basic convention and tourism market segments consisting of group tours, pleasure travelers, association meetings and conventions, trade shows and corporate meetings and travel; and (2) support of those activities and organizations which encourage increased lodging facility occupancy;

(f)    Accommodations broker means any business which maintains an inventory of two of more rooms in one or more locations which are offered for pay to a person or persons for not more than 28 consecutive days.

Section 2. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby enacts the following substitute and additional provisions for those provisions exempted from in Section 1 above:

As used in this act, the following words and phrases have the meaning respectively ascribed to them herein:

(a)    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other association of persons;

(b)    Hotel, motel, or tourist court means any structure or building which contains rooms furnished for the purposes of providing lodging, which may or may not also provide meals, entertainment or various other personal services to transient guests, and which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are sought for pay or compensation by transient or permanent guests and having more than two bedrooms furnished for the accommodation of such guests;

(c)    Transient guest means a person who occupies a room in a hotel, motel or tourist court for not more than 28 consecutive days;

(d)    Business means any person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting living quarters, sleeping accommodations, rooms or a part thereof in connection with any motel, hotel or tourist court;

(e)    Economic development promotion means (1) activities to attract the location or relocation of business into the community through marketing efforts, including advertising; (2) activities designed to encourage retention and expansion of existing businesses in the community; and (3) convention and tourism promotion activities designed to attract visitors into the community through marketing efforts, including advertising, directed to at least one of the five basic convention and tourism market segments consisting of group tours, pleasure travelers, association meetings and conventions, trade shows and corporate meetings and travel and support of those activities and organizations which encourage increased lodging facility occupancy."

Section 3. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt, and does exempt itself from, and makes inapplicable to it, the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1697 (a), which reads as follows:

(a)    In order to provide revenues to promote tourism and conventions, the governing body of any county or the governing body of any city is hereby authorized to levy a transient guest tax at not to exceed the rate of 2% upon the gross receipts derived from or paid by transient guests for sleeping accommodations, exclusive of charges for incidental services or facilities, in any hotel, motel or tourist court.

The percentage of such tax shall be determined by the board of county commissioners or by the city governing body and shall be specified in the resolution or ordinance authorizing the same.’

Section 4. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby enacts the following substitute and additional provisions for those provisions exempted from in Section 3 above:

(a)    In order to provide revenues to promote economic development, tourism and conventions, the governing body is hereby authorized to levy a transient guest tax at not to exceed the rate of four percent upon the gross receipts derived from or paid by transient guests for sleeping accommodations, exclusive of charges for incidental services or facilities, in any hotel, motel, or tourist court.

Section 5. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1698 (e), which reads as follows:

(e)    Except as otherwise provided in K.S.A. 12-1774, and amendments thereto, all such moneys received by the county or city treasurer from disbursements from the county or city transient guest tax fund shall be credited to the tourism and convention promotion fund of such county or city and shall only be expended for convention and tourism promotion.

Section 6. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby enacts the following substitute and additional provisions for those provisions exempted from in Section 5, above:

(e)    All such monies received by the city treasurer from disbursements from the city transient guest tax shall be credited to the Economic Development/Tourism Promotion Fund and shall only be expended for the following purposes:

1. Economic development promotion, including convention and tourism promotion, pursuant to the terms of an agreement or agreements approved by the Governing Body for economic development promotion services.

2. Revenues may be utilized for the operation, maintenance, expansion and development of city facilities connected with convention or tourism.

3. Revenue may be utilized to make payments for principal or interest for bonds issued to construct convention or community centers, parks, or recreation facilities that may be used in connection with conventions or tourism. Further, economic development purposes that may include purchase of property or infrastructure improvements for sale to business of improved property.

Revenues may be utilized to defray the cost of providing municipal services to convention and tourism functions, such as but not limited to police, fire or streets.

Section 7. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself and does exempt itself from, and makes inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-16,101, which reads as follows:

The governing body of any city or county which levies a transient guest tax pursuant to this act shall establish a convention and tourism committee to make recommendations concerning the programs and expenditures for promotion of conventions and tourism. Such board of county commissioners or city governing body shall appoint 10 members to such committee, a majority of which shall be representatives of businesses coming within the terms of this act. In appointing such members, the board of county commissioners or city governing body shall attempt to create a representative balance of large and small businesses and businesses from the various geographic areas of such county. The board of county commissioners or city governing body shall provide, by resolution, for the appointments and terms of service not to exceed four years for such members. The board of county commissioners or city governing body adopting such tax shall have the authority to contract for convention and tourism programs to be implemented.

Section 8. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby enacts the following substitute and additional provisions for those provisions exempted from in Section 7 above:

(a)    The governing body hereby establishes an Economic Development/Tourism Council to make recommendations concerning the programs and expenditures for economic development promotion. Such council shall be composed of the Mayor of Tonganoxie, or a duly authorized representative; the Tonganoxie City Administrator, or duly authorized representative; the President of the Tonganoxie Area Chamber of Commerce, who shall act as its secretary; and up to three additional members selected by the three named members and specifically approved by the governing body.

Section 9. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-16,113, which reads as follows:

Any entity to which funds which in the aggregate in any year exceed $25,000, are provided for convention and tourism promotion purposes from moneys received pursuant to K.S.A. 12-1693 or K.S.A. 12-1697, and amendments thereto, or pursuant to any charter ordinance or resolution which imposes a transient guest tax, shall provide for the separate accounting of the receipt and disbursement of such funds and shall provide to the city or county, as the case requires, an accounting of the receipt and expenditures of such funds in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year of such entity. In the event no such accounting is provided within such time period, funds shall not be provided to the entity unless and until the accounting is provided.

Section 10. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby enacts the following substitute and additional provisions for those provisions exempted from in Section 9, above:

The Tonganoxie Area Chamber of Commerce shall provide the separate accounting of the receipt and disbursement of all funds from the Economic Development/Tourism Promotion Fund, and shall provide to the city an accounting of the receipt and expenditures of such funds in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles unless exempted by statute within 120 days after the end of its fiscal year. In the event no such accounting is provided within such time period, funds shall not be provided until the accounting is provided.

(01-22-01)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 14 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-194; RELATING TO PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN EXCISE TAXES; AND PROVIDING A SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISION AUTHORIZING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS TO LEVY AN EXCISE TAX ON THE ACT OF PLATTING REAL PROPERTY AND BUILDING IN THE CITY, TO GRANT CREDITS AGAINST EXCISE TAXES PAID ON THE ACT OF PLATTING REAL PROPERTY OR BUILDING PREVIOUSLY MADE FOR CERTAIN TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS, TO GRANT EXEMPTIONS, AND TO PLEDGE THE REVENUES THEREFROM FOR TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS TO THE CITY.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-194, which provisions read as follows:

No city or county shall levy or impose an excise tax or a tax in the nature of an excise, other than a retailers’ sales tax and a compensating use tax, upon the sale or transfer of personal or real property, or the use thereof, or the rendering of a service, but the provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting any city from (a) contracting with a utility for a faxed charge based upon a percentage of gross receipts derived from the service permitted by grant, right, privilege or franchise to such utility; (b) imposing an occupational tax or license fee for the privilege of engaging in any business, trade, occupation or profession, or rendering or furnishing any service, but the determination of any such license fee shall not be based upon any amount the licensee has received from sale or transfer of personal or real property, or for the rendering or furnishing of a service, or on the income of the licensee; or (c) levying any occupation tax or license fee imposed by such city prior to the effective date of this act. No license fee described in subsection (b) of this section shall be imposed upon any utility contracting with and subject to a charge, described in subsection (a) of this section, by such city.

Such referenced provisions are either enactments or a part thereof, which are applicable to this city but are not uniformly applicable to all cities.

Section 2. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby enacts the following substitute and additional provisions in lieu of those provisions from which it is exempted pursuant to Section 1 above.

The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, shall not levy or impose an excise tax or a tax in the nature of an excise, other than a retailers’ sales tax and a compensating use tax, upon the sale or transfer of personal or real property, or the use thereof, or the rendering of a service, but the provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting the city from (a) contracting with a utility for a faxed charge based upon a percentage of gross receipts derived from the service permitted by grant, right, privilege or franchise to such utility; (b) imposing an occupational tax or license fee for the privilege of engaging in any business, trade, occupation or profession, or rendering or furnishing any service, but the determination of any such license fee shall not be based upon any amount the licensee has received from sale or transfer of personal or real property, or for the rendering or furnishing of a service, or on the income of the licensee; or (c) levying any occupation tax or license fee imposed by such city prior to the effective date of this ordinance; or (d) levying an excise tax on the act of platting real property in the city, granting credits against excise taxes paid on the act of platting real property in the city for contributions previously made for transportation improvements, granting exemptions, and pledging revenues therefrom for transportation improvements in the city.

(03-12-01)

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 15 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 41-712 PROHIBITING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR SALE ON SUNDAY, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT ALLOWING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR SALES ON SUNDAY AND CERTAIN HOLIDAYS.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 41-712, which applies to this city but is part of the enactment commonly known as the Kansas Liquor Control Act, as enacted in Chapter 242 of the Session Laws of 1949, which applies to this city but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

Section 2. The following is hereby substituted for the provisions of K.S.A. 41-712, as amended:

Sale at retail: forbidden on certain days: hours of sale, exception. No person shall sell at retail any alcoholic liquor: (1) on Easter Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day; or (2) before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday; or (3) before 11:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on Sunday.

(9-8-2003)

*This charter ordinance was passed on September 8, 2003, by a vote of 5 for and 0 against, but not being less than 2/3 of the members elect of the governing body, published in the Tonganoxie Mirror, the official city newspaper, on September 17, 2003, and September 24, 2003, being once each week for two consecutive weeks. A Petition of Protest was received containing sufficient signatures to protest the ordinance and demanding that such ordinance be submitted to a vote of the electors of Tonganoxie City. At their December 8, 2003, meeting, the city council unanimously agreed that it was a consensus of the council to not proceed with the charter ordinance by having a special election and allow the ordinance to die as allowed by law.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 16 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE AMENDING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 3 OF THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE RELATED TO APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS BY ELIMINATING THE APPOINTMENT OF POLICE OFFICER POSITIONS BY THE MAYOR AND PROVIDING SAID POSITIONS AS EMPLOYEES.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it such part of K.S.A. 15-204 which directs the appointment of law enforcement officers by the Mayor with the consent of the council, which applies to this city as enacted in 1871, which enactment applies to this city but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS:

Section 1. That Section 4 of Charter Ordinance No. 3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

SECTION 4: The Mayor, by and with the consent of the council, may appoint the following city officers, to-wit: a police chief, a municipal judge of the municipal court, city clerk, a treasurer, a city attorney, and other such officers as deemed necessary by the governing body. Officers so appointed and confirmed shall hold their offices for a term of one (1) year and until their successors are appointed and qualified.

SECTION 4a: Full time, part time and reserve Police Officers shall hereinafter be hired by the governing body upon the recommendation of the Police Chief and the City Administrator.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 17 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 15-106, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

Section 1: Exemption. The City of Tonganoxie, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to do and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 15-106 which applies to this city but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

Section 2: Regular and Special Meeting. Regular meetings of the council shall be held at such times as shall be prescribed by Ordinance, but not less than once each month. Special meetings shall be called by the Mayor or acting Mayor, on written request of any three members of the council, specifying the object and purpose of such meeting which shall be read at the meeting and recorded in the journal of minutes of the meetings of the council. In all cases it shall require four of the five council members elect to constitute a quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as the City Council, by Ordinance, may have previously prescribed.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 18 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1222 RELATIVE TO RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS OF LIBRARY BOARD MEMBERS AND PROVIDING A SUBSTITUTE PROVISION ON THE SUBJECT OF RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS FOR LIBRARY BOARD MEMBERS.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, under the authority of Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, elects to and does hereby exempt itself from, and make inapplicable to it, the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1222 relative to residence requirements for library board members, being part of an enactment applicable to such city, but not applicable uniformly to all cities, and further provides for a substitute provision on the subject of residence requirements for library board members for the Tonganoxie Public Library.

Section 2. At least five (5) members appointed to the Library Board shall be residents of the city of Tonganoxie, Kansas and the balance of the members shall be a resident of the USD #464 school territory.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 19 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A 66-1801 ET SEQ., THE KANSAS UNDERGROUND UTILITY DAMAGE PROTECTION ACT, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISION ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

Section 1. The City of Tonganoxie, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 66-1801 through K.S.A. 66-1816, the enactment known as the Kansas Underground Utility Damage Protection Act, which enactment applies to this city, but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

Section 2. All underground water and wastewater facilities installed after July 1, 2008 shall be locatable.

Section 3. Any excavator may, prior to excavating, call the city and request that the city locate any underground wastewater and water facilities.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 20 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-16,128, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

Section 1. Exemption: The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-16,128, which applies to this city but is part of the enactment concerning certain municipalities, as enacted in Chapter 163 of the Session Laws of 2008, which enactment applies to this city but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 21 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISION OF K.S.A. 15-204 and amending Charter Ordinance number 3, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

Section 1. Exemption. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it a provision of K.S.A. 15-204 regarding the appointment of a marshal-chief of police and clerk, which applies to this city but is part of the enactment regarding the appointment of officers by the Mayor, as enacted in Chapter 60 of the Session Laws of 1879, which enactment applies to this city but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

Section 2. Appointment of city officers; duties and compensation. The mayor, with the consent of the council, may appoint at the first regular meeting of the governing body in May of each year, the following city officers: A municipal judge of the municipal court, a municipal judge pro tem, a city attorney, a treasurer and such other officers as deemed necessary. Such officers shall hold an initial term of office of not to exceed one year and until their successors have been appointed and qualified. Any officers who are reappointed shall hold their offices for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The duties and pay of the various officers shall be regulated by ordinance. Any officer may be removed by a majority vote of the total membership elected or appointed to the council and may be suspended at any time by the mayor.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO.22 

EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, BY CHARTER ORDINANCE, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-621, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

Section 1. Exemption. The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Chapter 12, Article 6, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-621, which applies to this city but does not apply uniformly to all cities.

Section 2. Application. The limitation imposed upon cities by K.S.A. 12-621, which restricts issuance of general obligation bond for sewage disposal facilities to an amount not to exceed three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), shall not apply to the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 23 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS (the "City") FROM CERTAIN TERMS AND PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-201 AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ELECTION OF THE POSITION OF CITY TREASURER.

Section 1. Exemption

The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to make inapplicable to it and exempts itself from the provision of K.S.A. 14-201 requiring the position of city treasurer be elected.

In exempting itself, the City finds that such provision is applicable to cities of the second class, but not uniformly applicable to all cities. Therefore, the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas hereby adopts substitute and additional provisions on the same subject as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Appointive City Treasurer Position Established

The city treasurer shall be an appointive officer of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas pursuant to the provisions contained in K.S.A. 14-201.

Section 3. Existing City Treasurer Position

The existing City Treasurer of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas shall hold office until her successor has been appointed and qualified as provided for above.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 24 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS (the "City") FROM CERTAIN TERMS AND PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-560.

Section 1. Exemption

The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to make inapplicable to it and exempts itself from the provision of K.S.A. 14-560 requiring the City to hold an election to issue bonds for longer than 10 years for street resurfacing or repair.

In exempting itself, the City finds that such provision is applicable to cities of the second class, but not uniformly applicable to all cities. Therefore, the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas hereby adopts substitute and additional provisions on the same subject as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Bond Debt longer than 10 years can be issued on street resurfacing or repair

The City Council shall have the authority to issue bond debt for longer than 10 years without a vote of the electorate pursuant to K.S.A. 14-560.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 25 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS (the "City") FROM CERTAIN TERMS AND PROVISIONS OF K.SA. 14-101c and K.S.A. 14-103.

Section 1. Exemption

The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to make inapplicable to it and exempts itself from the provision of K.S.A. 14-101c and K.S.A. 14-103 requiring the City to divide into wards.

In exempting itself, the City finds that such provision is applicable to cities of the second class, but not uniformly applicable to all cities. Therefore, the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas hereby adopts substitute and additional provisions on the same subject as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. City Councilmembers Elected At-Large

The City shall consist of five (5) Councilmembers elected at-large by the City electorate pursuant to the provisions contained in K.S.A. 14-101.

CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 26 

A CHARTER ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE POSITION OF CITY MANAGER, EXEMPTING THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, FROM CERTAIN TERMS AND PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-201, K.S.A. 14-301 AND K.S.A. 14-307, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF CERTAIN OFFICERS OF THE CITY, INCLUDING THE POSITION OF CITY MANAGER.

Section 1. Exemption

The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5(c)(1) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to make inapplicable to it and exempts itself from the provisions of K.S.A. 14-201, K.S.A. 14-301 and K.S.A. 14-307 relating to the powers and duties of certain officers of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

In exempting itself, the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, finds that such provision is applicable to cities of the second class, but not uniformly applicable to all cities. Therefore, the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, hereby adopts substitute and additional provisions on the same subject as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Position of City Manager Established

There is hereby established the position of city manager of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas. The title of city administrator is hereby deemed equal and interchangeable with the title of city manager for the purpose of identifying the same office as defined in Section 5 herein.

Section 3. Appointments

Subject to the provisions of K.S.A. 2008 Supp. 12-16,128, and amendments thereto, the mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the council, a municipal judge of the municipal court and a city attorney. Any officers so appointed shall hold an initial term of office not to exceed one year. Any officers who are reappointed shall hold their offices for a term of one year. All reappointments shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the governing body in January of each year. Notwithstanding the above, any appointed officers may be suspended or removed at any time by the governing body. All such appointments shall be made upon merit and fitness alone. The council may by resolution specify the duties and compensation of the appointed office holders.

The mayor shall appoint, from time to time as needed, with confirmation by the council, the city manager and members to community boards and commissions as representatives of the municipality. The mayor shall also appoint, with confirmation by a majority of the council, members to the planning commission, recreation commission, and the library board for the duration of time that these boards exist.

Section 4. Mayor and City Council

The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council and shall have the casting vote when the council is equally divided. The mayor shall designate a mayor pro-tem from the members of the council in the event of the mayor’s absence from a public meeting. 

The mayor shall sign all ordinances and resolutions passed by the council. It is hereby a duty that the mayor may enter into and execute contracts and agreements directed by the council in lieu of the city manager.

The mayor shall be the primary representative of the governing body for public relations and public events. The mayor shall be the primary official representative of the governing body at meetings, conferences, and negotiations relating to policy matters, including policy matters of other governing jurisdictions, and may recommend council action relating thereto. The mayor may delegate municipal representation at various events to council members or persons on the city staff. The mayor may annually, or on a more frequent basis, communicate to the council and citizens such information as the mayor may possess with reference to the state of the city, and recommend such measures as he or she may deem necessary and expedient. The mayor may inform the council concerning questions of policy and make policy recommendations to the council. 

Members of the governing body shall be concerned with the advancement of the public interest in all matters and endeavor to faithfully represent the qualified electors in keeping with the trust and dignity of public office as a servant of the people of Tonganoxie. The governing body, by a majority, shall set policy for the municipality. 

Direction to any department may only be enacted by a majority decision of the governing body during a public meeting through the city manager and no single member of the governing body may unilaterally provide direction to departments. 

Section 5. City Manager

The city manager shall be responsible for the superintending administration of all of the affairs of the municipality and the proper discharge of the duties of the respective city administrative officers and employees. The city manager shall see that the laws and ordinances of the municipality are enforced. The city manager shall have the authority to appoint, promote, hire, transfer, assign, demote, discipline, lay off, suspend, discharge, and remove all heads of departments, all subordinate officers, and employees of the municipality, except the municipal judge of the municipal court and city attorney. Such officers of the municipality include the chief of police, fire chief, city clerk, city treasurer, and police officers. All such appointments shall be made upon merit and fitness alone. The city manager may delegate at his or her discretion such authority to appoint, promote, hire, transfer, assign and demote, discipline, lay off, suspend, discharge, or remove subordinate officers and employees of the municipality to department heads. In addition, the city manager may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or the conduct of any officer or employee to be examined. The city manager shall provide for the preparation and submission of the annual budget to the governing body and also keep the municipality fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the municipality. The city manager may make recommendations to the governing body on all matters concerning the welfare of the municipality and shall have a seat, but no vote, in all of the public meetings of the governing body. The city manager, or city manager’s designee, may enter into, execute, approve and accept, on behalf of the municipality, all contracts, agreements, and other legally binding documents as designated by the governing body.


APPENDIX B - FRANCHISES

ORDINANCE NO. 778

AN ORDINANCE, GRANTING TO THE KANSAS POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY, (ALSO KNOWN AS KPL GAS SERVICE), A KANSAS CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE, PRESCRIBING THE TERMS THEREOF AND RELATING THERETO, AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES OR PARTS OF ORDINANCES INCONSISTENT WITH OR IN CONFLICT WITH THE TERMS THEREOF.

Section 1. That in consideration of the benefits to be derived by the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, and its inhabitants, there is hereby granted to the Kansas Power and Light Company, a Kansas corporation, hereinafter sometimes designated as company, the company being a corporation operating a system for the transmission of electric current between two or more incorporated cities in the State of Kansas, and also operating a system for the transmission and distribution of natural gas in the State of Kansas, the right, privilege, and authority for a period of 20 years from the effective of this ordinance, to occupy and use the several streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, parks, parkings, and public places of the city, for the placing and maintaining of pipelines and other equipment necessary to carry on the business of selling and distributing natural gas for all purposes to the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, and its inhabitants, and through the city and beyond the limits thereof; to obtain the natural gas from any source available, and to do all things necessary or proper to carry on the business in the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

Section 2. As further consideration for the granting of this franchise, and in lieu of any city occupation, license, or revenue taxes, the company shall pay to the city during the term of this franchise five percent (5%)* of its gross revenue from the sale of natural gas within the corporate limits of the city, such payment to be made monthly for the preceding monthly period.

Section 3. That all mains, services, and pipes which shall be laid or installed under this grant shall be so located and laid as not to obstruct or interfere with any water pipes, drains, sewers, or other structures already installed.

Section 4. Company shall in the doing of the work in connection with its gas mains, pipes, and services, avoid, so far as may be practicable, interfering with the use of any street, alley, avenue, or other public thoroughfare, and where company disturbs the surface of a street, alley, avenue or other public thoroughfare, it shall at its own expense and in a manner satisfactory to the duly authorized representatives of the city replace such paving or surface in substantially as good condition as before the work was commenced.

Section 5. It is recognized that the natural gas to be delivered hereunder is to be supplied from a pipeline system transporting natural gas from distant sources of supply; and the company, by its acceptance of this franchise as hereinafter provided, does obligate itself to furnish natural gas in such quantity and for such length of time, limited by the terms hereof, as the sources and pipelines are reasonably capable of supplying.

Section 6. That company, its successors and assigns, in the construction, maintenance, and operation of its natural gas system, shall use all reasonable and proper precaution to avoid damage or injury to persons and property, and shall hold and save harmless the city from any and all damage, injury, and expense caused by the sole negligence of the company, its successors and assigns, or its or their agents or servants.

Section 7. That within 10 days from and after the passage and approval of this ordinance, company shall file the same with the State Corporation Commission for the commission’s approval.

Section 8. That within 60 days from and after the approval of this ordinance by the State Corporation Commission, company shall file with the city clerk its unconditional written acceptance of this ordinance. The ordinance shall become effective and be in force and shall be and become a binding contract between the parties hereto, their successors and assigns, from and after its passage, approval, and publication as required by law, and acceptance by the company.

Section 9. That this ordinance, when accepted as above provided shall constitute the entire agreement between the city and the company relating to this franchise and the same shall supersede and cancel any prior understandings, agreements, or representations regarding the subject matter hereof, or involved in negotiations pertaining thereto, whether oral or written.

Section 10. This franchise is granted pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-824.

(9-28-87)

*    Code reviser’s note: This amount was amended by Ord. 1397, § 2, which provides: “That the franchise fee to be collected by the Franchisee from its gross revenues collected within the City and paid to the City as consideration for its franchise agreement shall be increased from four percent (4%) to five percent (5%) from all sales of natural gas services within the corporate limits of said City, such payment to be made monthly for the preceding monthly period.”

ORDINANCE NO. 921 

AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM AND SERVICES IN THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, IN THE COUNTY OF LEAVENWORTH, IN THE STATE OF KANSAS, GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO DOUGLAS CABLE COMMUNICATION, L.P., TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM AND SERVICE WITHIN THE AREA OF THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS.

Section 1. Authority. This ordinance is passed and approved by the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, hereinafter city, and enacted pursuant to the laws of the State of Kansas.

Section 2. Franchise Grant. Pursuant to a law, a non-exclusive franchise is granted to Douglas Cable Communication, L.P., hereinafter grantee, to construct, own, and operate a cable television system in the city. This non-exclusive franchise is granted for a period of 10 years, the period to end December 31, 2005. This franchise shall vest all the rights, privileges, and immunities of a cable system with Douglas Cable Communications, L.P.; however, this franchise shall be subject to and conditional upon all the terms, conditions, duties, and obligations established by the State of Kansas, the Federal Communications Commission and this ordinance.

Section 3. Rights Conferred by Franchise. (a) This ordinance confers upon the grantee the non-exclusive rights, authority, power and franchise to establish, construct, acquire, own, operate, and maintain a cable television system within the city and to render, furnish, and sell such service to the inhabitants of the city and its environs, and to use and occupy the streets and other public places within the designated limits of the city as the same now exists or may hereafter exist for its cable system, including the right to enter and construct, erect, locate, relocate, repair, rebuilding, in, on, under, along, over, and across the streets, alleys, avenues, parkways, lanes, bridges, and to make use of all land dedicated or acquired for public use and locations approved by the city engineer, and other public places in the city, for all towers, poles, cables, amplifiers, conduits, and other facilities owned, leased, or otherwise used by grantee for the furnishing of cable service within the city during the continuance of the franchise hereby granted, and in accordance with the laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the United States, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the State of Kansas, the County of Leavenworth, and the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

(b)    The poles for the grantee’s distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by anyone authorized to maintain poles in the streets or public ways when and where practicable. It is contemplated that reasonable standard pole attachment agreements will be entered into with non-municipal utilities as required by Douglas Cable Communications, L.P. Grantee is specifically granted the right to set its own poles in the event reasonable joint use is not possible or feasible. In any areas where electric or telephone utilities are underground and in any new subdivisions or new additions where the utilities are underground, the grantee will lay its cable underground.

(c)    The city reserves the right to reasonable regulation of the erection, construction, or installation of any facilities by the grantee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and places.

Section 4. Installation of Cable System. (a) The installation of the cable system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code, and all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

(b)    The grantee, at its expense, shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alley, sidewalks, and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of grantee.

(c)    The grantee shall at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocated or remove any property of the grantee located upon streets, rights of way and easements of the city, when required by the city because of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, municipal power lines, and tracks or any other type of structure or improvement by the city on city facilities.

(d)    Any pavements, sidewalks, or curbing taken upon by grantee, and any and all excavation made by grantee shall be done only after notice to city, and shall be done in such a manner so as to cause the lease reasonable inconvenience to the inhabitants to the city and to the general public. All repairs and replacements shall be made at the expense of the grantee, with all reasonable speed, leaving such disturbed areas in as good condition as existed prior to any such taking up or excavation.

(e)    The grantee shall make available cable service to all residents of the city on an equitable basis. The inability of grantee to provide service to a resident of the city shall be a material violation of this contract, unless grantee shall present to the city evidence that a cost benefit analysis has been performed and the extension of service is more costly by a factor of 1.25 times than the economic return on the extension.

Section 5. Relocation of Property. The grantee, at the request of any person holding a permit issued by the city, shall temporarily remove, raise, or lower its wires or cables to permit the moving of buildings or equipment. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee may require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 72 hours advance notice for such temporary wire or cable change. The charge by the grantee for such relocation shall not exceed grantee’s cost, and in any event shall be more than a reasonable sum for such services.

Section 6. Rates and Charges. The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonable necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its services under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Grantee shall abide by the rules and regulations promulgated by the FCC or other applicable federal authority. Grantee shall inform the city via certified mail of all rate and charge options made available by current or future federal legislation, regulations, or rulings.

Section 7. Indemnification. The grantee agrees to hold and save the city harmless from any and all liability that may arise out of the construction, maintenance, operations, or use of grantee’s system and works and the provision cable television services. The grantee agrees to provide and keep in force adequate liability insurance therefore, to the extent of bodily injury limits of $500,000/$500,000 and of property damage limit of $300,000/$300,000 naming the city as an additional insured, as its interest may appear. Grantee shall also provide and maintain insurance under a Broad Form Automobile Policy, with $100,000/$500,000 coverage limits and workmen’s compensation insurance with Kansas statutory limits. All insurance shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of Kansas, and shall be provided before the grantee, its successors and assigns thereof, shall commence the construction or other operations mentioned in this section. The city shall notify the grantee’s representative or employee in the city, if any, within 10 days after presentation of any demand or claim that may arise, whether by suit or otherwise, against the city. Grantee shall maintain on file with the city clerk at all times a current certificate of insurance. All insurance policies shall, if possible, provide for not less than 30 days notice of cancellation. The policies mentioned herein shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insureds.

Section 8. Payment to the City. In consideration of the rights, privileges, and franchise hereby granted, and as compensation to the city for the use of its public ways and places by the grantee, and to properly regulate the activities of grantee, the grantee shall, on or before the last day of January and the last day of July of each year to which this franchise is effective, pay to the city a sum equal to three percent of gross revenues, less uncollectible, for cable television service within the then existing corporate limits of the city for the preceding six months period ending on the last day of December and the last day of June respectively. The books of grantee shall be open to inspection by the city at all reasonable times to verify the accuracy of the computation and correctness of the report which shall accompany payment. Grantee shall keep books and records pursuant to established practices using generally accepted auditing procedures. This portion of the franchise may be renegotiated every two years. This fee shall be considered rent for the use of city owned right-of-ways, alleys, streets, easements, and property of any nature.

Section 9. Customer Service. Grantee shall maintain a "1-800" toll free telephone number whereby residents of the city may leave requests for service, repairs or adjustments, and leave other messages or complaints, with the grantee at any time during normal business hours, all without any toll charges to any resident or customer.

Any interruption of service based on facility or technical difficulties that last 24 hours or more must be reported to the city. A fact sheet containing the nature of the interruption, the estimated repair time, and plans for mitigating the interruption shall be faxed to the city at the close of business (4:00 p.m.) on the day of the interruption, if the interruption is anticipated to last 24 hours or longer.

Section 10. Service to Public Buildings, Provision of Facilities. Grantee shall provide cable services on the request of and at no cost to the city, when requested site includes any one of the following: a fire or police department, public school or administrative building, city hall or public facility, or educational institution.

Grantee shall at the request of the city provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, and financial support. These costs shall not be calculated as a portion of the franchise fee. Grantee shall negotiate a reasonable provision of the access channel capacity, facilities, and financial support upon a request, but in all cases the request shall be reasonably honored within four months of the making. Grantor or grantor’s designate shall provide all personnel costs associated with establishing local channel access for governmental, educational or public use.

Section 11. Franchise Termination. If the grantee should violate any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of this franchise, or if the grantee should fail to comply with any reasonable provision of any ordinance of the city regulation the use by the grantee of the streets, alleys, easements, or public ways of the city, or if the grantee shall become insolvent, unable, or unwilling to pay its debts, or grantee abandons the cable system, or after having constructed and placed all or any portion thereof in operation, for any reason fails to operate it for a period of 30 days, any such violation continues for 30 days after the grantee shall have been notified in writing by the city to desist from such violation so specified, or if the grantee is adjudged a bankrupt, or there is notice of a prospective foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system, or grantee is found to have practiced any fraud upon the city, then the city may terminate and cancel this franchise, and thereupon all of the rights and privileges granted by this franchise, shall be deemed to have been forfeited and annulled. In the event such forfeiture is imposed, the grantee shall be afforded a period of six months after a final order of forfeiture, and including any appeal thereof, within which to sell, transfer, convey or otherwise deemed to have been forfeited and annulled. In the event such forfeiture is imposed, the grantee shall be afforded a period of six months to sell, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of the above described cable television system to a qualified purchaser at fair market value. During the six month period, the grantee shall operate the cable television system pursuant to the terms and provisions of this franchise.

Section 12. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The city declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portions of this ordinance shall not abate, reduced or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required by grantee by the franchise granted hereunder.

Section 13. Plat of System. Grantee shall file with the city and obtain approval thereof, a proper map showing and describing the exact location or proposal location of all its facilities within the city streets, alleys, and public ways.

Section 14. Complete Agreement. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this ordinance, excluding however, all public utility franchises heretofore granted to public utilities, including utilities regulated by the Kansas Corporation Commission.

Section 15. Sale or Transfer of the Franchise. This franchise shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or otherwise disposed of by the grantee without the written permission of the city, who shall not unreasonably withhold such permission.

(8-28-95)

ORDINANCE NO. 922 

AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR AND APPROVING THE TRANSFER OF THE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE IN THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, (THE CITY) GRANTED PURSUANT TO ORDINANCE 921, DATED AUGUST 28, 1995, (THE FRANCHISE ORDINANCE); AMENDING THE FRANCHISE ORDINANCE IN CERTAIN RESPECTS; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION OF THE CAPTION; AND PROVIDING THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE TRANSFER.

Section 1. Transfer of Franchise Ordinance. Pursuant to the franchise ordinance, consent and approval is hereby granted by the city for the transfer and assignment of the franchise ordinance by Douglas to Galaxy. The mayor, council president, or presiding officer of the city, or any person designated by the mayor, council president, or presiding officer are hereby authorized to execute the Consent to Assignment attached hereto as Annex 1.

Section 2. Emergency Preparedness Interruption Agreement. Upon transfer of this franchise to Galaxy, Galaxy agrees to provide appropriate equipment to enable Leavenworth County Emergency Preparedness to interrupt regular programming in the event of an emergency. Such interruption shall be controlled by Leavenworth County EOC from the Leavenworth County Courthouse. All costs related to this equipment and remove activation shall be borne by Galaxy. Leavenworth County EOC shall be permitted to test such equipment as deemed necessary.

Section 3. Effective Date. The transfer of the franchise ordinance shall be effective upon the closing of the sale by Douglas to Galaxy of the cable television facilities serving the City of Tonganoxie. Galaxy shall notify the city of the transfer to the franchise ordinance within 30 days of such closing, and provide therewith a copy of the Assignment and Assumption of Franchise by which the franchise ordinance was transferred and assigned by Douglas to Galaxy.

Section 4. Inconsistency. In the event any of the terms and provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the city are inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this ordinance, the terms and provisions of this ordinance shall govern and control.

(8-28-95)

ORDINANCE NO. 1018 

AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR AND APPROVING THE TRANSFER OF THE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE IN THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, (THE CITY) GRANTED PURSUANT TO ORDINANCE NO. 921, DATED AUGUST 28, 1955, (THE FRANCHISE ORDINANCE); AMENDING THE FRANCHISE ORDINANCE IN CERTAIN RESPECTS; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION OF THE CAPTION; AND PROVIDING THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE TRANSFER.

Section 1. Transfer of Franchise Ordinance. Pursuant to the franchise ordinance, consent and approval is hereby granted by the city for the transfer and assignment of the franchise ordinance by Galaxy to WorldNet. The mayor, council president, or presiding officer of the city, or any person designated by the mayor, council president, or presiding officer are hereby authorized to execute the Consent to Assignment attached hereto as Annex 1.

Section 2. Ordinance Affirmed. All terms and provisions of the franchise ordinance shall continue in full force and effect. As set forth in the Consent to Assignment, the city consents to the grant by World Net of a security interest in the franchise ordinance to its lenders to secure indebtedness or other obligations incurred by World Net with respect to the cable television system to be operated by WorldNet pursuant to the franchise ordinance.

Section 3. Effective Date. The transfer of the franchise ordinance shall be effective upon the closing of the sale by Galaxy to WorldNet of the cable television facilities serving the City of Tonganoxie. WorldNet shall notify the city of the transfer of the franchise ordinance within 30 days of such closing, and provide therewith a copy of the Assignment and Assumption of Franchise by which the franchise ordinance was transferred and assigned by Galaxy to WorldNet.

Section 4. Inconsistency. In the event any of the terms and provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the city are inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this ordinance, the terms and provisions of this ordinance shall govern and control.

(2-28-00)

ORDINANCE NO. 1019 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, MAINTAIN AND EXTEND A TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS, PRESCRIBING THE TERMS OF SAID GRANT AND RELATING THERETO; AND REPEALING ORDINANCE 909 AND ALL OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS AND PARTS THEREOF INCONSISTENT OR IN CONFLICT WITH THE TERMS HEREOF.

Section 1. Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein:

(a)    Access Lines shall mean the following billed main lines and trunks, whether provided on a retail or wholesale basis: residential lines; business lines; ISDN lines (channels); PBX trunks; Centrex or Centrex-like stations; simulated exchange access lines provided by a central office based switching arrangement where all stations served by such simulated exchange access lines are used by a single customer of the provider of such arrangement; where stations are served by simulated exchange access lines provided by a central office based switching arrangement and the stations served are not used by a single customer of the provider of such arrangement, each station shall constitute an access line; and pay phones lines. Access Lines shall include wireless telecommunication services subject to 47 C.F.R. Part 24. Access Lines shall not include the following: wireless telecommunication services subject to 47 C.F.R. Part 22; unbundled loop facilities; and special access services.

(b)    City shall mean the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

(c)    Cable Service means the one way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for selection and use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service does not include point to point, point to multi-point, and switched video services that telephone company has historically offered or other similar services that telephone company may in the future offer.

(d)    Facilities shall mean telephone and telecommunication lines, conduits, fiber optic cables, wires, cables, pipes, poles, towers, vaults, and appliances, either under or above ground.

(e)    Public Improvement shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility, building, or capital improvement project, including without limitation streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewer, water drainage, rights-of-way improvement, and public projects.

(f)    Public Project shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the city or any governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of public facilities or improvements or any other purpose of a public nature.

(g)    Rights-of-Way shall mean present and future streets, alleys, rights-of-way, and public easements, including easements dedicated in plats of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

(h)    Street Rights-of-Way shall mean the entire width between property lines of land, property or an interest therein of every way publicly maintained where any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including street, avenue, boulevard, highway, expressway, alley or any other public way for vehicular travel by whatever name.

(i)    Telecommunications — The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

(j)    Telecommunications Service — The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

(k)    Telephone Company shall mean Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns.

Section 2. Grant. (a) There is hereby granted to telephone company the right, privilege and franchise to construct, maintain, extend and operate its facilities, in, through, and along the rights-of-way for the purpose of supplying telecommunications services to the city and the inhabitants thereof for the full term of this franchise; subject, however, to the terms and conditions herein set forth.

(b)    This franchise does not provide the telephone company the right to provide cable service to city and inhabitants thereof. For purposes of this ordinance, cable service is defined as the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service; but cable service does not include point to point, point to multi-point, and switched video services that telephone company has historically offered or other similar services that telephone company may in the future offer. Nothing in this franchise is intended to preclude the city from seeking, or authorize the city to seek, a franchise from any subsidiary, affiliate, or third party providing cable services. Telephone company and city agree that nothing in this franchise is intended to authorize the city to seek from telephone company nor to require telephone company to obtain a franchise to offer open video systems as that term is used in section 653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (codified at 47 U.S.C. 573). Telephone company and city further agree, however, that this ordinance does not authorize telephone company to offer open video systems without paying the fee on the gross revenues of the system operator for the provision of cable service in lieu of a franchise fee, pursuant to and in the manner described in 47 U.S.C. 573(c)(2)(b) and without complying with FCC regulations promulgated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 573.

(c)    Upon written request from telephone company, the city agrees to begin negotiations in good faith with telephone company within 30 days to provide telephone company a franchise to provide cable service to the city and inhabitants thereof on terms no more burdensome than the franchise(s) granted to other providers of cable service with the city.

Section 3. Use of Rights-of-Way. In the use of rights-of-way under this franchise, the telephone company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or thereafter adopted or promulgated by the city in the reasonable exercise of its police power. In addition, the telephone company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or thereafter adopted or promulgated by the city relating to permits and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, and other requirements on the use of rights-of-way and shall comply with the following:

(a)    The telephone company’s use of rights-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the city’s use of rights-of-way for any public purpose. The telephone company shall coordinate placement of its facilities in a manner which minimizes adverse impact on public improvements, as reasonably determined by the city. Where placement is not otherwise regulated, facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public improvement.

(b)    All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements, or improvements of any kind, injured or removed by the telephone company in its activities under this franchise, shall be fully repaired or restored promptly by the telephone company at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the city or owner thereof.

(c)    All facilities constructed, replaced, or relocated in the right-of-way after the date hereof shall be placed underground unless otherwise agreed to by the city. Where there are obstructions in the right-of-way such as trees, shrubs, other utilities, commercial signs, man-made structures, or other like obstructions which make the cost of such underground burial unreasonable, the telephone company may request waiver of this requirement, in which event the city will not unreasonably withhold consent. Any vaults, boxes, pedestals, and similar facilities placed above ground in street right-of-way shall be located behind the sidewalk where feasible.

(d)    The telephone company shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings depicting accurate horizontal and vertical location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or relocated in the street right-of-way after the date hereof and provide location information regarding specific future project locations to the city upon request. Where such information is available electronically, upon request from the city, telephone company agrees to provide such information in an electronic format. (City agrees to use information only to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to disclose such information to anyone other than city employees requiring such information to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects except as required by law. Telephone company and city agree that such information is confidential and proprietary and agree that such information shall remain the sole property of the telephone company and agree that pursuant to K.S.A. 45-221(12), (18), as amended, such information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45218, as amended. In the event that city is required by law to disclose such information, city shall provide the telephone company seven days advance notice of its intended disclosure of such information and shall take such action as may be reasonably required to cooperate with the telephone company to safeguard such information. The telephone company agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all penalties or costs, including attorney’s fees, arising from the actions of the telephone company, or of the city at the written request of the telephone company, in seeking to safeguard the confidentiality of information provided by telephone company to city under this section. In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the telephone company shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the city with such information.) Such facilities shall be horizontally and vertically located at least every 100 feet and at any other alignment change. All points of facilities shall be horizontally located from street centerline, or section or quarter section lines or corners. Vertical locations or all points of facilities shall consist of elevations in either city datum or United States Geological Survey datum.

(e)    All work performed in the traveled way or which in any way impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected. Such signing shall be in conformance with the latest edition of the Federal Highway Administration’s Standards and Guideline for Work Zone Traffic Control, unless otherwise agreed to by the city.

(f)    The telephone company shall notify the city not less than three working days in advance (such notice to be adequate for timely notice on the governing body agenda under city procedures) of any construction, reconstruction, repair, or relocation of facilities which would require any street closure which reduces traffic flow to less than two lanes of moving traffic. Except in the event of an emergency, as reasonably determined by the telephone company, no such closure shall take place without prior authorization from the city.

(g)    The telephone company shall cooperate promptly and fully with the city and take all reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete. information regarding the nature and horizontal and vertical location of its facilities located within rights-of-way when requested by the city or its authorized agents for a public project. Such location and identification shall be at the sole expense of the telephone company without expense to the city, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. The telephone company shall designate and maintain a local agent, familiar with the facilities, who is responsible for satisfying information needs of the city and other users of the rights-of-way.

(h)    The telephone company shall promptly remove, relocate, or adjust any facilities located in rights-of-way if reasonably necessary and directed by the city for any publicly-funded improvement or project. Such removal, relocation, or adjustment for a particular public project shall be performed by the telephone company once at its sole expense without expense to the city, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules and regulations of the city pertaining to such. If additional removal, relocation, or adjustment is the result of the inaccurate or mistaken information of the telephone company, the telephone company shall be responsible for such at its sole expense.

(i)    It shall be the responsibility of the telephone company to take adequate measures to protect and defend its facilities in the rights-of-way from harm or damage. If the telephone company fails to accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, it has no claim for costs or damages against the city and its authorized contractors unless such party is solely responsible for the harm or damage by its negligence or intentional conduct. Telephone company shall be responsible to the city and its agents, representatives, and authorized contractors for all damages including, but not limited to, delay damages, repair costs, down time, construction delays penalties or other expenses of any kind arising out of the failure of the telephone company to perform any of its obligations under this agreement unless the damaged party is solely responsible for the harm or damage by its negligence or intentionally caused harm. However, the city and its authorized contractors shall be responsible to take reasonable precautionary measures including calling for utility locations and observing marker posts when working near telephone company facilities.

(j)    The telephone company, on the request of any applicant, shall remove or raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lower of wires shall be paid by the party or parties requesting the same, and the telephone company may require such payment in advance. The telephone company shall be given not less than 15 days’ written notice from the applicant detailing the time and location of the moving operations, and not less than 24 hours’ advance notice from the applicant advising of the actual operation. The city shall not be liable for any such expense or notice requirement for the moving of houses or structures by the city or its contractors.

(k)    Permission is hereby granted to the telephone company to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the telephone company, all of the trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of any city officials to whom the duties have been or may be designated in accordance with the Tonganoxie City Code.

(l)    All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the rights- of-way shall be in accordance with applicable present and future federal, state, and city laws and regulations, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, and the Fiber Optic Cable Installation Standard of the Telecommunications Industry Committee, or such substantive equivalents as may hereafter be adopted or promulgated. It is understood that the standards established in this paragraph are minimum standards and the requirements established or referenced in this ordinance may be additional to or stricter than such minimum standards.

(m)    The city encourages the conservation of right-of-way by the sharing of space by all utilities. To the extent required by federal or state law, the telephone company shall permit any other franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties to use any and all facilities constructed or erected by the telephone company. All agreements and installations shall be subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the city. Telephone company agrees that it will not grant any entity rights to occupy the rights-of-way without providing notice to the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring telephone company to provide city notice when it provides telecommunications services to any entity.

(n)    Telephone company agrees to attend regularly scheduled meetings with city staff to coordinate future development plans, annexations, planned subdivision, future infrastructure needs, etc.

(o)    Upon notification, telephone company agrees to meet with developers of new subdivision is or subdivision expansions and city staff one time during the platting process to help facilitate a smooth construction process and to develop time tables and infrastructure needs assessments in advance of the start of construction.

Section 4. Indemnity and Hold Harmless. The telephone company shall hold and save the city, its officers, employees, agents, and authorized contractors, harmless from and against all claims, damages, expense, liability and costs including attorney fees, to the extent occasioned in any manner by the telephone company’s occupancy of rights-of-way, except to the extent otherwise specified in section 3(i). In the event a claim shall be made or an action shall be instituted against the city growing out of such occupancy of the right-of-way by facilities of the telephone company, then upon notice by the city to the telephone company, the telephone company will assume liability for the defense of such actions at the cost of the telephone company, subject to the option of the city to appear and defend, at its own cost, any such case.

Section 5. Payments and Charges. The payments herein provided shall be in lieu of all other license, taxes, charges, fees or impositions, except that the usual general property taxes and special ad valorem property taxes, and any charges for pavement cuts or other charges based on restoring premises to their same condition, or charges made for privileges which are not in any way connected with telephone business, as such, will be imposed on the telephone company, and are not covered by the payments therein. The telephone company shall have the privilege of crediting such sums payable hereunder with any unpaid balance due the telephone company for telephone service rendered or facilities furnished to the city; provided, that the balance due is liquidated and uncontested.

Section 6. Compensation to City. (a) In consideration of the franchise granted to telephone company by city, telephone company agrees to pay to city, a sum of $.81 per month for each access line served by telephone company for local service within the city limits of city. Compensation required by this franchise shall be paid on an annual basis and shall become due and payable 60 days after the end of the year with the first payment due August 30, 2001. The number of access lines as of June 30 shall be used to calculate payments to city.

(a)    If during the term of this ordinance any entity provides local service in city and provides compensation to city at an amount less than the telephone company is required to pay under section 6(a) per month for each access line within the city or provides no compensation to city for each such access line, this ordinance shall require compensation no greater than such amounts, if any, during such time remaining of the term of this ordinance that the lesser compensation, if any, is paid by such other entity.

(b)    The parties agree that if federal law or state law is enacted setting forth a maximum allowable level of compensation for franchise rights and if such maximum allowable level is less than the level of compensation required by this ordinance, this ordinance shall require telephone company to pay the reduced level required by law for the remainder of the term of this ordinance.

(c)    If during the term of this ordinance, telephone company believes that it is entitled to reduction in compensation pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) above, telephone company agrees to notify city in writing and agrees that it will continue to pay city the monthly rate set forth in section 6(a) for each access line served by telephone company for local service within the City of Tonganoxie until final agreement is reached with the city 60 days following such notice to city.

(d)    The telephone company shall correctly code all customers that are located within the corporate limits of the city, provided that the city shall give telephone company notice of boundary changes as provided below. Coding shall be updated to reflect annexation and other changes in city boundaries, and the associated changes in customers and access lines, within 30 days of the date city provides telephone company written notice of the annexation or other changes in boundaries and a listing of addresses affected by such changes. Such notice shall be sent to Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, 823 Quincy, Room 801, Topeka, KS 66612. In the event of annexations, telephone company may request additional time in writing to re-code customers, which request will not be unreasonably denied.

Section 7. Collection of Compensation. This franchise may be terminated by the telephone company if authority to collect the amounts of such payments, or part of such payments, from its customers within the city shall be removed, canceled or withdrawn by legislative, judicial or regulatory act. City and telephone company acknowledge and agree that telephone company has collected and paid city all amounts due and owing for telephone company’s use and occupancy of city rights-of-way at all times prior to July 1, 2000.

Section 8. Attachment to Poles. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require or permit any telephone, electric light or power wire attachments by either the city or the telephone company on the poles of the other. If such attachments are desired by the city or the telephone company, then a separate non-contingent agreement shall be prerequisite to such attachments.

Section 9. Termination of Franchise. In case of failure on the part of Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or if Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this ordinance, Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit all rights and privileges and granted by this ordinance and all rights hereunder shall cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that the forfeiture shall not take effect until the City of Tonganoxie shall carry out the following proceedings. Before the City of Tonganoxie proceeds to forfeit the franchise, as in this section prescribed, it shall first serve a written notice upon the manager of Southwestern Bell Telephone Company at its principal office in the City of Tonganoxie, and upon the trustee or trustees in any deed of trust securing bonds of Southwestern Bell Telephone of record in Leavenworth County, Kansas, by mailing notice to such trustee or trustees to the address designated in such trust deed, setting forth in detail in such notice the neglect or failure complained of, and Southwestern Bell Telephone shall have 90 days thereafter in which to comply with the conditions of this franchise. If at the end of such 90 day period, the City of Tonganoxie deems that the conditions of such franchise have not been complied with by Southwestern Bell Telephone and that such franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof, the City of Tonganoxie, in order to terminate such franchise, shall enact an ordinance setting out the grounds upon which the franchise or agreement is to be canceled or terminated. If within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance, Southwestern Bell Telephone shall not have instituted an action, either in the District Court of Leavenworth County, Kansas, or some other court of competent jurisdiction to determine whether or not Southwestern Bell Telephone has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof, such franchise shall be canceled and terminated at the end of such 30 day period. If within such 30 day period Southwestern Bell Telephone does institute action, as above provided, to determine whether or not Southwestern Bell Telephone has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof and prosecutes such action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event, in case the court finds that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the violation of its terms, this franchise shall terminate 30 days after such final judgment is rendered.

Provided, however, that the failure of Southwestern Bell Telephone to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance or the doing or causing to be done by Southwestern Bell Telephone of anything prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this ordinance shall not be a ground for the forfeiture thereof when such act or omission on the part of Southwestern Bell Telephone is due to any cause or delay beyond the control of Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, or to bona fide legal proceedings.

Section 10. Rights and Duties of Grantee Upon Expiration of Franchise. Upon expiration of this franchise, whether by lapse of time, by agreement between the telephone company and the City of Tonganoxie, or by forfeiture thereof, the telephone company shall have the right to remove from public property any and all of its lines, poles, towers and other appurtenances and equipment used in its business within a reasonable time after such expiration, but in such event, it shall be the duty of the telephone company, immediately upon such removal, to restore the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public ways and grounds from which the lines, poles, towers, other appurtenances and other equipment are removed to as good condition as the same were before the removal was effected.

Section 11. Term and Termination Date. This franchise ordinance shall be effective for a term of one year from the effective date. Thereafter, this franchise ordinance will renew for 10 renewable one year terms, unless either party notifies the other party of its intent to negotiate a new franchise ordinance, prior to 180 days before the termination of the then current term.

Section 12. Acceptance of Terms by the Telephone Company. The telephone company shall have 60 days after the final passage and approval of this ordinance to file with the city clerk of the City of Tonganoxie its acceptance in writing of the provisions, terms and conditions of this ordinance, which acceptance shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and when so accepted the ordinance and acceptance shall constitute a contract between the City of Tonganoxie and the telephone company subject to the provisions of the laws of the State of Kansas.

Section 13. Right to Assign. This franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the same may exist at the time when any assignment is made.

Section 14. Conditions of Franchise. This contract, franchise, grant and privilege is granted and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the orders, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies now or hereafter having jurisdiction, each and every provision hereof shall be subject to Acts of God, fires, strikes, riots, floods, war and other causes beyond the telephone company’s control. This franchise shall not be exclusive.

Section 15. Invalidity of Ordinance. If any clause, sentence, or section of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid, it shall not affect the remaining provisions of this ordinance.

Section 16. Venue. This agreement shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, and all obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in Leavenworth County, Kansas. In the event that any legal proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this agreement, the same shall be brought in Leavenworth County, Kansas, limited to state court action. Nothing in Section 16 shall be construed to limit or restrict telephone company’s right to initiate action in federal court (Kansas District) or to remove a state court action to federal court (Kansas District).

Section 17. Notice. For the purpose of this agreement, notice to the city will be to: City Administrator, City of Tonganoxie, P.O. Box 326, Tonganoxie, KS 66086.

Notice to the telephone company will be to: Southwestern Bell Telephone, Area Manager-Municipal Affairs, 220 E. 6th, Room 505, Topeka, KS 66603.

Notice will be effective upon delivery by hand delivery or by first class mail to the above address until the city or telephone company notifies the other, in writing, of a change in address.

(3-27-00)

ORDINANCE NO. 1086 

AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR AND APPROVING THE TRANSFER OF THE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE IN THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE (THE CITY) GRANTED PURSUANT TO ORDINANCE 921 DATED AUGUST 28, 1995, (THE FRANCHISE ORDINANCE); AMENDING THE FRANCHISE ORDINANCE IN CERTAIN RESPECTS; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION OF THE CAPTION; AND PROVIDING THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE TRANSFER.

Section 1. Transfer of Franchise Ordinance. Pursuant to the franchise ordinance, consent and approval is hereby granted by the city for the transfer and assignment of the franchise ordinance by World Net to World Co. The mayor, or any person designated by the mayor, is hereby authorized to execute Consent to Assignment.

Section 2. Ordinance Affirmed. All terms and provisions of the franchise ordinance shall continue in full force and effect. As set forth in the Consent to Assignment, the city consents to the grant by World Co. of a security interest in the franchise ordinance to its lenders to secure indebtedness or other obligations incurred by World Co. with respect to the cable television system to be operated by World Co. pursuant to the franchise ordinance.

Section 3. Effective Date. The transfer of the franchise ordinance shall be effective upon the closing of the sale by WorldNet to World Co. of the cable television facilities serving the City of Tonganoxie. World Co. shall notify the city of the transfer to the franchise ordinance within 30 days of such closing, and provide therewith a copy of the Assignment and Assumption of Franchise by which the franchise ordinance was transferred and assigned by WorldNet to World Co.

Section 4. Inconsistency. In the event any of the terms and provisions of any other ordinance or regulations to the city are inconsistent with the terms and the provisions of this ordinance, the terms and provisions of this ordinance shall govern and control.

(6-25-01)

ORDINANCE NO. 1153 

AN ORDINANCE, GRANTING TO WESTAR ENERGY, INC., A KANSAS CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, AN ELECTRIC FRANCHISE, PRESCRIBING THE TERMS THEREOF AND RELATING THERETO, AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES OR PARTS OF ORDINANCES INCONSISTENT WITH OR IN CONFLICT WITH THE TERMS HEREOF.

Section 1. That in consideration of the benefits to be derived by the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, and its inhabitants, there is hereby granted to Westar Energy, Inc., a Kansas corporation, hereinafter sometimes designated as "company," the company being a corporation operating a system for the transmission of electric current between two or more incorporated cities in the State of Kansas, into and through which it has built transmission lines, the right, privilege, and authority for a period of 20 years from the effective date of this ordinance, to occupy and use the several streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, parks, parkings, and public places of the city, for the placing and maintaining of equipment and property necessary to carry on the business of selling and distributing electricity for all purposes to the city and its inhabitants, and through the city and beyond the limits thereof; to obtain the electricity from any source available; and to do all things necessary or proper to carry on the business in the city.

Section 2. As further consideration for the granting of this franchise, and in lieu of any city occupation, license, or revenue taxes, the company shall pay to the city during the term of this franchise four percent of its gross cash receipts from the sale of electric energy within the corporate limits of the city, such payment to be made monthly for the preceding monthly period. Any change in the rate of compensation agreed upon by the parties shall be effective for the remainder of the term. Gross cash receipts shall not include other operating revenues received by the company, which are not related to the "sale of electric energy." Other operating revenues include, but are not limited to, delayed payment charges, connection fees, disconnection and reconnection fees, collection fees and return check charges. At the option of either the city or the company and upon written notice given by one to the other sent at least 90 days before the fifth, tenth, or fifteenth anniversary of this franchise, the rate of compensation hereunder may be renegotiated. Any new rate of compensation that results from such renegotiation shall be effective on and after the fifth, tenth, or fifteenth anniversary of this franchise.

Section 3. That company, its successors and assigns, in the construction, maintenance, and operation of its electric transmission, distribution and street lighting system, shall use all reasonable and proper precaution to avoid damage or injury to persons and property, and shall hold and save harmless the city from any and all damage, injury and expense caused by the negligence of the company, its successors and assigns, or its or their agents or servants.

Section 4. After the approval of this ordinance by the city, company shall file with the city clerk of the city, its unconditional written acceptance of this ordinance. The ordinance shall become effective and be in force and shall be and become a binding contract between the parties hereto, their successors and assigns, from and after the expiration of 60 days from its final passage, approval and publication as required by law, and acceptance by the company.

Section 5. This ordinance, when accepted as above provided, shall constitute the entire agreement between the city and company relating to this franchise and the same shall supersede and cancel any prior understandings, agreements, or representations regarding the subject matter hereof, or involved in negotiations pertaining thereto, whether oral or written.

Section 6. This franchise is granted pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-2001.

Section 7. That any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the terms hereof are hereby repealed.

Section 8. The company will file this ordinance with the State Corporation Commission of Kansas. Should the State Corporation Commission take any action with respect to this franchise ordinance, which would or may preclude Westar Energy, Inc., a Kansas corporation, from recovering from its customers any cost provided for hereunder, the parties hereto shall renegotiate this ordinance in accordance with the State Corporation Commission’s ruling.

Section 9. A franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the same may exist at the time when any assignment is made, provided, however, that the franchise may be assigned by company without action by the city to any creditworthy entity which succeeds to all or substantially all of the electric utility business of the company. In the event of such assignment to a successor, company shall be released from all obligations which are assumed in writing by such successor and the assignee shall have executed an assumption of the franchise being assigned.

(9-8-03)

ORDINANCE NO. 1169 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NONEXCLUVISE FRANCHISE RENEWAL TO THE WORLD COMPANY dba SUNFLOWER BROADBAND, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, AND MAINTAIN A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS; AND SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF THE FRANCHISE; AND PROVIDING FOR REGULATION AND USE OF THE CABLE SYSTEM.

FINDINGS 

Following the review of Grantee’s renewal proposal and past performance, and after receiving the comments of interested parties at a public hearing, the City Council makes the following findings:

(a)    Grantee has the technical, legal and financial ability to fulfill the obligations of this Ordinance;

(b)    Grantee’s plans for constructing, upgrading, and operating the Cable System meet or exceed the community’s cable-related needs and interests, taking into account the costs; and

(c)    Renewing Grantee’s franchise under the terms and conditions of this Ordinance will serve the public interest.

Section 1. Definitions. When used in this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this Section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is discretionary.

(a)    "Cable Service" means:

(1)    The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and

(2)    Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

(b)    "Cable System" means a facility located within the City, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service to multiple subscribers within the City.

(c)    "City" means the City of Tonganoxie.

(d)    "Council" means the governing body of City.

(e)    "Facilities" shall mean any reception, processing, distribution or transmission component of a Cable System, including cables, conduits, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, manholes, vaults, poles, equipment, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and related facilities maintained by Grantee in the Streets.

(f)    "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.

(g)    "Franchise" shall mean the rights granted to Grantee under this Ordinance to construct and operate the Cable System and to provide Cable Services and other services as permitted by applicable law.

(h)    "Grantee" means The World Company, dba Sunflower Broadband, and its permitted successors.

(i)    "Gross Revenues" means all revenue received by Grantee from Subscribers for the provision of basic Cable Service in the City. The term Gross Revenues shall not include franchise fees, advertising revenues, late fees, any fees itemized and passed through as a result of franchise imposed requirements or any taxes or fees on services furnished by Grantee imposed directly on any Subscriber or user by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by Grantee for such governmental unit.

(j)    "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity.

(k)    "Street" means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or later existing within the City.

(l)    "Subscriber" means any Person who lawfully receives Cable Service.

Section 2. Grant of authority.

(a)    Grant of nonexclusive authority. City grants to Grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the Streets, all Facilities necessary or desirable for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the Cable System. This Franchise shall be nonexclusive, and City may grant franchises to other Persons. Any additional franchises shall contain the same substantive terms and conditions as this Franchise.

(b)    Rules of Grantee. The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing its business and services as reasonably necessary to enable Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under this Ordinance.

Section 3. Franchise term. The Franchise granted under this Ordinance commences upon approval by the City Council and acceptance by Grantee and shall continue for 10 years, unless renewed, revoked or terminated sooner. So long as Grantee remains in material compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, Grantee, at its option, may extend the term for an additional five years by providing notice to City during the last 24 months of the initial term.

Section 4. Conditions of street occupancy.

(a)    Location of Facilities. Grantee shall locate all Facilities so as to minimize interference with the use of the Streets and with the rights and reasonable convenience of adjacent property owners.

(b)    Construction codes and permits. Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits from City and shall comply with all City Ordinances of general applicability before commencing any construction, upgrade or extension of the Cable System, including the opening or disturbance of any Street.

(c)    Repair of streets and property. Grantee, at its expense, shall promptly restore any Street, public property, or private property damaged by Grantee during the construction, repair, maintenance or reconstruction of the Cable System.

(d)    Public projects. After reasonable prior notice, Grantee, at its expense, shall relocate its Facilities as required by the City due to traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, or other public improvements by City.

(e)    Building movement. Upon request of any Person holding a moving permit issued by City and after reasonable prior notice, Grantee shall temporarily move its Facilities to permit the moving of buildings. Grantee may require the requesting Person to pay all costs related to the temporary relocation of Facilities, and may require payment in advance.

(f)    Tree trimming. Grantee may trim any trees in or overhanging the Streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of City as necessary to protect Grantee’s Facilities.

(g)    Location of poles and undergrounding of cable. The poles for the Grantee’s distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by anyone authorized to maintain poles in the streets or public ways when and where practicable. It is contemplated that reasonable standard pole attachment agreements will be entered into with non-municipal utilities as required by Grantee. Grantee is specifically granted the right to set its own poles if reasonable joint use is not possible or feasible. In any areas where electric or telephone utilities are underground and in any new subdivisions or new additions where utilities are underground, the Grantee will install Facilities underground. The City reserves the right of reasonable regulation of the erection, construction or installation of any facilities by the Grantee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the Streets.

(h)    Compliance with construction codes. Grantee shall install and maintain its Facilities in compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, statutes, and/or ordinances, subject to the grantee’s right to challenge in good faith such laws, statutes, and/or ordinances.

Section 5. Cable System operations and safety.

(a)    Technical standards. Grantee shall operate the Cable System in compliance with all applicable technical standards promulgated by the FCC.

(b)    Test reports and regulatory filings. Upon request by City, Grantee shall provide City with copies of: (i) reports of any FCC required test of the Cable System; and (ii) any filings with regulatory authorities related to the operation of the Cable System within the City.

(c)    Safety requirements. Grantee shall employ ordinary care and shall maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices to reduce failures and accidents.

(d)    System maps. Grantee shall periodically file with the City up-to-date as-built maps showing locations of all Facilities in the Streets.

Section 6. System upgrade. Grantee shall maintain the current Cable System capacity of 750 MHz and a minimum of 75 analog or digital channels. The Cable System shall utilize a hybrid fiber-coaxial architecture designed with the capability to transmit return signals upstream. Grantee may develop, construct and operate the upgraded Cable System to provide Cable Services and non-cable services such as cable modem services, telecommunications services, and other competitive services as permissible under applicable law. Grantee may activate and offer such other services in response to consumer and business demand.

Section 7. Service obligations and Cable System extension. Grantee shall provide Cable Services without discrimination to all Persons who request such services and who comply with Grantee’s terms and conditions of service. Grantee shall extend the Cable System to all areas of the City not currently served by the Cable System when any such area reaches a household density equal to or greater than 20 households per cable mile. Grantee is not obligated to extend service to residences beyond 300 feet from Grantee’s Facilities.

Section 8. Educational and Governmental Access.

(a)    Service to public buildings and schools. Grantee shall provide a service drop and basic Cable Service to each City building, police station, fire station, and public and private school passed by the Cable System, with additional service drops to be provided at the cost of labor and material.

(b)    Channel Access for the City of Tonganoxie. During the term of the Franchise granted under this Ordinance, Grantee shall make available to local government and local educational institutions one (1) channel for non-commercial local governmental and educational programming. The City, at its discretion, is responsible for the creation and production of any programming and any hardware required for production and to provide Grantee with a signal that meets generally accepted minimum quality standards. The Grantee is responsible for the purchase and installation of hardware required to provide said signal to its subscribers within the Franchise area. This City must give the Grantee a minimum of 90-days notice of its intent to utilize said channel.

Section 9. Customer service and rates.

(a)    Subscriber Inquiries. Grantee shall have a publicly listed toll-free telephone number and be operated so as to receive Subscriber complaints and requests on a 24 hour-a-day, seven days-a-week basis. Grantee shall investigate and promptly resolve customer complaints regarding quality of service or service outages.

(b)    Rates. Grantee shall maintain with the City Clerk a currently schedule of rates and services. Grantee shall provide the City and Subscribers with 30 days written notice of changes to Cable Services or rates.

(c)    Service outages. Grantee shall promptly notify City of any interruption based on Facility or technical difficulties that last 24 hours or more and affect more than 5% of the Cable System. Grantee’s notice shall provide a reasonable description of the reason for the service outage and Grantee’s plans to remedy the service outage.

Section 10. Franchise fee.

(a)    Grantee shall pay to City an annual franchisee fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%)* of Gross Revenues payable every six (6) months. These payments will be due in January and July each year on the last day of the month for the previous six (6) month period. Following reasonable prior notice, City may inspect Grantee’s books, records, and reports to verify franchise fee calculations and payments.

(b)    Franchise fee increases by City. At any time during the term of this Franchise, City may increase the Franchise fee up to the maximum amount permitted by law, subject to the following procedures:

(i)    City shall provide Grantee at least 90 days written notice of City’s intent to schedule a public hearing concerning a proposed increase in the Franchise fee.

(ii)    City shall consider a proposed increase Franchise fee at a duly noticed public hearing, and shall provide all interested parties, including Grantee, an opportunity to be heard. 

(iii)    If, after one or more public hearings, the City decides to increase the Franchise Fee, the increase shall not become effective until the first day of the month that begins at least 90 days from the date of the City’s decision.

*    Code reviser’s note: This amount was amended by Ord. 1386, § 2, which provides: “That the franchise fee to be collected by the Franchisee from its gross revenues collected within the City and paid to the City as consideration for its franchise agreement shall be increased from three percent (3%) to five percent (5%) from all sales of cable services within the corporate limits of said City, such payment to be made monthly for the preceding monthly period.”

Section 11. Insurance and Indemnification

(a)    Insurance. During the term of the Franchise granted under this Ordinance, Grantee shall maintain a comprehensive general liability insurance policy with the following minimum coverage limits:

(i)    One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury or death of any one Person;

(ii)    Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for personal injury or death of two or more Persons in any one occurrence;

(iii)    One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for property damage to any one person; and

(iv)    Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence.

Each policy of insurance shall contain a statement that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy for any reason without first giving 30 days’ advance written notice to City.

(b)    Indemnification. During the term of the Franchise granted under this Ordinance, Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless City, its officers, agents and employees ("Indemnitees") from and against any claims, liabilities, damages, losses, and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable attorney fees) ("Losses"), which may arise out of or be in any way connected with Grantee’s construction, installation, operation, maintenance of the Cable System, unless such Losses arise from the negligence or intentional misconduct of the City, its officers, agents or employees.

Section 12. Transfer of Franchise. Grantee shall not transfer or assign its rights granted under this Ordinance without obtaining the prior consent of City. City shall not unreasonably withhold or delay such consent. Consent of City shall not be required for the following: (i) the assignment of, or the granting of a security interest in, the Franchise or the Cable System for the purpose of securing indebtedness; or (ii) the assignment or transfer of the Franchise or the Cable System to an affiliate under common ownership or control with Grantee.

Section 13. Franchise extension and renewal.

(a)    Extension. Beyond the term provided in Section 3, City and Grantee may extend by mutual agreement the term of the Franchise granted under this Ordinance, and the existing terms and conditions of this Ordinance shall govern the extended term.

(b)    Renewal. Any renewal of the Grantee’s Franchise shall be done in accordance with Section 546 of the federal Cable Act, 47 USC § 546, and applicable FCC regulations.

Section 14. Franchise termination City may terminate the Franchise granted under this Ordinance in case of material noncompliance by Grantee. Material noncompliance shall include:

(a)    A material violation by Grantee of any term, condition, or provision of this Ordinance that remains uncured within the applicable cure period;

(b)    Failure of Grantee to comply with any reasonable provision of any applicable City Ordinance;

(c)    Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt, or there is a notice of prospective foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the Cable System;

(d)    Grantee abandons the Cable System;

(e)    Grantee fails to operate the Cable System for a period of 30 days; or

(f)    Grantee is found to practiced any fraud upon City.

Section 15. Termination procedures. If City seeks to terminate the Franchise under Section 14, City shall follow the procedures in this section.

(a)    Notice of complaint. City shall provide Grantee with written notice describing with reasonable specificity the alleged noncompliance.

(b)    Opportunity to cure. Grantee shall have 60 days from receipt of written notice to cure the alleged noncompliance. If Grantee cures the alleged noncompliance within the 60-day period, the City shall provide Grantee with written notice withdrawing the complaint.

(c)    Public hearing. If Grantee fails to cure the alleged noncompliance within the 60-day cure period, or if Grantee provides City with written notice disputing the complaint, and the parties fail to otherwise resolve the matter, the City shall schedule a public hearing on the alleged noncompliance. At the public hearing, Grantee may present testimony, cross-examine witnesses and deliver to City Council all evidence relevant to Grantee’s defense. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may dismiss the complaint, defer action, order appropriate sanctions, or terminate the Franchise in accordance with this section.

(d)    Termination. The City Council may, after a duly noticed public hearing, terminate the Franchise for material and willful continuing noncompliance by Grantee. If Grantee contests the termination in a court of competent jurisdiction, Grantee may operate the Cable System in accordance with this Ordinance while the case is pending.

(e)    Force Majuere. Grantee’s failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance shall not constitute noncompliance when such failure is due to circumstances beyond Grantee’s control, including, without limitation, acts of God, adverse weather, natural or man-made disaster, civil disturbance, war or insurrection, or shortage of supplies, material, or labor.

(f)    Removal of Facilities. Upon expiration or termination of the Franchise, Grantee shall be afforded a six-month period to sell or otherwise dispose of the Cable System. During the six-month period, Grantee shall operate the Cable System in accordance with this Ordinance. At the expiration of the six-month period, Grantee has the right to remove its Facilities within a reasonable time.

Section 16. Notices. Notices under this Ordinance shall be in writing and shall be deemed given delivery by hand delivery, certified mail return receipt requested, or overnight courier to the following addresses:

	To City:	City of Tonganoxie

	 	321 S. Delaware Street

	 	P.O. Box 326

	 	Tonganoxie, KS 66086

	 	Attn: City Clerk

	 	 

	To Grantee:	Sunflower Broadband

	 	1 Riverfront Plaza

	 	Suite 301

	 	Lawrence, Kansas 66044

	 	Attn: General Manager

A party may designate other addresses for providing notice by providing notice in writing of such addresses.

Section 17. Miscellaneous.

(a)    Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance. The invalidity of any portions of this Ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required by Grantee under the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

(b)    Complete Agreement. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance, excluding all public utility franchises granted to public utilities, including utilities regulated by the Kansas Corporation Commission.

Section 18. Effective date and acceptance. This Ordinance shall become effective upon publication of any required notice in the official City paper and after Grantee files a letter of acceptance with the City Clerk.

(9-27-04)

ORDINANCE NO. 1308 

AN ORDINANCE APPROVING THE TRANSFER OF THE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE GRANTED BY THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS IN ORDINANCE NO. 1169.

FINDINGS 

A.    The City of Tonganoxie, Kansas (“City”), has received a request from The World Company, d/b/a Sunflower Broadband (“Sunflower”), to assign to Knology of Kansas, Inc. (“Knology”) the cable television franchise granted Sunflower under City Ordinance No. 1169 (“Franchise”).

B.    The Franchise requires that Sunflower obtain the City’s prior consent for the assignment of the Franchise by Sunflower to Knology.

C.    Sunflower and Knology have properly requested the City’s consent to the assignment and transfer of the Franchise and related assets to Knology.

D.    To the City’s knowledge, Sunflower has fulfilled its obligations under the Franchise.

E.    Knology has the financial, technical, and legal ability to fulfill the obligations of the Franchise, and the assignment of the Franchise to Knology will serve the public interest.

ORDINANCE 

Based on the above findings, the City Commission ordains as follows:

1.    Sunflower is in material compliance with its obligations under the Franchise, and the City has no knowledge of any breach or default by Sunflower under the Franchise.

2.    The City consents to the transfer of the Franchise to Knology and all of Sunflower’s rights, title, powers, and privileges in and under the Franchise and related assets.

3.    Upon the closing of the sale of Sunflower’s cable system to Knology (“Closing”), Knology shall become bound by the Franchise and shall perform and discharge all obligations and duties under the Franchise that arise on and after the Closing.

4.    Upon Closing, the City releases Sunflower from all obligations and liabilities under the Franchise that relate to periods from and after the Closing.

5.    The City consents to the granting by Knology of a security interest in the Franchise for the purposes of securing financing.

(9-13-10)

ORDINANCE NO. 1444 

AN ORDINANCE, granting to Kansas Gas Service, a Division of ONE Gas, Inc., and its successors and assigns, a natural gas franchise, prescribing the terms thereof and relating thereto, providing definitions of terms, prescribing a franchise fee, providing terms and conditions for the use of public rights-of-way, requiring advance notice of work and duty to repair, providing for indemnification and a hold harmless agreement, providing for rules and regulations, prescribing insurance requirements, reserving certain rights, providing for revocation and termination, providing for an acceptance of the terms of the franchise, providing for a reopener, providing for notice of annexations, prescribing relevant governing law, providing for transfer and assignment of the franchise, providing for points of contact and notifications, providing for an agreement to renegotiate, and repealing all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with the terms hereof.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF TONGANOXIE, KANSAS:

SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this Ordinance the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent within the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense and words in the single number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory, and not merely directory.

“City” shall mean the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, and, where appropriate by the context, each of its departments, divisions and component units, including public trusts or authorities of which the City is a beneficiary.

“Company” shall mean Kansas Gas Service, a Division of ONE Gas, Inc.

“Consumer” shall mean any person or Entity located within the municipal corporate limits of the City and serviced by the Company through any use of the Public Ways.

“Distribution” or “Distributed” shall mean all sales, distribution, or transportation of natural gas to any Sales or Transportation Consumer for use within the City by the Company or by others through the Distribution Facilities of Company in a Right of Way.

“Distribution System” or “Distribution Facilities” shall mean a pipeline or system of pipelines, including without limitation, mains, pipes, boxes, reducing and regulating stations, laterals, conduits and services extensions, together with all necessary appurtenances thereto, or any part thereof located within any Public Way, for the purpose of Distribution or supplying natural gas for light, heat, power and all other purposes.

“Effective Date” shall mean the date the Company files its written acceptance with the City following the final passage and approval of said Ordinance by the City.

“Entity” shall mean any individual person(s), governmental entity, business, corporation, partnership, firm, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, unincorporated association, joint venture or trust and shall include all forms of business enterprise not specifically listed herein.

“Facility” or “Facilities” refers to the Company’s Distribution System or Distribution Facilities.

“Franchise” shall mean the grant of authority by the City to transport, distribute or sell natural gas to the inhabitants of the City and to operate a Distribution System or Distribution Facilities.

“Franchise Fee” shall refer to the charges as prescribed in Section 3 of this Franchise Ordinance.

“Franchise Ordinance” shall mean this Ordinance granting a natural gas franchise to the Company.

“Gross Receipts” shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration derived directly by the Company from any Distribution of natural gas to Consumers within the City. Such term shall not include revenue from certain miscellaneous charges and accounts including but not limited to: connection fees, disconnection and reconnection fees, temporary service charges, delayed or late payment charges, collection fees, bad debts, customer project contributions, meter test fees, revenues received by Company from Consumers as franchise fee reimbursement, and returned check charges. Additionally, Gross receipts shall not include credit extended pursuant to the Cold Weather Rule (or substitute rule) of the Kansas Corporation Commission for natural gas sold within the corporate limits of the City, nor Volumetric Rate Fees collected by Company and remitted to City in accordance with Section 3 of this ordinance.

“MCF” shall mean a measurement of natural gas equal to one thousand cubic feet. It is assumed for purposes of this Franchise Ordinance that one MCF equals one million British Thermal Units.

“Public Improvements” means any public facilities, buildings, or capital improvements, including, without limitation, streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewer, water, drainage, right-of-way improvements, and other Public Projects.

“Public Project” means any project planned or undertaken and financed by the City or any governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of public facilities or improvements, or any other purpose of a public nature paid for with public funds.

“Public Way” or “Public Ways” shall mean the area on, below or above the present and future public streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, boulevards, roads, highways, parks, parking places and other public areas, and general utility easements, dedicated to or acquired by the City. The term does not include easements obtained by private entities providing utilities services or private easements in platted subdivisions or tracts.

“Sales Consumer” shall mean, without limitation, any Entity that purchases natural gas within the Corporate City limits from Company for delivery to such consumer within the City through the Company’s Distribution System or Distribution Facilities.

SECTION 2. GRANT OF FRANCHISE.

A.    In consideration of the benefits to be derived by the City and its inhabitants, there is hereby granted to the Company, said Company operating a system for the sale, transmission and distribution of natural gas in the State of Kansas, a non-exclusive franchise for a period of twenty (20) years from the Effective Date to construct, maintain, extend and operate its Distribution Facilities along, across, upon or under any Public Way for the purpose of selling and distributing natural gas for all purposes to the City, and its inhabitants, and through said City and beyond the limits thereof; to obtain said natural gas from any source available; and to do all things necessary or proper to carry on said business.

B.    The grant of this franchise by the City shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in a Public Way and shall give only the right to occupy the Public Way for the purposes and for the period stated in this Ordinance. This Ordinance does not:

(1)    Grant the right to use facilities or any other property, natural gas-related or otherwise, owned or controlled by the City or a third party without the consent of such party;

(2)    Grant the authority to construct, maintain or operate any Facility or related appurtenance on property owned by the City outside of a Public Way;

(3)    Excuse the Company from obtaining appropriate access or attachment agreements before locating its Facilities on property owned or controlled by the City (other than a Public Way) or a third party; or

(4)    Excuse the Company from obtaining and being responsible for any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City, the FCC or the Kansas Corporation Commission.

SECTION 3. FRANCHISE FEE.

A.    As further consideration for the granting of this franchise, and in lieu of city occupation, license or permit fees, or revenue taxes, except as expressly provided herein, the Company shall pay to the City during the term of this franchise, a Franchise Fee of (i) five percent (5%) of the actual Gross Cash Receipts collected by the Company from the sale, and distribution all Sales Consumers within the corporate limits of the City all such payments to be made monthly for the preceding monthly period.

B.    The Company’s obligation for payments of the Franchise Fee shall commence with the first cycle of the monthly billing cycle beginning after the passage, adoption, acceptance and publication of this Ordinance, as provided in Section 11 below. Prior to that date, payments shall continue to be calculated and be paid in the manner previously provided in Ordinance No. 1254 and amendments thereto.

C.    In the event a Consumer of Company does not pay a monthly bill from Company in full, Company shall prorate its payments of remissions to the City for sums due on that particular bill so that the amount actually paid by the Consumer to Company on the bill is distributed to Company for the natural gas commodity and transportation or distribution service and to the City for sums due on the bill in proportion to the percentage of the total bill actually paid by the Consumer. In the event Company actually collects any outstanding amounts due on a past due, unpaid or partially paid monthly bill to a customer, then Company shall pay City its proportionate share of sums due to the City on such bill.

D.    Upon written request by the City, but no more than once per quarter, the Company shall submit to the City a certified statement showing the manner in which the Franchise Fee was calculated. The City shall have the right to examine within the corporate limits of the City and during regular business hours, upon reasonable advance written notice to the Company (but no more often than once per calendar year), all books, papers and records kept by the Company in the ordinary course of business and pertaining to its business carried on by it in or through the City, necessary to verify the correctness of the Franchise Fees paid by Company.

E.    No acceptance by the City of any Franchise Fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall acceptance of any Franchise Fee payment be construed as a release of any claim of the City. Any dispute concerning the amount due under this Section shall be resolved in the manner set forth in K.S.A. 12-2001 and amendments thereto.

F.    The Franchise Fee required herein shall be in lieu of all taxes, charges, assessments, licenses, fees and impositions otherwise applicable that are or may be imposed by the City under K.S.A. 12-2001 and 17-1902 and amendments thereto. From and after the date hereof, the permit fees required of the Company by any ordinance presently in effect or hereafter adopted for a permit to excavate in or adjacent to any Public Way shall be deemed a part of the compensation paid pursuant to this Ordinance and shall not be separately assessed or collected by the City; in no event, however, shall this provision be interpreted to waive the requirement of notice to the City and the procedural requirements of such ordinance. The Franchise Fee is compensation for use of the Public Way.

SECTION 4. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.

A.    Except as provided herein or as regulated by state or federal law, the use of any Public Way under this franchise by the Company shall be subject to all laws, statutes, regulations and/or city policies (including, but not limited to those relating to the construction and use of the Public Way or other public property) now or hereafter adopted or promulgated. In addition, except as provided herein the Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations and policies now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to permits, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, and other requirements on the use of a Public Way; provided however, that nothing contained herein shall constitute a waiver of or be construed as waiving the right of the Company to oppose, challenge, or seek judicial review of, in such manner as is now or may hereafter be provided by law, any such rules, regulation or policy proposed, adopted, or promulgated by the City and, further provided other than the items enumerated in this Section 4 herein, that such rules, regulations or policies shall not require the payment of additional fees or additional costs for the use of a Public Way.

B.    All mains, services, and pipe which shall be laid or installed under this grant shall be so located and laid as not to obstruct or interfere with any water pipes, drains, sewers, or other structures already installed. The Company shall provide, prior to commencing work, information to the City concerning work to be performed in the streets, avenues, bridges, parking areas, and public places of the City, as the City may from time to time require for purposes of record keeping. The City may require that the information be provided on its standard permit form, but without requiring approval, consent, or fees. In the event of an emergency, the Company shall have the right to commence work without having first providing such information or form(s).

C.    The Company’s use of any Public Way shall always be subject and subordinate to the City’s use of the Public Way for any public purpose. The City may exercise its home rule powers in its administration and regulation related to the management of the Public Way; provided that any such exercise must be competitively neutral and may not be unreasonable or discriminatory, nor in conflict with state or federal law.

D.    The City reserves the right to lay or permit to be laid cables, electric conduits, water, sewer, gas or other pipelines and to do or permit to be done any underground work deemed necessary and proper by the City, along, across, over or under any Public Way. In permitting such work to be done, the City shall not be liable to the Company for any damage to the Company’s Facilities unless the City or its agents or contractors are negligent in causing said damage.

E.    Whenever by reason of establishing a grade or changes in the grade of any street or in the location or manner of construction of any Public Way, cables, electric conduits, water, sewer, gas or other underground structures, it shall be deemed necessary by the City to alter, change, adapt or conform any portion of the Company’s Facilities located in the Public Way, such alterations or changes shall be made within a reasonable time by the Company, as ordered in writing by the City, without claim for reimbursement or compensation for damages against the City; provided, however, that this provision is not intended to require the Company to alter, change, adapt or conform any portion of its Facilities without reimbursement or compensation where the right to locate the same, whether by private right-of-way grant, utility easement or otherwise, was acquired prior to its location in the Public Way.

F.    If the City shall require the Company to adapt or conform its Facilities or in any way to alter, relocate or change its property to enable any other person, firm, corporation or entity (whether public or private), other than the City, to use the Public Way, the Company shall be reimbursed by the person, firm corporation or entity desiring or occasioning such change for any and all loss, cost or expense occasioned thereby. “Person,” “firm,” “corporation,” and “entity” as used in this paragraph shall not include regular departments of the City, or any trust or authority formed by or for the benefit of City for public utility purposes, but shall include any other agency or authority of the City, whether acting in a governmental or non-governmental capacity, including, but not limited to, any urban renewal authority, or any other agency or authority, which as a part of its program clears whole tracts of land within the municipal corporate limits and relocates citizens for the purpose of urban development or similar aims.

G.    The Company shall participate in the Kansas One-Call utility location program. The Company shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete information regarding the location of its Facilities located within a Public Way when requested by the City. Such location and identification shall be promptly communicated in writing to the City without cost to the City, its employees, agents or authorized contractors. The Company shall designate and maintain an agent familiar with the Facilities, who is responsible for providing timely information needed by the City for the design and replacement of Facilities in a Public Way during and for the design of Public Improvements.

H.    The Company shall be subject to the following fees and costs in connection with its use and occupancy of any Public Way: (i) in the event that the repairs or replacements set forth under Section 5 below, have not been timely completed by Company, the City may charge an excavation fee for each street or pavement cut to recover the costs associated with construction and repair activity; (ii) inspection fees to recover all reasonable costs associated with City inspection of the work of the Company in the Public Way when the Facilities are of such a scope and magnitude so as to require the City to incur such inspection costs by an outside party; and (iii) the repair and restoration costs associated with repairing and restoring the Public Way because of damage caused by the Company, its assigns, contractors, and/or subcontractors in the Public Way. Such repair and restoration costs shall be paid in advance to the City.

SECTION 5. NOTICE OF WORK & DUTY TO REPAIR.

A.    Prior to commencing any activities related to the construction, maintenance, or extension of its Facilities along, across, upon or under the Public Way, the Company shall submit to the City written plans detailing all such activities together with an application for permit. In the event of an emergency, Company shall have the right to commence work without having first providing such plans, provided such plans are submitted within three business days of commencement of the work. The Company shall coordinate the installation, construction, maintenance, and operation of its Facilities in a manner which minimizes adverse impact on existing or contemplated Public Improvements as reasonably determined by the City. The Company’s Facilities shall be so constructed and maintained as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on such public ways or unreasonably obstruct the legal use by other utilities.

B.    Prior to beginning work, the Company will inspect existing pavement within and/or adjacent to the work area and will report any existing damage or concerns. All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, Public Improvements, or improvements of any kind located within the Public Way that are damaged, displaced, or removed by the Company shall be fully repaired or replaced to their prior condition or to existing municipal standards as are then in existence, and in a manner satisfactory to the duly authorized representatives of the City, after completing such activity as is permitted under this Ordinance and without cost to the City.

SECTION 6. INDEMNITY AND HOLD HARMLESS.

The Company, its successors and assigns, in the construction, maintenance, and operation of its natural gas system, shall use all reasonable and proper precaution to avoid damage or injury to persons and property, and shall indemnify, defend, and hold and save the City harmless from any and all claims, damage, judgements, and reasonable expense, including attorney fees, caused by the negligence of the Company, its successors and assigns, or its or their agents or servants. The Company or the City shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or demand against the Company or the City related to or arising out of the Company’s activities in any Public Way.

SECTION 7. RULES AND REGULATIONS.

The Company shall have the right to make and enforce such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the extension of its Facilities, the sale of its gas, and the prudent conduct of its business, provided that such rules and regulations shall neither be in conflict with the laws of the State of Kansas, with the orders, rules or regulations of the Kansas Corporation Commission or other regulatory authority having jurisdiction, nor with the ordinances and regulations of the City insofar as they are consistent with the jurisdiction of the Kansas Corporation Commission or such other regulatory authority.

SECTION 8. INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.

During the term of this Ordinance, the Company shall obtain and maintain insurance coverage at its sole expense with financially reputable insurers that are licensed to do business in the State of Kansas. Should the Company elect to use the services of an affiliated captive insurance company for this purpose, that insurer shall possess a certificate of authority from the Oklahoma Insurance Commissioner. The Company shall provide not less than the following insurance:

(1)    Workers’ compensation as provided for under any worker’s compensation or similar law in the jurisdiction where any work is performed with an employers’ liability limit equal to the amount required by law.

(2)    Commercial general liability, including coverage for contractual liability and products completed operations liability on an “occurrence” basis and not a “claims made” basis, with a limit of not less than Two Million Dollars combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage liability. The City shall be included as an additional insured with respect to liability arising from the Company’s operations under this Ordinance.

As an alternative to the above insurance requirements, the Company may demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that it is self-insured and as such Company has the ability to provide coverage in an amount not less than One Million Dollars per occurrence and Two Million Dollars in the aggregate, to protect the City from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for loss or damage from personal injury, bodily injury, death or property damage occasioned by the Company, or alleged to so have been caused or occurred.

SECTION 9. REVOCATION AND TERMINATION.

In case of failure on the part of the Company to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or if the Company should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this Ordinance, the Company shall forfeit all rights, privileges and franchise granted herein, and all such rights, privileges and franchise hereunder shall cease, terminate and become null and void, and this Ordinance shall be deemed revoked or terminated, provided that said revocation or termination shall not take effect until the City has completed the following procedures: Before the City proceeds to revoke and terminate this Ordinance, it shall first serve a written notice upon Company, setting forth in detail the neglect or failure complained of, and the Company shall have sixty days thereafter in which to comply with the conditions and requirements of this Ordinance. If at the end of such sixty-day period the City determines that the neglect or failure complained of has not been cured, the City shall take action to revoke and terminate this Ordinance by an affirmative vote of the governing body present at a public meeting and voting, setting out the grounds upon which this Ordinance is to be revoked and terminated; provided, to afford the Company due process, the Company shall first be provided reasonable notice of the date, time and location of the governing body’s consideration and shall have the right to address the governing body regarding such matter; and further provided, if the nature of the default is such that it cannot be reasonably cured within the above said sixty-day period, and the governing body believes the Company has in good faith timely commenced its cure and is diligently pursuing the completion of the same, the Company may, in the City’s sole discretion, be given a reasonable additional period of time to complete its cure. Nothing herein shall prevent either party from invoking any other remedy that may otherwise exist at law. Upon any determination by the governing body to revoke and terminate this Ordinance, the Company shall have thirty days to appeal such decision to the District Court where the City is located or in the District Court of Johnson County, Kansas. This Ordinance shall be deemed revoked and terminated at the end of this thirty-day period, unless the Company has instituted such an appeal. If the Company does timely institute such an appeal, such revocation and termination shall remain pending and subject to the court’s final judgment. Provided, however, that the failure of the Company to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the doing or causing to be done by the Company of anything prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this Ordinance shall not be a ground for the revocation or termination thereof when such act or omission on the part of the Company is due to any cause or delay beyond the control of the Company or to bona fide legal proceedings.

SECTION 10. RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.

In granting its consent hereunder, the City does not in any manner waive its regulatory or other rights and powers under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Kansas as the same may be amended, applicable Federal laws or regulations as the same may be amended, its home rule powers under the Constitution of the State of Kansas, nor any of its rights and powers under or by virtue of present or future ordinances of the City.

In adopting and passing this Ordinance, neither the City’s nor the Company’s present or future legal rights, positions, claims, assertions or arguments before any administrative agency or court of law are in any way prejudiced or waived. By the City’s adopting and passing this Ordinance and the Company’s acceptance hereof as provided in Section 11, neither the City nor the Company waive any rights, but instead expressly reserve any and all rights, remedies, and arguments the City or the Company may have at law or equity, without limitation, to argue, assert, and/or take any position as to the legality or appropriateness of any present or future laws, non-franchise ordinances and/or rulings.

SECTION 11. ACCEPTANCE OF TERMS.

This franchise Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, approval by the City, acceptance by the Company, and publication in the official City newspaper. The Company shall have sixty days after the final passage and approval of this franchise Ordinance to file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of the provisions, terms and conditions of this franchise Ordinance and when so accepted, this franchise Ordinance and acceptance shall constitute a contract between the City and the Company and such contract shall be deemed effective on the date Company files its acceptance with the City.

This franchise Ordinance, when accepted as provided above, (i) shall constitute the entire agreement between the City and the Company relating to this franchise, and the same shall supersede and cancel any prior understandings, agreements, or representations regarding the subject matter hereof, or involved in negotiations pertaining thereto, whether oral or written, (ii) shall be binding upon the parties, including their successors and assigns, and (iii) shall not be amended or further obligations imposed without mutual consent of the parties hereto.

SECTION 12. REOPENER PROVISION.

Upon written request of either the City or the Company, this Franchise may be reopened and renegotiated after five (5) years from the effective date of this ordinance, and every (5) five years thereafter for the review of the rate set forth in Section 3 above. Said request must be served upon the other party at least 120 days prior to the end of each period set forth above and shall state specifically the amendments desired. The City and the Company shall negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually satisfactory amendments.

Upon written request of the Company, the franchise shall be reopened and renegotiated at any time upon a change in federal, state, or local law, regulation, or order which materially affects any rights or obligations of Company, including, but not limited to, the scope of the grant to the Company or the compensation to be paid to the City.

The franchise fee percentage rate set forth in Section 3 shall in no event exceed the percentage rate hereafter approved to calculate any fee paid to the City by any Entity for use of the Public Ways, if such fee is based in any way on the amount of revenues or gross receipts from the sale, transportation and/or distribution of natural gas or electric energy (excluding any municipally-owned electric utility) by such other Entity to customers within the City. If at any time after the effective date of this Ordinance the fee or rate required to be paid by another utility distribution company is less than the percentage rate set forth in Section 3, then the percentage rate set forth in Section 3 shall be automatically reduced to equal such lesser percentage rate on the date such lesser percentage rate becomes effective and without any further action by the City.

SECTION 13. NOTICE OF ANNEXATION.

The City shall promptly notify the Company in writing (to include a map) of areas newly annexed into or de-annexed from the corporate limits of the City, and the Company shall update its records for the purpose of payment of franchise fees as soon as reasonably practicable after receiving such notice. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, the fees provided for in Section 3 above shall not become effective within any area annexed by the City until the beginning of the monthly billing cycle which begins no more than sixty days after the date that the City provides the Company with a certified copy of the annexation ordinance, proof of publication as required by law and a map of the City detailing the annexed area.

SECTION 14. RELEVANT LAW.

The franchise is granted pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-2001 and amendments thereto. Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the terms hereof are hereby repealed or considered as having no effect as of the first cycle of the monthly billing cycle as referenced in Section 3 of this ordinance.

SECTION 15. TRANSFER AND ASSIGNMENT.

Company shall not have the right to assign, sell, lease, or otherwise transfer in any manner whatsoever to any third party not affiliated with Company the rights and privileges granted under this Ordinance except as hereinafter provided. Any assignment, sale, lease, or other transfer by the Company of the franchise granted herein to any third party not affiliated with Company shall be ineffective and void unless:

(1)    The proposed assignment, sale, lease or transfer shall be in writing:

(2)    The prospective assignee, buyer, lessee or other transferee shall agree in writing to accept and become responsible for full performance of all conditions, covenants, obligations, and liabilities contained in this Ordinance; and

(3)    Such writing shall be submitted to the City Clerk of the City.

SECTION 16. POINT OF CONTACT AND NOTICES.

Company shall at all times maintain with the City a local point of contact who shall be available at all times to act on behalf of Company in the event of an emergency. Company shall provide the City with said local contact’s name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address. Emergency notice by either party to the other may be made by telephone to the City’s designee as listed below. All other notices between the parties shall be in writing and shall be made by personal delivery, depositing such notice in the U.S. Mail, Certified Mail (return receipt requested), or via the email addresses provided below. Any notice served by U.S. Mail or Certified Mail (return receipt requested) shall be deemed delivered upon actual receipt unless otherwise provided. Other than emergencies, notices to the parties shall be to the following:

	The City:	Company:

	 	 

	The City of Tonganoxie	Kansas Gas Service, a Div. of ONE Gas, Inc.

	Attn:	City Clerk	Attn:	Legal Department

	 	526 E. 4th Street	 	7421 W. 129th Street

	 	Tonganoxie, KS 66086	 	Overland Park, KS 66213-2713

	Phone: 913-845-2620	Phone: 913.319.8618

	Email: info@tonganoxie.org	Email: kgsfranchises@onegas.com

	Emergency Designee: Dan Porter	Emergency Designee: Jason Baker

	Address: PO Box 326, Tonganoxie, KS 66086	Address: 11401 W 89th Street, OP, KS 66214

	 	 	 	 

	Phone: 913.845.2620	Phone: 913.599.8932

	Fax: 913.845.9760	Fax:

	Email: dporter@tonganoxie.org	Email: Jason.Baker@onegas.com

	 	 	 	 

	(or to replacement addresses that may be later designated in writing).

SECTION 17. AGREEMENT TO RENEGOTIATE.

Should the Kansas Corporation Commission take any action with respect to this franchise Ordinance and any amendment thereto which precludes Company from recovering from its customers any costs or fees provided for hereunder, the parties hereto shall renegotiate this franchise Ordinance in accordance with or to conform to the Commission’s ruling.

(7-16-18)


Section 1 TITLE, AUTHORITY AND ADOPTION


1-010 TITLE

These regulations for the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas, including the text herein as well as the appendices and zoning district maps attached and made a part thereof, shall be known, and may be cited and referred to as the Tonganoxie Zoning and Subdivision Regulations.


1-011 STATUTORY AUTHORITY

The Development Regulations are adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12, Article 7 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated (KSA. 12-741 et seq.), and amendments thereto, for the state of Kansas.


1-012 PURPOSE

The provisions herein set forth are enacted to implement the land use portion of the comprehensive plan for the City and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City. They are intended to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to divide the City into zones and districts; to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings and the uses of land within each district or zone; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other requirements.


1-013 ORDINANCE ADOPTION

A.    These Zoning and Subdivision Regulations shall become effective on January 15, 2003, the date of publication of Ordinance # 1138, as approved by the Governing Body for the City of Tonganoxie.

B.    The approval of these regulations shall serve to repeal Ordinance No. 867 Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations of the City of Tonganoxie, Ks, 1992 and all ordinances amending the zoning and subdivision regulations contained within the ordinance.

C.    The passage of these regulations does not affect the right of the City to prosecute any violation of the previous ordinance, if the violation occurred while that ordinance was in effect.


1-014 JURISDICTION

A.    The provisions of these Zoning and Subdivision Regulations shall apply to all uses, structures and land within the corporate limits of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas. However, nothing contained within these regulations shall be construed to preclude the City from engaging in extraterritorial planning activities pursuant to KSA 12-743, and amendments thereto.

B.    The jurisdictional area shall be shown on the Official Zoning District Map.


1-015 ZONING DISTRICT MAP

A.    The Official Zoning District Map for the City of Tonganoxie, kept on permanent public display at the Tonganoxie City Hall, with all explanatory notations, references, and other information shown thereon, is hereby incorporated into this ordinance as if the same were set forth in full herein.

B.    Establishment of Districts: The City of Tonganoxie is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:

(1)    R-R RURAL DISTRICT: A district designed for a variety of agricultural and related uses and permits single family residential and public uses.

(2)    R-RE RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT: A district providing for single family residential development at a density not less than 32,670 square feet per lot.

(3)    R-I INFILL DISTRICT: A district providing for residential and limited commercial development similar in size, lot coverage, massing, density and character to those on surrounding lots. This overlay district is bounded by Washington Street, East Street, and 24/40 Highway, plus the Elm Park Subdivision.

(4)    R-SF SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT: A district providing for single family residential development at a density not less than 6,000 square feet per lot.

(5)    RMF-1 MULTI-FAMILY I DISTRICT: A district providing for one (1) to four (4) family dwelling units at a density of not less than 7,500 square feet per lot or 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is larger.

(6)    RMF-2 MULTI-FAMILY II DISTRICT: A district providing for two (2) to sixteen (16) family dwelling units at a density of not less than 10,000 square feet per lot or 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is larger.

(7)    RMF-3 MULTI-FAMILY III DISTRICT: A district providing for multi- family development (16 units or more) at a density of not less than 10,000 square feet per lot or 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is larger.

(8)    “R-MHP” MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT: A district providing for manufactured home park development according to the “Mobile Home Code.”

(10)    “HBD” HISTORIC BUSINESS DISTRICT: This district is intended to provide for businesses, which are compatible with the existing character and design standards of the Tonganoxie Central Business District. Warehousing and manufacturing are strictly discouraged.

(11)    “LBD” LIMITED GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: This district is designed to provide a broad range of retail shopping and personal service uses consistent with neighborhood uses.

(12)    “GBD” GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: A district designed to permit business use which is primarily oriented toward highway and arterial streets for their customers, including very light industrial uses.

(14)    “I-LT” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: A district designated for light manufacturing, processing, warehousing and wholesale distributing.

(15)    “I-MD” MODERATE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: A district similar in use to “I-LT” except providing for lower density and more off-street parking.

(16)    “I-H” HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: This district may provide for industrial operations of all types where compatibility with adjacent districts is sensitive.

C.    In addition to the districts listed above, the following zoning may be invoked upon specific parcels of land as provided in this ordinance:

“PUD-R” PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT: A district providing for flexibility of design standards for multi-family residential use. Extensive development plans are required.

“PUD-C” PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: This district is to provide for and encourage the grouping of business buildings into “centers” in keeping with the modern concepts of office, service and shopping center design.

“COMMUNITY UNIT PLAN” This Plan provides for flexibility of design standards for mixed-use development allowing for residential and accessory uses such as churches, schools and daycare facilities.

D.    Interpretation of the Zoning District Map:

1.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits.

2.    Where the designation of a district boundary line coincides with a street alley, waterway, or railroad right-of-way, the boundary lines shall be the centerline of said indicated element unless otherwise stated.

3.    Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets, waterways, or railroad rights-of-way but do coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.

4.    Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way, waterway or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline

5.    Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated, a zoning district adjoining either side of said street, alley or other public way shall automatically be extended to its centerline if ownership is split along the centerline.

6.    Where none of the above rules apply, the district boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map.


1-016 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION

A.    The following rules shall hold true for all regulations contained in this ordinance, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

1.    Words used in the present tense shall include the future.

2.    Words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number.

3.    Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.

4.    The phrase ‘used for’ shall include the phrases ‘arrange for’, ‘designed for’, ‘intended for’, ‘maintained for’ and ‘occupied for’.

5.    The words ‘shall’ and ‘must’ are mandatory. The words ‘may’ and ‘should’ are permissive.

6.    Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.

7.    The word ‘City’ refers to the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

B.    Interpretation of these regulations shall be guided by the following:

1.    In their interpretation and application, the provisions made by these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare.

2.    Where the conditions imposed by any portion of these regulations upon the use of land or structures are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by other provisions of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulations of any kind, the regulation which is more restrictive shall govern.

3.    These regulations are not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or any other private agreement of legal relationship. Provided, however, that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements or legal relationships, the provisions of these regulations shall govern.

4.    No structure or use, which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations, shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of these regulations. To the extent that, and in any respect that, said unlawful structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of these regulations, said structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.

5.    Where this ordinance permits or requires an act on the part of an ‘owner’ or ‘landowner’, said designation shall include all owners, partners, tenants in common, or any other person with ownership interests.

C.    Time Computation

1.    In computing any period of time the day of the act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included.

2.    The last day of the time period shall be counted unless it falls on a Saturday or Sunday or a legal holiday observed by the City of Tonganoxie.

3.    When the prescribed time period is 7 days or less, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays observed by the City of Tonganoxie shall be excluded.

4.    Whenever a notice, petition or document must be filed within a specified period of time or prior to a specified date or day, it shall be filed with the appropriate city official no later than 4:00PM.


1-017 ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY

All newly annexed properties shall retain the City equivalent to their prior zoning status when taken into the City.


1-018 VESTED RIGHTS

A.    For all subdivision and planned unit development, development rights for land shall vest upon recording of the final plat for such land. If construction of infrastructure has not been completed within five years of recording the plat, the development rights shall expire unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission.

B.    The Planning Commission may, for good cause as presented by the applicant, grant a single extension of vested rights in a subdivision or planned unit development. Vested rights shall not be extended for more than one year. Applicants seeking an extension shall submit a statement in writing, justifying the extension. In considering an extension, the Planning Commission shall examine the following factors, as well as other relevant considerations:

1.    The undue or unnecessary hardship placed upon the property owner;

2.    Any amendments or changes to the regulations that have occurred since issuance of the permit;

3.    The amount of construction that has been completed;

4.    Estimated period of time needed to complete construction; and

5.    Conformance with the general spirit and intent of the zoning and subdivision regulations.

C.    Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to exempt development from the provisions of the Development Regulations except to the extent that the construction or development is expressly shown on the approved final plat or site plan. For example, the right to complete a building in accordance with a previously-approved site plan shall not include the right to erect signs or make other site improvements not shown on the approved plan.

D.    Development rights for individual lots, platted or unplatted, shall vest upon approval of the site plan or development plan for such site and the issuance of all applicable building permits. Building permits shall expire within one year for residential construction and two years for multi-family or commercial construction. An extension may be granted by the Building Inspector only if construction is substantially completed.


1-019 COMPLIANCE WITH DISTRICT PROVISIONS

A.    The regulations set forth in this ordinance shall be interpreted as the minimum allowable and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land use, except as hereinafter provided:

1.    No site, lot or parcel of land or part thereof shall hereafter be used, occupied or divided, except in conformity with all the regulations applicable for the district in which it is located.

2.    No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, remodeled, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations and requirements of this ordinance.

3.    No part of a yard or other open space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for any other building.

4.    Every building hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot, unless specifically provided for in these regulations.

5.    No lot of record shall be reduced or diminished in size nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with these Development Regulations for the City of Tonganoxie.

6.    No use of the site shall be commenced and no accessory buildings shall be allowed on a site prior to the construction of a main structure.

7.    Lots that were legally created shall remain legal and considered buildable for any purpose allowed within the designated zoning district.

8.    Any structure rebuilt or restored after damage or destruction by fire or other casualty shall be considered to be a structure built hereafter, unless Article 21 of these regulations permits such structures to be rebuilt or restored.

9.    If a use of any structure is hereafter changed to another, then the new use must comply with the Use Regulations of these zoning regulations, but the mere establishment of the new use does not require the existing structure to conform to the Lot Size Requirements of the Bulk Regulations of these zoning regulations.

10.    No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: to exceed the height of bulk; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; and to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.

11.    No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance.


Section 2 GENERAL PROVISIONS


2-010 DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR

A.    A Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Governing Body to implement the zoning process.

B.    Said Administrator shall be expected to attend all Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals meetings as an advisor concerning the zoning and subdivision regulations for the City. Such Administrator shall also attend such other meetings as necessary to represent the City concerning the application of the zoning and subdivision regulations.

C.    The Zoning Administrator shall

1.    Respond to all questions of interpretation and enforcement of the zoning ordinance either in person or when an application for an action is submitted. He/she shall review all applications for such actions for compliance with the adopted regulations.

2.    Shall be responsible for official public notification when required on applications and proposals.

3.    Shall collect all fees due to the City for such applications.

4.    Shall issue building permits for new buildings or renovations

D.    If an application does not meet the zoning and subdivision regulations for the City, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the request and issue a written response stating the reasons for such denial.

E.    The Zoning Administrator shall also be responsible for enforcement of the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations. They shall investigate complaints, issue notices of violations and take action to correct said violations.


2-011 BUILDING PERMITS

A.    It shall be unlawful to commence the construction or the excavation for the construction of any building or structure or to commence the moving or alteration of a structure as defined in the City Building Code of any building within the City of Tonganoxie until the Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator has issued a building permit for such work. This shall also apply to accessory structures or buildings. Except upon written authorization of the Board of Zoning Appeals, no such building permit shall be issued for any building where said construction, moving, alteration, or use thereof would be in violation of any provisions of this Ordinance.

B.    Any building permit issued by the Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, and which permit, by its own terms and provision, is in full force and effect at said date, shall not be invalidated by the passage of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, but shall remain a valid permit subject only to its own terms and provisions and any other ordinances or regulations pertaining thereto in effect at the time of the issuance of said permit.

C.    The application for a building permit in the City of Tonganoxie shall be as prescribed in the Building Code for the City of Tonganoxie.

D.    The application fee for a building permit shall be as prescribed by the Governing Body for the City of Tonganoxie.

E.    Certificate of Occupancy

1.    No land shall be occupied or used, nor buildings structurally altered until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator which certifies that the use complies with the regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.

2.    No new or altered building shall be occupied until application is made for an Occupancy Permit. No such permit shall be issued until the structure is approved by the Building Inspector or City Administrator as complying with the appropriate zoning district regulations, the building codes, and any other applicable codes or ordinances.

3.    A temporary Occupancy Permit may be issued for a use in lieu of completion of landscaping or other requirements that cannot be completed through no fault of the owner, such as inclement weather conditions. Such Temporary Occupancy Permit shall contain an expiration date. If all conditions of the Temporary Occupancy Permit have not been met by the expiration date, occupancy of said premises shall be revoked and all utilities disconnected.


2-012 EXEMPTIONS

A.    Poles, wires, cables, conduits vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or other similar equipment for distribution to consumers of telephone or other communications, electricity, gas or water, or the collection of sewage or surface water operated or maintained by the City or a public utility but not including substations located on or above the surface of the ground.

B.    Railroad tracks, signals, bridges and similar facilities and equipment located on a railroad right-of-way, and maintenance and repair work on such facilities and equipment. This exemption shall not include any facilities and equipment listed as a permitted use in the I-H Heavy Industrial District.

C.    Agriculture structures or land used for agriculture. In the event that any structure or land ceases to be used only for agriculture, then such structure or land shall be subjected to the applicable regulations of this ordinance.

D.    Other structures as noted elsewhere in these regulations. See Section 25, Signs.


Section 3 “R-R” RURAL DISTRICT


3-010 PURPOSE

To protect residential areas with a rural or agricultural character and to protect those areas that have become surrounded by urban uses but are not yet ready to be more intensely developed.


3-011 ALLOWED USE GROUPS

A.    Residential Uses

1.    Various General or Moderate Agricultural uses with the exception of the following:

a.    Intensive feeding operations and/or agribusiness

b.    The spreading, accumulation, feeding or use of garbage in any manner on the open surface of the land

c.    Any use within three hundred (300) feet of a residential or retail business structure that results in offensive odor, dust or noise.

2.    Group Home

3.    Secondary Residential Uses (such as pool houses, guest houses, servants quarters)

4.    Single Family Residential

5.    Accessory Uses 1, 2, 5 that are related, customary and subordinate to the existing use of the site.

6.    No single farm building shall exceed 1,000 square feet

7.    No single farm building shall occupy more than 1% of the total square footage of a lot

B.    Institutional and Service Uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Education: School & Other

2.    Internment Facilities 1 & 2

3.    Religious Institution

4.    Aviation

5.    Municipal Services

6.    Safety Services

7.    Local and Major Utilities

C.    Recreational Uses that are compatible with the uses in the surrounding area.

1.    Athletic Facilities, Outdoor

2.    Open space

3.    Recreation Entertainment II & III

D.    Commercial uses: Lodging Facilities I

E.    Signs as regulated in Section 25.

F.    Special Uses as allowed in Section 22; (Personal Care Facility, Lodging Facilities II & III, Recreation Entertainment II & III, Home Occupation)

G.    Temporary Uses:

1.    Roadside stand for the sale of products generated on site. Said stand to be removed when not in use.

2.    Other Temporary Uses as approved by the Governing Body. See Section 33.

H.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


3-012 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for temporary dumpster rentals during construction process.


3-013 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    Lot Area

1.    Minimum lot area is one acre excluding public right of way.

2.    Newly annexed properties are automatically zoned R-R Rural until an application for rezoning can be submitted and approved.

3.    For purposes of constructing a dwelling, lots shall maintain a minimum of 160 feet of frontage measured at the setback line.

B.    Height Regulations

1.    No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided in Section 23, Additional Height and Area Regulations.

C.    Floor Area. Minimum finished floor area for a main dwelling unit shall be 1000 square feet


3-014 REQUIRED YARDS

A.    Front Yard. Minimum depth of fifty (50) feet on all street rights-of-way.

B.    Side Yard. Minimum depth of twenty (20) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. Minimum depth of fifty (50) feet.


3-015 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Ordinance.


3-016 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance.


Section 4 “R-E” RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT


4-010 PURPOSE

To allow for the development of large lot residential uses in environmentally sensitive areas such as floodplain fringe, forested areas, places with steep slopes, etc. Lot arrangement shall be geared toward reserving large areas for open space/communal uses. Dwelling unit density shall be no more than 1 unit per acre. Development agreements and homeowner’s associations may be required.


4-011 ALLOWED USE GROUPS

A.    Residential and Accessory Uses.

1.    Single-family residential dwellings.

2.    Secondary Residential Uses (such as pool houses, guest houses, servants quarters)

3.    Limited Animal Husbandry as described is Section 32, Definitions

4.    Accessory uses 1 & 5 that are related, customary and subordinate to a large-lot, single-family subdivision such as detached garage, barn, etc.

B.    Institutional and Service Uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Education: School & Other

2.    Religious Institution

3.    Safety Services

4.    Local Utilities

C.    Recreational Uses such as park, playground, golf course, stable or other appropriate and compatible recreational uses as an accessory or subsidiary use to a large-lot single-family residential area.

D.    Signs as regulated in Section 25.

F.    Special Uses as allowed in Section 22. (Education, Other; Personal Care Facility; Home Occupation)

F.    Temporary Uses as approved by the Governing Body. See Section 33.

G.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


4-012 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

This zoning may be invoked in any area designated as environmentally at risk or as a natural area of value to the community. Building site locations and densities may be limited at the discretion of the City. Clustering and open space preservation techniques are encouraged to make the best use of the land and increase the preservation of open space.

A.    Right-of-Way.

1.    Streets. It is recommended that streets be constructed to City standards and dedicated as defined in the Subdivision regulations, however they may remain in private ownership under the following conditions

a.    Right-of-way width to be reserved as an easement will meet the width established by the City subdivision regulations.

b.    Only local roads may remain in private ownership. If at any time the street connects to another area or is improved to a collector or arterial status, said street must be brought up to the City standards in effect at that time and dedicated to the City.

c.    Private ownership of the road/street must be maintained by a mandatory homeowners association. A copy of the association agreement must be submitted to the City for review.

d.    If at any time the homeowner’s association wishes to dedicate the street to the City, said street must be brought to the minimum City standards existing at the time of transfer.

2.    Curbs are required on all streets dedicated to the City.

3.    Sidewalks will be provided unless an alternate walking/riding path system is proposed that allows easy access from/to all lots and recreational areas.

B.    Water – All lots shall be connected to the City water system. It is the responsibility of the developer to negotiate terms of compensation with the Rural Water District prior to annexation of land by the City. The developer shall pay said compensation. The City reserves the right, on an individual lot basis, to request that the Rural Water District provide service.

C.    Wastewater – All lots must be connected to the City’s wastewater treatment system.

D.    Stormwater provisions shall be calculated according to the City’s Stormwater Management Plan.

E.    A development agreement will be required to establish specific responsibilities of the developer, the City and future owners of the subdivision or any portion thereof.

F.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for temporary dumpster rentals during construction process.


4-013 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    A minimum 3/4-acre per lot (32,670 square feet) is required, with no more than 1 dwelling unit per acre.

B.    Impervious surface area on any given lot shall not exceed 25% of the lot area.

C.    Amenity Space. A minimum amount of space shall be required for amenities such as walking/biking paths, parks, water features, recreation areas or similar uses. Space designated for rights-of-way or utility easements does not count toward the amenity space requirement.

1.    For subdivisions less than 20 acres in area, a minimum of 1 acre of public/private amenity space shall be provided for amenities.

2.    For subdivisions greater than 20 acres, a minimum of 15% of the land area in the subdivision shall be reserved for amenities. Rights-of-way and utility easements are exempted from the total land area figure for this calculation.

3.    Additional amenity space may be required at the discretion of the Planning Commission for areas of environmental concern.

d.    Floor area: Minimum finished floor area for a main dwelling unit shall be 1,200 square feet.

e.    Minimum width of lot shall be 100 feet.


4-014 REQUIRED YARDS

A.    Front Yard. Minimum depth of fifty (50) feet on all street rights-of-way.

B.    Side Yard. Minimum depth of twenty (20) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. Minimum depth of fifty (50) feet.


4-015 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Ordinance


4-016 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 5 “R-SF” SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT


5-010 PURPOSE

To allow for residential development at a low density that is protected from encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the residential environment.


5-011 ALLOWED USES

A.    Residential Uses

1.    Accessory Uses 1 & 5 that are related, customary and subordinate to the existing use of the site.

2.    Group Home

3.    Secondary residential Uses (such as pool houses, guest houses, servants quarters)

4.    Single-family dwellings

B.    Institutional and Service Uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Community or Social Service/Groups

2.    Education: – School

3.    Religious Institution

4.    Safety Services

5.    Local Utilities

C.    Recreational uses that are compatible with the uses in the surrounding area

1.    Athletic Facilities, Outdoor

2.    Open Space or Areas

D.    Commercial Uses: Lodging Facilities I

E.    Signs as regulated in Section 25.

F.    Special Uses as allowed in Section 22. (Group Living, Education-Other, Personal Care Facility, Home Occupation)

G.    Temporary Uses as approved by the Governing Body. See Section 33.

A.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


5-012 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

The following standards are required for placement of a site-built or pre-manufactured residential structure in this district:

1.    The minimum dimension of either the width or length of the home shall be 22 feet.

2.    The minimum roof pitch shall be 3 inches of rise in 12 inches of run. Lesser pitches may be allowed with the approval of the City Planning Commission. (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05)

3.    The home shall be sided in wood, masonry, composition board or finished aluminum lap siding. Other materials will be allowed if they are normally used in site built residential construction.

4.    The roofing material shall be wood shingles, composition or fiberglass shingles, asphalt shingles, clay or concrete tile or slate. Other materials will be allowed if they are normally used in site built residential construction.

5.    The home must be permanently mounted on a foundation or basement.

6.    A garage is required if 70% of the homes on the block where the home is to be placed have garages.

7.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for temporary dumpster rentals during construction process.

For non-residential structures refer to Article 9, Site Review regulations of the Subdivision Regulations.


5-013 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    Area Regulations

1.    Minimum lot area is 6,000 square feet.

2.    All lots shall have a minimum width at the setback line of 65 feet.

B.    All lots shall have frontage on a right-of-way

C.    Height Regulations

1.    No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental Regulations

D.    Minimum finished floor area for a single-family home shall be 1,000 square feet


5-014 REQUIRED YARDS

A.    Front Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet on all street rights-of-way.

B.    Side Yard. Minimum depth of 10 feet.

C.    Rear Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet.


5-015 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Ordinance


5-016 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 6 “R-I” INFILL DISTRICT


6-010 PURPOSE

To provide for residential and limited commercial development that is compatible with other development in the nearby area in terms of lot size, structure size and required yard setback.


6-011 ALLOWED USES

A.    Residential Uses

1.    Single-Family Residential dwellings

2.    Group Homes

3.    Accessory Uses 1 & 5 that are related, customary and subordinate to the existing use of the site.

4.    Two-Family Residential dwellings

B.    Institutional and Service Uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Community or Social Service/Groups

2.    Education: School & Other

3.    Religious Institution

4.    Safety Services

5.    Local Utilities

C.    Recreational Uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Athletic Facilities, Outdoor

2.    Open Space or Areas

D.    Commercial – Lodging Facilities I

E.    Signs as regulated in Section 25.

F.    Special Uses as allowed in Section 22. (Education-Other, Personal Care Facility, Home Occupation)

G.    Temporary Uses as approved by the Governing Body. See Section 33.

H.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


6-012 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    This is an overlay zoning district that may be invoked upon any currently platted lot in an area bounded by Washington Street, East Street, and 24 Highway plus the Elm Park Subdivision.

B.    The application for this zoning requires submittal of examples and locations to support the request.

C.    A minimum of 1 off-street exterior parking space per dwelling unit will be required.

D.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for temporary dumpster rentals during construction process.


6-013 AREA, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS

A.    Area Regulations – Lot size and width as well as finished building area shall be similar to those in immediately adjacent areas to the proposed site as approved by the Planning Commission.

B.    Height Regulations – No building shall exceed two and one half (2½) stories or thirty five (35) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental District Regulations.

C.    Required Yard setbacks shall be similar to those in immediately adjacent areas to the proposed site as approved by the Planning Commission.

D.    Floor Area: minimum finished floor area for a single-family home shall be 1,000 square feet


6-014 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Ordinance


6-015 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 7 “R-MF1” MULTIPLE FAMILY 1 DISTRICT


7-010 PURPOSE

To be used as a transition area or buffer area between single-family residential uses and more intense uses such as those allowed in R-MF2 Multi-Family and the commercial districts. This is considered a low-density residential district.


7-011 ALLOWED USES

A.    Residential.

1.    Multi-Unit dwelling: (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/09/05) Two-, three-, and four-family dwelling structures

2.    Single Family Dwelling

3.    Group Homes as defined in Section 32 Definitions;

4.    Group Living

5.    Accessory Uses I and III that are related, customary and subordinate to the existing use of the site.

B.    Institutional and Service uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Community or Social Services/Groups

2.    Religious Institution: Place of worship and other related religious uses

3.    Public utility buildings and services

4.    Municipal and Safety Services

5.    Early learning, elementary and preparatory schools

6.    Long-term health care facilities

C.    Recreational uses that are compatible with the uses in the surrounding area.

1.    Athletic Facilities, Outdoor

2.    Open Space or Areas including forest, wetland, historical marker or archeological site.

D.    Signs as regulated in Section 25.

E.    Special Uses as allowed in Section 22. (Education, Other; Personal Care Facility; Home Occupation)

F.    Temporary Uses as approved by the Governing Body. See Section 33.

G.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


7-012 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for temporary dumpster rentals during construction process.


7-013 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    Area Regulations

1.    Minimum lot area: There shall be an area provided of not less than 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit or 7,500 square feet per lot.

2.    Maximum 4 dwelling units per structure

3.    Minimum lot width is 75 feet measured at the setback line or a minimum 37 ½ feet per unit for two-, three-, and four-family dwelling structures. (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

B.    Height Regulations

1.    No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental Regulations

C.    Minimum finished floor area per dwelling unit is 750 square feet.


7-014 REQUIRED YARD

Front Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet on all street rights-of-way

Side Yard. Minimum depth of 7 feet, or 0 feet for interior side yards of attached residential units (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

Rear Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet


7-015 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Ordinance


7-016 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 8 “R-MF2” MULTIPLE FAMILY 2 DISTRICTS


8-010 PURPOSE

Provide the convenience of multi-family living with the amenities available to residential development. This is considered moderate density residential housing. All higher density housing shall require Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning.


8-011 ALLOWED USES

A.    Residential:

1.    Multi-Unit dwelling: Two-,three-, and four-family dwelling structures and structures containing two(2) to sixteen (16) dwelling units or more. (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05).

2.    Assisted Living

3.    Group Home

4.    Group Living

5.    Accessory uses 1, 4 and 5 that are related, customary and subordinate to the existing use of the site.

B.    Institutional and Services: Uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Community or Social Services/Groups

2.    Short- and Long-Term Health Care Facilities

3.    Religious Institutions: Place of worship and other related religious uses

4.    Local public utility uses

5.    Safety Services

6.    Public and private schools, institutions of higher learning; and related facilities

C.    Recreational uses that are compatible with the uses in the surrounding area.

1.    Outdoor athletic facilities

2.    Open Space or Areas such as forests, orchards, and wetlands, fishing lakes, historic or archeological areas.

D.    Commercial

1.    Lodging Facilities I

E.    Signs as regulated in Section 25.

F.    Special Uses as allowed in Section 22. (Education, Other; Personal Care Facility; Lodging Facilities II, Home Occupation)

G.    Temporary Uses as approved by the Governing Body. See Section 33.

H.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


8-012 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for temporary dumpster rentals during construction process.


8-013 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    Area Regulations

1.    Minimum 10,000 square feet per lot or 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is larger.

2.    Minimum lot width is 100 feet measured at the setback line or a minimum 35 feet per unit for two-, three-, and four-family dwelling structures (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

B.    Height Regulations

1.    No building shall exceed (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental Regulations

C.    Minimum finished floor area per dwelling unit shall be 500 square feet.


8-014 REQUIRED YARDS

A.    Front Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet on all street rights-of-way

B.    Side Yard. Minimum depth of 10 feet, or 0 feet for interior side yards of attached residential units (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

C.    Rear Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet


8-015 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Ordinance


8-016 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 9 “R-MF3” MULTIPLE FAMILY III DISTRICT


9-010 PURPOSE

Provide the convenience of multi-family living with the amenities available to residential development. This is considered high density residential housing. All higher density housing shall require Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning.


9-011 ALLOWED USES

A.    Residential:

1.    Multi-unit dwelling Two-, three-, and four-family dwelling structures, and structures containing 16 dwelling units or more.(Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05)

2.    Assisted Living

3.    Group Home

4.    Group Living

5.    Accessory uses I, IV and V that are related, customary and subordinate to the existing use of the site.

B.    Institutional and Services Uses that are incidental to and compatible with the general existing or planned uses in the area.

1.    Community or Social Services/Groups

2.    Short- and Long-Term Health Care Facilities

3.    Religious Institutions: Place of worship and other related religious uses

4.    Local public utility uses

5.    Safety Services

6.    Public and private schools, institutions of higher learning; and related facilities

C.    Recreational uses that are compatible with the uses in the surrounding area.

1.    Outdoor athletic facilities

2.    Open Space or Areas such as forests, orchards, wetlands, fishing lakes and historic or archeological area.

D.    Commercial

1.    Lodging Facilities I

E.    Signs as regulated in Section 25.

F.    Special Uses as allowed in Section 22. (Education, Other; Personal Care Facility; Lodging Facilities II)

G.    Temporary Uses as approved by the Governing Body. See Section 33.

H.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


9-012 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for temporary dumpster rentals during construction process.


9-013 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    Area Regulations

1.    Minimum 10,000 square feet per lot or 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is larger.

2.    Minimum lot width is 100 feet measured at the setback line or a minimum 35 feet per unit for two-, three-, and four-family dwelling structures (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

B.    Height Regulations

1.    No building shall exceed (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental Regulations

Minimum finished floor area per dwelling unit shall be 500 square feet.


9-014 REQUIRED YARDS

A.    Front Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet on all street rights-of-way

B.    Side Yard. Minimum depth of 10 feet, or 0 feet for interior side yards of attached residential units in two-, three-, and four-family dwelling structures (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

C.    Rear Yard. Minimum depth of 30 feet


9-015 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Ordinance


9-016 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 10 “MHP” MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT


10-010 PURPOSE

This district provides for mobile home park development. The purpose of this district is to accommodate the particular needs and requirements of mobile homes in areas where such needs can be reasonably and efficiently met. Special consideration must be given to the movement of traffic both within the mobile home park and of the mobile homes themselves on public streets, to the provision of safety features peculiar to the needs of mobile homes, to the provision of amenities suitable to the density of mobile home parks, and to the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

A.    Mobile Home Parks are subject to compliance to Mobile Home Code.


10-011 PERMITTED USES

In the MHP, Manufactured Home Park District, no building, structure, or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, converted, or structurally altered unless otherwise provided in this article, except for one or more of the following uses:

A.    Mobile home dwellings in a mobile home park of at least ten acres which shall be designed for a maximum density of 6 mobile homes per acre. Each mobile home shall be placed on its own mobile home space.


10-012 MOBILE HOMES, WHERE PERMITTED

A.    Except as provided below, a mobile home may be permitted in the City only in an area zoned “MHP” Manufactured Home Park District.

B.    A mobile home may be permitted elsewhere in the City by the Governing Body for the purpose of providing temporary housing following a disaster, such as fire, windstorm, flood or other emergency or hardship provided such mobile home is removed from its location within one year of its original placement.

C.    One or more mobile homes may be used as a temporary office or other non-residential structure on the site of a construction project, provided such structure is removed upon completion of the project.


10-013 SITE LOCATION REQUIREMENTS

No site shall be zoned the MHP Manufactured Home Park District unless the following location requirements are met:

A.    On a minimum 24 feet wide paved Public Street no more than 500 feet from a street designated and improved as a collector or thoroughfare on the Major Street Plan.

B.    All intersecting streets from the collector or thoroughfare to the mobile home court shall have intersections adequate to accommodate maneuvering with a 16 feet by 80 feet mobile home.


10-014 PERMITS AND ZONING

It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any mobile home park unless a valid permit has been issued by the Governing Body of the City of Tonganoxie in the name of the owner for the specific construction, alteration, or extension proposed.

Applications for permits and/or rezoning shall have attached preliminary site plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer of the State of Kansas. The site plan shall contain the following as a minimum:

A.    Name, address, and telephone number of applicant.

B.    Acreage and dimensions of the land.

C.    Contour intervals of not more than five feet.

D.    North arrow, scale, and date of plan.

E.    The layout and dimensions of all mobile home lots, streets, walkways, and recreational or open space areas.

F.    An enlarged detail of a typical mobile home lot plan to show street, off-street parking, mobile home stand, patio, storage, walkways, and on-site utility lines.

G.    Location of existing and proposed utility lines.

H.    Location and size of all proposed buildings and their designated use.

I.    Preliminary drainage plan and location of all areas subject to flooding.

J.    Detail of trash enclosures and disposal areas.

K.    Location of all buildings and streets within 200 feet of the site.

L.    Proposed development schedule.

All applications for a Mobile Home Park permit shall pay the current application fee at the time application is made.

If the permit is approved by the City Planning Commission, no permit shall be issued until completed final engineering plans are approved by the City Engineer. Final engineering plans are approved by the City Engineer. Final engineering plans and specifications shall cover all items called for in the preliminary site plan and any other details or items deemed necessary by the City Engineer.

Permits shall become void if construction is not completed within one year of the date of the permit.


10-015 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    Area and Lot Width

1.    Mobile Home Space Size – Not less than 45 feet by 100 feet.

B.    Height

1.    Not more than 1 story.

C.    Setback from Property Lines

1.    Setbacks around the perimeter of the mobile home park – Not less than 25 feet when abutting on a public street and 15 feet from other boundary lines.

2.    Front Yard – Not less than 25 feet from any public or private street or drive.

3.    Side Yard, Interior – Not less than 20 feet on the entry side of the mobile home and not less than 5 feet on the non-entry side from the side lot line.

4.    Side Yard, Corner – Not less than 25 feet.

5.    Rear Yard – Not less than 15 feet from any lot line and not less than 25 feet from any street line.


10-016 REQUIRED FACILITIES

In the MHP, Manufactured Home Park District, the following minimum facility requirements shall be provided:

A.    A concrete patio 180 square feet or larger with a minimum width of 8 feet for each mobile home space convenient to the entrance of the mobile home and appropriately related to the open area of the space.

B.    A concrete or asphalt mobile home pad of adequate size for each mobile home space to fit the outside dimensions of the mobile home to be placed thereupon. Each home shall be equipped with skirts on all sides, such skirts to be of material harmonious to the mobile home and installed within ten days of home placement.

C.    Where public streets are provided, they will meet all City standards and specifications. All private streets shall be built to City standards and shall be at least 24 feet wide. The City may at any time require traffic control devices to be installed and maintained by the developer or owner on private streets as are deemed necessary to protect the public safety.

D.    A paved individual walkway not less than two (2) feet wide shall be provided from each mobile home to a paved driveway or parking space. A common walk not less than 3 1/2 feet wide shall be provided of all streets within the park.

E.    Appropriate recreational areas at a rate not less than 200 square feet per mobile home space shall be provided. Required recreational areas shall not be less than 2,000 square feet in size.

F.    If tenant storage facilities are to be provided outside the mobile home for or by the occupants, the location and design of the storage facilities shall be made a part of the final development plan. Storage facilities may be provided on each mobile home lot or in compounds located within 100 feet from each mobile home lot. If private fences between mobile home lots are to be allowed, they shall be of uniform height and approved as a part of the final development plan.

G.    A storm shelter shall be provided for persons living in the mobile home park. The storm shelter shall be adequately designed to protect occupants, and shall have an area of not less than 12 square feet per mobile home lot. The storm shelter shall have adequate fresh air ducts to accommodate the occupants, and storm shelters shall be so located to provide a reasonable degree of safety for all residents. Design and construction of the storm shelter shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.

H.    All mobile homes newly installed shall be anchored to the ground by means of anchors attached both to the frame and with straps extending over the top and completely surrounding sides and roof in accordance with K.S.A. 75-1230 or updates.


10-017 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING

A reasonable amount of landscaping is required on all projects with emphasis on softening the visual impact of unsightly areas and enhancing the overall appearance. Trees are required at not less than one per 4,500 square feet of site area, and buffer planting is required adjacent to single-family and two-family zoned property. Planting schedules shall be shown on the final site plan and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.


10-018 PARKING STANDARDS

Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. In addition, mobile home parks which do not have public streets shall provide visitor parking at a rate of one-fourth parking space for each mobile home lot, appropriately located and dispersed in separate parking lots having no more than eight parking spaces each.


10-019 MANAGEMENT OF MOBILE HOME PARKS

Each mobile home park shall have a resident manager on staff and shall be operated in a sanitary, orderly, and efficient manner, and shall maintain a neat appearance at all times. No damaged or deteriorated mobile home shall be permitted to remain; and suitable and effective rules for regulating the outside storage of equipment, the removal of wheels and installation of skirting, the collection of trash and garbage, and the attachment of appurtenances to the mobile homes shall be continually enforced. All drives, playground area and equipment, lawn and trees, and any recreational or accessory buildings shall be maintained at a level at least equal to the average residential neighborhood in the City. All portions of the mobile home park shall be open and accessible to fire, police, and other emergency and protective vehicles and personnel, including City, County, and State inspectors.


10-020 SIGNS

Each such project shall be permitted one wall sign and one monument sign. For additional standards and information, see Section 25.


10-021 UTILITY SERVICE

In the MHP, Manufactured Home Park District, the following minimum utility services shall be provided.

A.    Water Supply – A public water supply shall be provided to serve the entire mobile home park. Water piping within the park shall comply with City and Kansas Department of Health & Environment standards.

1.    Adequate fire protection shall be provided by the installation of fire hydrants at minimum spacing of 500 feet between hydrants. Hydrants shall be served by minimum 8-inch diameter water mains.

2.    A minimum 3/4 -inch diameter service line shall be extended to each mobile home lot. The service line shall end with a riser pipe with screwed cap to above ground level. A shutoff valve in a pit shall be installed below frost line. The meter setter and meter pit shall be installed as approved by the City Engineer.

B.    Sewage Disposal – A public sewer system shall be installed to serve all occupied buildings and mobile homes within the park. The sewer system shall be connected to the City sewer system. On-site treatment system shall not be permitted. Design and construction of the sewer system shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer and the Kansas Department of Health & Environment. All sewer discharge shall meet City specifications and SDR-35 minimum shall be used.

1.    Each mobile home shall be provided with a 4-inch diameter sewer service in accordance with City specifications and the City Engineer’s approval. The sewer service shall end with a capped vertical riser, which shall extend to the ground surface and SDR-35 or equivalent shall be used.

C.    Electrical Distribution – Each mobile home park shall be served by an underground electrical system. The system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with current City electrical codes and the requirements of the local electric utility.

1.    Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a minimum 120/240 v. 100-ampere service. Connection shall be provided by a main disconnect housed in a weatherproof outlet box. All mobile homes shall be grounded with an approved grounding conductor.

D.    Natural Gas Distribution – Each mobile home park shall be served with a natural gas distribution system installed and operated by the local natural gas utility. Private systems shall not be permitted.

1.    Each mobile home lot shall have an approved manual shutoff valve and screwed cap.

E.    Refuse Handling – The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be conducted so as to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding, fire hazards, or air pollution.

1.    Refuse shall be stored in water-tight containers located no more than 150 feet from any mobile home lot. Common refuse containers shall be set on concrete stands and properly screened. Refuse shall be collected and transported in covered containers. Collection shall be at least once a week.


Section 11 “PUD-R” PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT


11-010 PURPOSE

This district provides for elements of flexibility in design, placement, arrangement, bulk and other considerations involved in a planned multiple family project; together with a framework within which the buildings and uses in the planned project may be interrelated with adjacent developments and areas, to maintain the desired overall intensity of land use, desirable population densities, and desirable areas of open space. The purpose of this district is to accommodate low-rise, multiple family housing at moderate densities. Building units shall be clustered and be carefully planned to provide for the maximum of privacy and preserving adequate open space to serve as a buffer between commercial and districts with different zoning.


11-011 USE REGULATIONS

Principles Uses and Buildings

A.    Apartment houses or townhouses. (Flats)

B.    Row-houses – containing 2 units or more

C.    Two-family dwellings.

Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


11-012 ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS

A.    Incidental commercial services within an apartment house provided the following conditions are complied with.

1.    Limited to tenants.

2.    Contained within a principal building and shall not exceed (10%) of gross floor area.

3.    No advertising signs or window displays visible from the outside of the building.

4.    No direct access from the outside of the building.

B.    Garages, for the purpose of storing tenant’s automobiles, having no repair facilities.

C.    Such accessory buildings and uses as are customarily incidental to the permitted principal use, i.e., storage, recreation, public utilities, etc.


11-013 HEIGHT REGULATION

No building shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, except that of an apartment house or portion thereof may be increased to 6 stories or 65 feet provided the building is set back from each required yard line at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above forty-five (45) feet.


11-014 LOCATION AND HEIGHT OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS

Garages and other accessory buildings shall not exceed one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height. No unattached building shall be located in a front yard, and; if located in a rear yard shall not be less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line or side lot line, and; if located in the side yard it shall not be nearer than five (5) feet from the side lot line.


11-015 AREA REGULATIONS

A.    Minimum Size Parcel

1.    Area – shall contain a minimum of 2 acres.

2.    Frontage – shall be a minimum of 200 feet.

3.    Depth – shall be a minimum of 200 feet.

B.    External Requirements

1.    Front and Rear – Set back shall be 1 foot for every foot of building height, but not less than 50 feet.

2.    Side Yard – shall be 1 foot for every 2-1/2 feet of building height, but not less than 20 feet.

3.    Corner Lots – shall have front yards on each street equivalent to the above front yard requirements.

C.    Internal Requirements

1.    The minimum horizontal distance between buildings shall be twenty (20) feet, provided:

a.    Walls containing main window exposures or main entrances shall be located no closer to another building than (75) feet, and generally no closer than twice the difference in elevation between the lowest ground elevation of the buildings and the greatest roof elevation of the buildings.

b.    Other walls containing secondary windows (side of buildings) shall be located no closer to another building than thirty (30) feet.


11-016 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS

A.    Apartment – 1-1/2 parking spaces per dwelling unit that has one bedroom or less containing 180 square feet (9’ x 20’) per space on right angle parking or equivalent for 30, 45 and 60 degree parking. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit with two bedrooms or more.

B.    Row houses – 1-1/2 parking spaces per dwelling unit, provided condominiums shall be required only 1 (one) parking space per unit with the additional 1/2 parking space per unit located within the project.

C.    Two family dwellings and row houses shall conform to the requirements of Section 20.


11-017 MINIMUM LOT COVERAGE OF ALL BUILDINGS

All buildings, including accessory buildings, at ground level shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent of the gross lot area.


11-018 MINIMUM OPEN SPACE COVERAGE

At least forty-five (45) percent of the gross lot area, including front side and rear yards, shall be devoted to open space; such as landscaped areas, pedestrian walks, malls, swimming pools, play grounds, bicycle trails, etc. Public streets access ways and parking areas shall not be included as part of the open space requirements.


11-019 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA

Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 380 square feet of habitable floor area for apartments. Minimum floor area for row houses, town-homes and two-family dwellings shall conform to other areas required in RMF1 and RMF2 zoning districts.


11-020 DENSITY

There shall be a minimum lot area of 2,178 square feet per family or a maximum of 20 families per acre.


11-021 APPLYING FOR REZONING

A petition to change to a “PUD-R” Planned Residential District shall be filed in accordance with the application and review procedures provided in Section 27. Included with the petition shall be an Outline Development Plan a Preliminary Development Plan, in accordance with this ordinance. (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)


11-022 PLANNING COMMISSION PROCEDURES

After a petition for “PUD-R,” Planned Residential District is filed; it shall be referred to and considered by the City Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures set forth by Section 27. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and after the conclusion of the hearing shall submit its recommendations to the Governing Body, based on the zoning of the land and the Outline Development Plans or the Preliminary Development Plan. (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)


11-023 GOVERNING BODY ACTION

If the City Council is in favor of rezoning, they shall, by ordinance rezone the property, but before any building permits may be issued the Preliminary and Final Development Plans shall be approved by the Governing Body after recommendation by the City Planning Commission according to the requirements under these regulations.


11-024 PROCEDURE FOR SUBMITTING PLANS

If the Outline Development Plans were submitted with the petition, a Preliminary Plat and the Preliminary Development Plans shall be submitted to the Planning Commission Office within six (6) months after the Governing Body rezone the property and approve the Outline Development. The Final Plat and Final Development Plans shall also be submitted in the same manner and with the same considerations as the Preliminary Development Plan procedure, except the applicant shall be given one (1) year to submit it. If the final plat and final development schedule is not submitted within one (1) year, all previous approval shall be voided.


11-025 OUTLINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN

The Outline Development Plan shall include maps and written statements, and shall show enough of the area surrounding the proposed planned development to demonstrate its relationship to adjoining uses, existing and proposed. The maps shall contain the following information:

A.    Boundary of project with dimensions to scale.

B.    Existing topography.

C.    Existing and proposed land use showing the approximate location and dimensions of buildings, open space, parking and drives and other structures.

D.    The character and approximate density of dwellings.

E.    The approximate location of major thoroughfares.

F.    Proposed recreational areas and other open spaces.

The written statements to accompany the outline development plan shall contain the following information:

A.    An explanation of the character of the development.

B.    A general indication of the expected schedule of development.


11-026 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLANS

At a scale dimension of not more than 1" = 100’ and shall include:

A.    Proposed size, location and area coverage figures of all buildings.

B.    Parking areas and drives with proposed arrangement of stalls, number of cars, entrance and exits driveways and their relationship to existing and proposed streets, and area coverage figures.

C.    Landscape plans, including location and height of all walls, fences and screen plantings and open space coverage figures.

D.    Accessory uses and buildings showing location and dimensions.

E.    Sufficient proposed control grades to interpret the intent of the developer.

F.    Drainage plan, having contour intervals of two (2) feet.

G.    Location of existing and proposed fire hydrants and utilities with a statement from the Fire Chief and the various utility companies involved confirming and approving the locations.

H.    Land use and development within two hundred (200) feet outside the project area, excluding streets and alleys.

I.    Architectural sketches showing building height, bulk, interior layout and proposed use.

J.    Name of owner, name and seal of engineering firm licensed in the state of Kansas developing plan, scale, north point and date of plan.


11-027 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS

The final Development Plans shall conform to the approved Preliminary Development Plans, shall be in final form for the issuance of a building permit, shall have been previously approved by the City Administrator and the City Engineer, and shall include a construction schedule of development. It shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at least seven (7) days before the scheduled meeting for approval and recommendation to the Governing Body. A final approval by the Governing Body shall authorize construction to begin. Any land reserved for public use (utility easements, streets, drives, ways, etc.) shall be processed and approved in accordance with the rules and regulations for platting contained in the “Subdivision Regulations for Tonganoxie, Kansas”. Construction of a least the first stage of development shall begin within eighteen (18) months from the date the ordinance of the zoning change was published in the paper. If construction does not begin within this period and no effort is made of an extension of time by the owner, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Commission that the ordinance should be voided, and when voided said property shall revert back to its original zoning district.


11-028 BUILDING PERMITS

On final approval by the Governing Body, the owner shall provide a copy of the approved Final Development Plans to the following:

A.    City Planning Commission

B.    City Administrator

C.    City Engineer.

Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the approved final development plan and the procedures set forth by Section 2-011. If any variation or rearrangement of buildings, parking area and drives, entrances, heights or open spaces is requested by the owner, he shall proceed by following the same procedure previously followed and outlined in the “Preliminary Development Plan”. (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/9/07)


11-029 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP

A.    In the event of a sale of property approved for rezoning under this ordinance, no development shall take place except according to the approved Final Development Plan.

B.    If new ownership requests a change in the Final Development Plan, they shall be required to file revised Preliminary Development Plans and Final Development Plans, and a construction schedule of improvements in accordance with this ordinance, except no further rezoning will be required. If there is a revision in the location of utility easements, streets, drives, ways, etc., the area shall be re-platted.


11-030 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

A.    The proposed development shall constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability so that the property contiguous to the development will not be unreasonably affected.

B.    The proposed development shall provide streets, drives or ways that are accessible to the major street system in such a way that the traffic generated by the development will not cause an unreasonably hazardous condition or unusual inconvenience to the neighborhood.

C.    A building group shall be so arranged that all principal buildings shall be made reasonably accessible to emergency vehicles.

D.    Parking shall be provided in a manner, which reduces to a minimum its adverse physical impact in the area. Screening areas with landscaping or walls, breaking parking areas into smaller units by introducing landscaped areas or other physical separators are minimum requirements. The parking areas should be appropriately spaced to serve those units they represent.

E.    The availability of service and location of public utilities shall have the approval of each agency involved. Evidence to this effect shall be presented with Preliminary Development Plans.

F.    All streets, drives, and right-of-ways shall be established as permanent easements whether public or private, provided through platting procedures, and shall be improved according to the City Engineer’s specifications.

G.    The location, design and calculations of the storm drainage and sanitary sewers shall meet the specifications of the City Engineer.


Section 12 “HBD” HISTORIC BUSINESS DISTRICT


12-010 PURPOSE

This district provides for small-scale retail, entertainment, municipal and personal service uses that meet the regular needs of the City. Uses that require larger scale structures or spaces than those generally found in the district or that will generate excessive parking needs should locate in one of the General Business Districts. All uses shall preserve the structural fabric and scale of the district. To preserve or recapture the original character and integrity of this district, all new development or rehabilitation of existing structures shall be held to the standards defined in the Design Guidelines for Tonganoxie’s Central Business District.


12-011 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    General Requirements

1.    Temporary exterior display of merchandise on sidewalk areas immediately adjacent to the business shall be allowed only during the regular business hours of the business for which they are displayed. No less than one-half of the width of the walkway shall be clear space and merchandise shall not interfere with pedestrian circulation.

2.    No exterior display yards shall be allowed. However other outside sales and display areas may be permitted in the side or rear yard on a permanent basis upon approval of a special use permit obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section 22.020.e.

3.    Placement of fixtures required in connection with a designated patio or courtyard eating area adjacent to a restaurant shall be allowed.

4.    All business shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except for parking and loading/unloading, and outdoor sales and display areas as permitted by Sections 12-011.a.1 and 12-011.a.2. Any drive-in or drive-thru business shall be subject to Site Review approval.

5.    All buildings shall incorporate windows and/or showcases into sidewalk facades at the street level to encourage pedestrian traffic.

6.    Sites or parcels where structures have been severely damaged, destroyed or removed due to deterioration shall be considered buildable for re-development purposes. All re-development shall conform to all use and development standards for this district except for minimum lot size or width.

7.    Service vehicles or equipment parked or stored on site shall be within an enclosed structure or fully screened yard. All vehicles and equipment must be licensed and/or registered as required by the State of Kansas.

8.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers shall be permitted.


12-012 ALLOWED USES

A.    Residential Uses

1.    Limited lodging facilities such as bed & breakfast, rooming or boarding house

2.    Residential use shall be allowed in the form of apartment(s) as an accessory use with the following limitations:

a.    When the apartment(s) occurs on the same level as the store front, the apartment shall not consist of more than 50% of the gross floor area.

b.    The apartment(s) shall not be accessible from the common store front entrance.

c.    The width of the store front may not be reduced to add an apartment(s) except for accommodating access to an upper, lower or rear apartment.

3.    Accessory uses as subordinate, incidental and compatible to the efficient operation of the main use of the site.

4.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.

B.    Institutional:

1.    General uses such as museum, library, art center, church, lodge or fraternal organization, mortuary or funeral home

2.    Educational uses such as private or group instruction in the arts or athletics, technical and professional training classes, university or college satellite classes.

3.    Municipal and governmental service offices or centers

C.    Commercial:

1.    Retail, office and service businesses such as medical or dental office or clinic, legal and administrative services, financial institution, restaurant, retail outlet, clothing store, specialty shop, tradesmen, and other similar uses.

D.    Prohibited:

1.    Any business using highly flammable or hazardous material is prohibited unless the business files an approved Fire Plan with the City Fire Department.


12-013 AREA REGULATIONS

Any existing parcel as of the approval of this ordinance shall be considered buildable. All remaining development regulations shall be enforced.

Minimum area for new lots is 3000 square feet

Minimum width for new lots shall be thirty (30) feet


12-014 HEIGHT REGULATIONS

No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental District Regulations.


12-015 REQUIRED SETBACKS

No setbacks are required unless abutting a residential use or zone. In that case, the minimum side setback shall be ten (10) feet and the minimum rear setback shall be fifteen (15) feet.


12-016 PARKING

There are no off-street parking requirements in the Historic Business District, except there shall be one (1) parking space for each dwelling unit, and except for the requirements for special parking set out in Section 20.


12-017 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance (Ord. 1289, Ord. 1365)


Section 13 “LBD” LIMITED GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT


13-010 PURPOSE

This district is intended for retail trade and service businesses to serve the needs of the surrounding neighborhoods. Businesses located in this area act as a median or buffer between residential areas and large scale commercial centers. Because they are closely connected to neighborhoods, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space, and off-street parking are provided than in other commercial districts.


13-011 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    No use shall produce noise levels higher than that which normally prevails in the adjacent neighborhood.

B.    An 8-foot architectural screen shall be required for all sites where the rear or side property line abuts a residential zone or use. “Best side towards the residential use.” (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

C.    Exterior mechanical equipment, refuse handling and storage of materials or equipment shall be well screened from both the right-of-way and any adjacent residential areas.

D.    All exterior display yards shall be paved.

E.    All accessory buildings or enclosures shall be constructed in a compatible manner and with similar materials as the main structure on the property.

F.    No use of a site shall commence prior to the construction of a main structure.

G.    All commercial and industrial uses shall be of sound structural quality, be maintained in good repair, have a clean and neat appearance, and land adjacent shall be kept free from debris, weeds and trash. If the business or industry is not maintained as described and the Codes Enforcement Officer deems them a public safety hazard or nuisance, they shall be fined and given notice to correct the nuisance within 30 days.

H.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers except for Industrial uses. All other uses apply. A temporary permit for industrial uses is required.

I.    All activity shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building, except for the display and sale of landscaping and gardening plants supplies.

J.    All business except for parking and loading/unloading shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.

K.    Beverages containing alcohol may not be dispensed on the premises.

L.    No use is permitted that involves the parking, storage, or keeping of any vehicle or equipment of over 5,000 pounds weight.


13-012 ALLOWED USES

A.    Uses shall focus upon retailing of goods and services, offices, personal services, institutional uses, restaurants and transient (i.e. motel, boarding room, etc...) lodging facilities.

B.    Private, public or semi-public recreational, religious or administrative uses that are appropriate and compatible in the area due to space or intensity needs.

C.    Accessory uses as subordinate, incidental and compatible to the efficient operation of the main use of the site.

D.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


13-013 AREA REGULATIONS

A.    Minimum lot area is 10,000 square feet

B.    Maximum gross floor area is 7000 square feet

C.    Minimum lot width shall be seventy-five (75) feet


13-014 HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental District Regulations.


13-015 REQUIRED SETBACKS

A.    Right-of-way setback: Thirty (30) feet.

B.    Side setback: Twenty (20) feet when abutting a residential use or zone, otherwise ten (10) feet.

C.    Rear setback: Thirty (30) feet when abutting a residential or rural zone or use, otherwise only twenty (20) feet.


13-016 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this Ordinance.


13-017 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 14 “GBD” GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 


14-010 PURPOSE

This district is intended for retail trade shall be located along arterial and collector streets and highways within the City. The district provides access for businesses serving the local and regional market. Businesses located in this area are of a higher intensity and require a larger area than those allowed in the HBD District.


14-011 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

A.    Loading docks, exterior mechanical equipment and refuse handling shall be at the rear of the site and/or well screened from both the right-of-way and any adjacent residential areas.

B.    No exterior storage of materials or equipment.

C.    Outdoor sales and display as an accessory use: Sales and display of merchandise shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, including the storage of supplies, goods, and equipment; provided that outdoor display of merchandise may be permitted in accordance with the following. Exceptions to these standards may be permitted upon approval of a Special Use Permit. (Ordinance 1289, October 12, 2009)

1.    The permitted display of merchandise for sale to the public shall be restricted to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the area of either the front, side or rear yard exclusive of any area of required setback. In no case shall merchandise be displayed in any required setback or parking area, reduce the capacity of a parking lot below that required by Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, or hinder the movement of pedestrians on any sidewalk around the building.

2.    Such activities shall be limited to those items which require an out-of- doors location, such as, by way of example, living plants, automotive fuel, and any item which because of large volume or weight is more easily housed out-of-doors and is more convenient to the purchaser in an outdoor location, but not including items such as motor oil, fuel additives, tires, batteries, or cartons or cases of beverages.

3.    Sidewalk Displays. Daily temporary display of merchandise or activities, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area or twenty-five (25) percent of the ground floor area of the building or tenant space, whichever is less, may be held on the walkway immediately adjacent to the business during business hours. All such merchandise and display shall be temporary in nature and shall be moved inside the business after business hours. No less than one-half of the width of the walkway shall be clear space and merchandise shall not hinder the movement of pedestrian around the building.

4.    Outdoor display of landscape plantings, materials and supplies, and lawn and garden supplies (as accessory sales for businesses with other commercial activities) shall be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Section 14.011.c.1, and subject to the following:

a.    Seasonal landscape plantings may be displayed outside on a seasonal basis upon approval of a temporary sale and events permit. Plantings shall be kept off the public sidewalks and streets, shall not be placed within a required parking/paving setback area, shall not reduce the capacity of a parking lot below that required by Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, and shall not hinder the movement of pedestrians on any sidewalk around the building.

b.    Landscape materials and lawn and garden supplies are required to be located within an enclosed building or an outdoor display confinement area. However, such materials and supplies may be displayed outside of an outdoor display confinement area on a seasonal basis upon approval of a temporary sale and events permit. Materials and supplies shall be kept off the public sidewalks and streets, shall not be placed within a required parking/paving setback area, shall not reduce the capacity of a parking lot below that required by Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading regulations and shall not hinder the movement of pedestrians on any walkway around the building.

5.    Outdoor display and storage of landscape plantings, materials and supplies, and lawn and garden supplies associated with retail nurseries and/or lawn and garden supply stores (stand alone businesses not associated with other commercial activities) and not located within an outdoor display confinement area may be permitted on a permanent basis pursuant to the provisions of Section 14.011.c.1, and the approval of a site plan application by the Planning Commission.

D.    All business for outdoor sales and display permitted by Section 14.011.c, and parking and loading/unloading areas, shall be conducted on an improved (paved) display area intended for that purpose. All business for the sale, lease, or rental of any new or used vehicles, equipment, recreational boats and trailers, and other motorized vehicles or machinery as permitted by Section 14-012 shall be conducted on an improved (paved) display yard, and shall not exceed the maximum outdoor display area allowed by Section 14.011.c.1 except as approved by a Special Use Permit. Alternative permeable paving surfaces for display areas and display yards may be permitted by the Planning Commission upon approval by the City Engineer for purposes of minimizing storm water runoff and improving water quality. Such alternative surfaces shall be suitable for the type of merchandise, vehicles, or equipment for display or parking. (Ordinance 1289, October 12, 2009)

E.    All accessory buildings shall be constructed in a compatible manner and with similar materials as the main structure on the property.

F.    No use of a site shall commence prior to the construction of a main structure.

G.    An eight-foot architectural screen shall be required for all sites where the rear or side property line abuts a residential zone or use. “Best side towards the residential use.” (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

H.    No temporary storage structures or moveable containers shall be permitted.

I.    Placement of fixtures required in connection with a designated patio or courtyard eating area adjacent to a restaurant shall be allowed.

J.    All commercial and industrial uses shall be of sound structural quality, be maintained in good repair, have a clean and neat appearance, and land adjacent shall be kept free from debris, weeds and trash. If the business or industry is not maintained as described and the Codes Enforcement Officer deems them a public safety hazard or nuisance, they shall be fined and given notice to correct the nuisance within 30 days.

K.    Self-service storage is allowed as a secondary use, provided it is limited in extent, scale or prominence of site and building elements to an allowed principle use in the GBD, through a special use permit. (Ord. 1443, 2018)


14-012 ALLOWED USES

Uses shall focus upon retailing of goods and services, office groupings, large institutional uses, restaurants and temporary lodging facilities and those businesses requiring large display yards.

A.    Private, public or semi-public recreational, religious or administrative uses that is appropriate and compatible in the area due to space or intensity needs.

B.    Accessory uses as necessary to the efficient operation of the main use on the site.

C.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


14-013 AREA REGULATIONS

A.    Minimum lot area is 10,000 square feet.

B.    Minimum lot width shall be 75 feet.


14-014 HEIGHT REGULATIONS

A.    No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in Section 23, Supplemental District Regulations.


14-015 REQUIRED SETBACKS

A.    Right-of-way setback: 30 feet.

B.    Side setback: 20 feet when abutting a residential area, otherwise 10 feet.

C.    Rear setback: 30 feet when abutting a residential or rural zone or use, otherwise only 20 feet


14-016 PARKING

Please refer to Section 20, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this Ordinance.


14-017 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance.


Section 15 “PUD-C” PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT


15-010 PURPOSE

This district is to provide for and encourage the grouping of business buildings into centers in keeping with the modern concepts of office, service and shopping center design. The intent is to reduce the need for strips of commercial development.


15-011 GENERAL CONDITIONS

The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area not less than two (2) acres may submit to the Governing Body a petition and Preliminary Development Plan for a planned commercial district in compliance with the requirement set forth in this article. The application and plan shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study and report and for public hearing in accordance with Section 27, (Amendments). If no report is transmitted by the Planning Commission within ninety (90) days of notification, the Governing Body may take action without said report. If the Planning Commission approves the plans, they shall then be submitted to the Governing Body for their consideration and action. The Planning Commissioners approval and recommendations shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for approval and that the application meets the requirements of the “PUD-C” Planned Commercial District as set forth in Section 15. The location of any “PUD-C” Planned Commercial District shall be on property which has direct access to a collector or arterial street as designated on the official comprehensive plan for the City of Tonganoxie. The Plan for the proposed development must present a unified and organized arrangement of buildings and service facilities and shall not adversely affect the uses of property immediately adjacent to the proposed development. (Amended by Ordinance # 1189 5/23/05)


15-012 USE REGULATIONS

The use regulations are similar to those found in the “LBD” Limited General Business District and in the “HBD” Historic Business District except that there shall be no limit to the square footage of floor area to be devoted to any specific use.

Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


15-013 HEIGHT REGULATIONS

No building or structure shall exceed six (6) stories except as provided in Section 23.


15-014 AREA REGULATIONS

A.    Front Yard

There shall be a setback from any street of at least fifty (50) feet for any building and ten (10) feet for any parking lot.

B.    Side Yard

1.    Along any other property line within or adjoining the district, there shall be a setback from any building or structure of at least ten (10) feet.

2.    Along any property line abutting or adjoining a residential district, there shall be a setback of at least twenty (20) feet.

C.    Parking and Loading Regulations – Whenever a structure is erected, moved, converted, or structurally altered, the regulations shall apply. See Section 20.


15-015 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS

The planned commercial district shall be permanently screened from abutting property zoned for residential use by a suitable fence, wall or shrub border, the height of such screen to be at least four (4) feet. The requirements are as found in Section 24.


15-016 EXCEPTIONS

The requirements and regulations herein prescribed pertaining to height, open spaces, set-back, parking and loading may be adjusted or modified by the Planning Commission so that the property in question may be developed in a reasonable manner and at the same time will not be detrimental to the public welfare and the interest of the community, but in keeping with the general intent and spirit of the Zoning Ordinance.


15-017 APPLYING FOR REZONING

A petition to change to a “PUD-C” Planned Commercial District shall be filed in accordance with the application and review procedures provided in Section 27. Included with the petition shall be an Outline Development Plan or a Preliminary Development Plan, in accordance with the submittal requirements of this ordinance. (Amended by Ordinance # 1186 5/23/05 & Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)


15-018 PLANNING COMMISSION PROCEDURES

After a petition for “PUD-C” Planned Commercial District, is filed with the City Clerk, it shall be referred to and considered by the City Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and after the conclusion of the hearing shall submit its recommendations to the Governing Body, based on the zoning of the land and the Outline Development Plans or the Preliminary Development Plan. (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)


15-019 GOVERNING BODY ACTION

If the Governing Body is in favor of rezoning, they shall, by ordinance, rezone the property, but before any building permits may be issued the Preliminary and Final Development Plans shall be approved by the Governing Body after recommendations by the City Planning Commission according to the requirements of this zoning ordinance.


15-020 PROCEDURE FOR SUBMITTING PLANS

If the Outline Development Plans were submitted with the petition, a Preliminary Development Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission within one (1) year after the Governing Body rezones the property and approved the Outline Development Plan.

The Final Development Plans shall be submitted in the same manner and with the same considerations as the Preliminary Development Plan procedure, except the applicant shall be given two (2) years to submit it or all previous approval shall be voided.


15-021 OUTLINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN

The Outline Development Plan shall include site plans and written statements and shall show all land use and development within two hundred (200) feet, of the planned development to demonstrate its relationship to adjoining uses and shall also show:

A.    Boundary of project with dimensions to scale.

B.    Existing topography.

C.    Existing and proposed land uses showing the approximate location and dimensions of buildings, open space, parking, drives and other structures.

D.    The location of existing streets and utilities.

E.    The written statements to accompany the plan shall contain the following information:

1.    An explanation of the character of the development.

2.    A general indication of the expected schedule of development.


15-022 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLANS

The preliminary development plan shall be submitted to the City Administrator and City Engineer for review and approval. The approved preliminary plan shall then be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the Governing Body. At a scale dimension of not more than 1" = 100’ and shall include:

A.    Boundary of project with dimensions to scale.

B.    Contour intervals of two (2) feet of existing topography and final elevations or contours.

C.    Proposed size location and arrangement of building, parking areas with proposed arrangement of stalls and number of cars, entrance and exit driveways and their relationship to existing and or proposed street.

D.    Storm Drainage plan.

E.    General landscape plan to include location and height of all walls, fences, screening and plantings.

F.    Note provision for dedication of additional right-of-ways if needed for the widening of streets, such to be dedicated to the City prior to approval of Final Development Plan.

G.    Stages of development.

H.    Name of owner, name and seal of professional engineering firm licensed in the State of Kansas developing the plan, scale, north point and date of plan.


15-023 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS

The Final Development Plans shall conform to the approved Preliminary, shall be in final form for the issuance of a building permit, shall have been previously approved by the City Administrator and the City Engineer and shall include a construction schedule of development. It shall be submitted to the Planning commission at least thirty (30) days before the scheduled meeting for approval and recommendations to the Governing Body. A final approval by the Governing Body shall authorize construction to begin according to the construction schedule. Construction of at least the first stage of development shall begin within three (3) years from the date the ordinance of the zoning change was published in the official city paper. If construction does not begin within this period and no effort is made for an extension of time by the owner, all previous plans and zoning shall be voided.


15-024 BUILDING PERMITS

On final approval by the Governing Body, the owner shall provide a copy of the approved Final Development Plans to the following:

A.    City Planning Commission

B.    City Administrator

C.    City Engineer

Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the approved final development plan and the procedures set forth by Section 2-011. If any variation or rearrangement of buildings, parking area and drives, entrances, heights or open spaces is requested by the owner, he shall proceed by following the same procedure previously followed and outlined in the “Preliminary Development Plan.” (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/9/07)


15-025 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP

A.    In the event of a sale of property approved for rezoning under this ordinance, no development shall take place except according to the approved Final Development Plan.

B.    If new ownership requests a change in the Final Development Plan, they shall be required to file revised Preliminary Development Plans and Final Development Plans, and a construction schedule of improvements in accordance with this ordinance, except no further rezoning will be required. If any portion of the Planned Commercial District is sold, a plat of the entire district shall be filed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the city.


15-026 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

A.    The proposed development shall provide access to the major street system in such a way that the traffic generated by the development will not cause an unreasonably hazardous condition or inconvenience in the area.

B.    A building group shall be so arranged that all principal buildings shall be made reasonably accessible to emergency vehicles.

C.    Parking shall be provided in a manner, which reduces to a minimum its adverse physical impact in the area. Screening parking areas with landscaping walls, breaking parking areas into smaller units by introducing landscaped areas or other physical separators are suggested approaches and may be required. The parking areas should be appropriately spaced to serve those units they represent.

D.    The availability of service and location of public utilities shall have the approval of each agency involved. Evidence to this effect shall be presented with the Preliminary Development Plans.


Section 16 “I-LT” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT


16-010 PURPOSE

This area is designed to accommodate a wide range of low level industrial activities as well as to protect and buffer nearby commercial and residential districts from more intense industrial uses. Uses in this district will be held to a higher aesthetic standard than other industrial zones.


16-011 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    No land use shall be allowed that produces vibration, concussion, impact, shock, dust, fly-ash, odor, noxious gases, temperature differential or glare at any point on the lot line in excess of limits normally encountered in surrounding, non-industrial districts.

B.    No land use shall be allowed that produces a noise level at the lot line that is greater than that produced by the average traffic in the area.

C.    Exterior mechanical equipment and refuse handling shall be at the rear of the site and well screened from both the right-of-way and any adjacent residential areas (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05).

D.    All outside storage of equipment or materials must be well screened from view from either residential areas or rights-of-way.

E.    Only one main structure allowed per site. Exception--individual storage units when no administrative functions are on the site.

F.    No use of a site shall commence prior to the construction of a main structure.

G.    Accessory structures shall be compatible with the main structure both in design and materials.

H.    A minimum 20’ landscaped strip shall be maintained along all rights-of-way.

I.    The use of trailers or other non-permanent structures for storage or other purposes is prohibited in this district.

J.    A buffer area shall be provided along side and rear property lines common to or across an alley from residentially zoned property. Please refer to Section 24, Landscaping and Screening, for details.


16-012 ALLOWED USES

A.    Uses shall focus upon administrative facilities, research institutions, light manufacturing activities, warehousing and wholesaling of goods; tradesman’s workshops.

B.    Businesses requiring large equipment display yards.

C.    Accessory uses as necessary to the efficient operation of the main use on the site.

D.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


16-013 AREA REGULATIONS

A.    Minimum lot area is one (1) acre

B.    Minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet

C.    Minimum lot depth shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet


16-014 HEIGHT REGULATIONS

No building shall exceed three (3) stories or fifty (50) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental District Regulations.


16-015 REQUIRED SETBACKS

A.    Right-of-way setback: Minimum thirty-five (35) feet for buildings up to 26’ in height, then 1 additional foot of setback is required for each additional foot of building height.

B.    Side setback: Twenty (20) feet

C.    Rear setback: Twenty-five (25) feet


16-016 PARKING

All structures shall have parking on a hard-surface or paved lot. A minimum of 1 space for every 1,000 square feet of building is required. Additional or fewer spaces may be recommended by The City Planning Commission. Parking is allowed within the setback area up to within ten (10) feet of the property line. These requirements must be met as a condition of obtaining an occupancy permit.


16-017 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance


Section 17 “I-MD” MODERATE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT


17-010 PURPOSE

For the conversion of raw materials into partially finished or completed goods, for distribution of goods and the provision of industrial level services.


17-011 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    No land use shall be allowed that produces a noise level at the lot line that is greater than that produced by the average traffic in the area.

B.    Exterior mechanical equipment and refuse handling shall be at the side or rear of the site and well screened from both the right-of-way and any adjacent residential areas (Amended by Ordinance #1184 5/9/05).

C.    All outside storage of equipment or materials must be well screened from view from either residential areas or rights-of-way.

D.    Only one main structure allowed per site. Exception--Individual storage units when no administrative functions are on the site.

E.    No use of a site shall commence prior to the construction of a main structure.

F.    Accessory structures shall be compatible with the main structure both in design and materials.

G.    A minimum 10’ landscaped strip shall be maintained along all rights-of-way.

H.    The use of non-permanent structures for storage or any other purpose is prohibited in this district without a temporary use permit.

I.    A buffer area shall be provided along side and rear property lines common to or across an alley from residentially zoned property. Please refer to Section 24, Landscaping and Screening, for details.


17-012 ALLOWED USES

A.    Uses include manufacturing of goods and products; storage and transfer of goods and products; wholesaling of raw materials; intensive utility uses; trades contractors.

B.    Accessory uses as necessary to the efficient operation of the main use on the site.

C.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.

D.    No residential use shall be permitted


17-013 AREA REGULATIONS

A.    Minimum lot area is one and one quarter (1 ¼ ) acre

B.    Minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet

C.    Minimum lot depth shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet


17-014 HEIGHT REGULATIONS

No building shall exceed three (3) stories or fifty (50) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental District Regulations.


17-015 REQUIRED SETBACKS

A.    Right-of-way setback: Minimum fifty (50) feet for buildings up to 26’ in height, then 1 additional foot of setback is required for each additional foot of building height.

B.    Side setback: Twenty-five (25) feet

C.    Rear setback: Twenty-five (25) feet


17-016 PARKING

All structures shall have parking on a hard-surface or paved lot. A minimum of 1 space for every 1,000 square feet of building is required. Additional or fewer spaces may be recommended by The City Planning Commission. Parking is allowed within the setback area up to within ten (10) feet of the property line. These requirements must be met as a condition of obtaining an occupancy permit.


17-017 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance.


Section 18 “I-H” HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT


18-010 PURPOSE

The extraction and/or processing of raw materials in preparation for manufacturing into finished goods and products.


18-011 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    Uses in this zoning district require a Special Use Permit.

B.    No land use shall be permitted that produces airborne particles, gases, or odors exceeding limits of the local air quality regulations.

C.    No use is permitted that produces noise greater than 85 db(A) at any point on the property line.

D.    Uses producing industrial wastes of a type or volume which are not amenable to treatment by the public sewage facility must be disposed of in a proper and legal fashion.

E.    Exterior mechanical equipment and refuse handling shall be at the side or rear of the site and well screened from both the right-of-way and any adjacent residential areas (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05).

F.    All outside storage of equipment or materials must be completely screened from view from either residential areas or rights-of-way.

G.    Only one main structure allowed per site.

H.    No use of a site shall commence prior to the construction of a main structure.

I.    Accessory structures shall be compatible with the main structure both in design and materials.

J.    A minimum 10’ landscaped strip shall be maintained along all rights-of-way.

K.    The use of non-permanent structures for storage or any other purpose is prohibited in this district without a temporary use permit.

L.    A buffer area shall be provided along side and rear property lines common to or across an alley from residentially zoned property. Please refer to Section 24, Landscaping and Screening, for details.


18-012 ALLOWED USES

A.    Uses include extraction and processing of raw materials; waste disposal and related uses;

B.    Accessory uses as necessary to the efficient operation of the main use on the site.

C.    Please refer to Appendix A for a list of suggested, permitted uses.


18-013 AREA REGULATIONS

Subject to Site Review Committee.


18-014 HEIGHT REGULATIONS

No building shall exceed six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet in height except as provided in Section 23 Supplemental District Regulations.


18-015 REQUIRED SETBACKS

A.    Right-of-way setback: Minimum fifty (50) feet for buildings up to 26’ in height, then 1 additional foot of setback is required for each additional foot of building height.

B.    Side setback: Twenty-five (25) feet

C.    Rear setback: Twenty-five (25) feet


18-016 PARKING

All structures shall have parking on a hard-surface or paved lot. A minimum of 1 space for every 1,000 square feet of building is required. Additional or fewer spaces may be recommended by The City Planning Commission. Parking is allowed within the setback area up to within ten (10) feet of the property line. These requirements must be met as a condition of obtaining an occupancy permit.


18-017 SIGNS

Please refer to Section 25, Signs, of this Ordinance.


Section 19 COMMUNITY UNIT PLAN


19-010 COMMUNITY UNIT PLAN

The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than twenty (20) acres may submit to the Governing Body of Tonganoxie City a plan for the use and development of the entire tract of land for residential purposes. The Development Plan shall be referred to the City Planning Commission for study and report and for public hearing. If the Planning Commission approves the Development Plan, the plan, together with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall be accompanied by a report stating the reason for approval of the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed community unit plan meets the following conditions:

A.    That property adjacent to the area included in the plan will not be adversely affected.

B.    That the plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare.

C.    That the buildings shall be used only for single family dwellings, two family dwellings or multiple dwellings and the usual accessory uses such as garages, storage space and community activities, including but not limited to, churches, schools, day care facilities, parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities.

D.    That the average lot area per family contained in the site, exclusive of the area occupied by streets, will be no less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the development is located.

If the Governing Body approves the Community Unit Plan, building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the use of land, the location of the buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the district in which it is located.


19-011 NOTE OF EXPLANATION

The “Community Unit Plan” is for mixed uses in that it allows all types of residential uses plus any uses directly related to residential uses such as churches, schools, day care facilities, parks, playgrounds, recreational faculties, etc. There are few regulations, only guidelines making it possible for a creative developer to bring in a plan for a ’community’ or a neighborhood. Cluster development could also be incorporated into this zone.

The Planned Residential district is for multi-family development only and is regulated in order to maintain a suitable development that buffers between commercial and single-family residential uses. Cluster development for multi-family dwellings is encouraged.


Section 20 OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS


20-010 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS

Whenever a structure is erected, converted, structurally altered or moved, off-street parking and or loading spaces shall be provided in the form of garages or areas made available exclusively for that purpose. Such parking space shall be located entirely on private property with no portion, except the necessary drives, extending into any street or other public way. In addition, no parking shall be permitted in the required front and side yard in district “R-E” through “LBD” inclusive, except that parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted in customary driveways of single and two family dwellings. All off-street parking in fulfilling multiple family, commercial and industrial development or as in fulfilling a special use permit requirement, may be located within 200 feet of said development, if requirements can not be fulfilled on site, and if the following requirements are approved and passed in accordance with Section 22, Special Uses:

A.    Enclosed with a fence, wall or other suitable enclosure having a height of not less than three (3) feet, and maintained in good condition.

B.    No parking within six (6) feet of an adjoining lot in a residential district.

C.    Any lights used to illuminate said parking areas shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from any adjoining premises in a residential district.

D.    Nature of Use: Required off-street parking areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, storage, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.

E.    Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this ordinance results in a requirement of a fractional space, this shall be counted as one parking space.

F.    Parking spaces in lots of more than six (6) spaces shall be marked by painted lines or curbs or other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers shall be used as necessary to ensure efficient traffic operation of the lot.

G.    Off-street parking facilities shall be drained to eliminate ponding water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys. No surface water from such parking area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining private property without adequate drainage precaution being taken by the developer.

H.    Approval of site plan, to scale, showing a proposed parking lot. All off-street parking and or loading spaces shall be permanently surfaced with bituminous or concrete pavement meeting the standards and specifications of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas. (Ordinance # 985 3/8/99) All off street parking and connecting driveways for new construction or structures moved onto a lot for multifamily, commercial or industrial use and on residential lots with an area of one-half acre or less shall be permanently surfaced. For residential lots greater than one-half acre, driveways must be paved from the curb or edge of the street to the setback line and enough paved area at or near the residence provided for the required 2 parking spaces per dwelling unit. This shall apply to any new construction, homes moved onto a lot, or existing homes that are structurally altered or converted. Existing multi-family, commercial and industrial properties must be brought into compliance if they are structurally changed according to Section 2 – General Provisions of these regulations. Non-conforming uses that change or are discontinued must also be brought into compliance. Compliance shall consist of paving all access drives from the curb or edge of the street to the setback line and providing sufficient paved area for the required number of the parking spaces for the intended use. Access drives for residential and commercial uses shall be surfaced with a minimum of 6” reinforced concrete or 8” asphaltic concrete pavement constructed to the Right-of-Way Line. Details for construction are included in the City standard details for street construction.

Parking areas for residential uses shall be surfaced with a minimum of:

1.    Four inches reinforced Portland cement concrete, or

2.    Five inches granular rock base with two inches of asphaltic concrete, or

3.    Seven inches granular rock with a double asphaltic prime and seal, or

4.    Five inches full depth asphaltic concrete

Alternative materials or paving systems may be used upon approval by the City Engineer for residential areas or low use parking areas such as fire safety lanes or overflow parking. Alternative driveway paving systems such as ribbon and pervious driveway surfaces may be used for single-family and two-family dwellings in the R-I Infill District upon approval by the City Engineer. Access drives and parking for business and industrial uses shall meet the City Engineer’s specifications. (Amended by Ordinance #985 and Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)

I.    A portion of the parking area required under this Section may remain unimproved until such time as the City Council deems it must be improved to serve the parking demand adequately. Such delayed improvement may be permitted only after the Planning Commission is satisfied that the initial occupancy of the premises will be adequately served by the lesser number of spaces and only after approval of a site plan indicating clearly the location, pattern and circulation to and from the delayed parking spaces. The land area so delineated for future parking shall be brought to finished grade, be landscaped and shall not be used for building, storage, loading or other purposes. (Amended by Ordinance 1230. 5/9/07)


20-011 PARKING REGULATIONS

Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:

	A.	Single Family Dwellings	2 spaces per dwelling unit

	B.	Two Family Dwellings	2 spaces per dwelling unit

	C.	Multiple Family Dwellings	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit

	D.	Mobile Home Parks	2 spaces per mobile home

	E.	Churches, Theaters,	1 space per 4 seats or 1 space

	 	Auditoriums, Schools, etc.	per 17 classroom seats

	F.	Hospitals, Clinics	1 space per 3 beds

	G.	Nursing Homes, Rest Homes	1 space per 4 beds

	H.	Lodging & Rooming Houses	1 space per bed

	I.	Dance halls, assembly halls exhibition halls, libraries,	1 space per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly etc.

	J.	Medical or Dental Offices or Clinics	5 spaces per Doctor

	K.	Home Occupations	2 spaces

	L.	Business and Professional Office Buildings, Banks, Post Office	1 space per 200-sq. ft. of gross area 

	M.	Motels, Hotels, Bed & Breakfast	1 space per sleeping unit

	N.	Funeral Homes	1 space per 50-sq. ft. of floor area

	O.	Personal Services	1 space per 150-sq. ft. of floor area

	P.	Retail Stores & Shops	1 space per 250-sq. ft. of gross floor space

	Q.	Restaurants, Taverns, Night

Clubs	1 space per 2.5 seats

	R.	Automobile Sales and Service

Garages	1 space per 400-sq. ft. of floor area

	S.	Bowling Alleys	5 spaces per alley

	T.	Wholesale Establishments	1 space per 2 employees on maximum shift

	U.	All Other Commercial Uses	Minimum of 1 space per 500 square feet. Additional spaces as required by the Planning Commission (Ord. 1045, 2000)

	V.	Industrial Uses 	See regulations provided in individual industrial zoning district sections. (Ord. 1045, 2000)

	W.	Uses in the Historic Business	In the historic business district (HBD), for the purposes of minimizing disruptive curb cuts and driveways, and to encourage the consolidation of parking space in appropriate locations, accessory off- street parking is not required unless determined necessary by the Planning Commission with approval of a site plan. (Ord. 1230, 2007)

	X.	Daycares	1-2 children	Same as the residential district in which it occurs.

	 	Daycares (Licensed Daycares, Group Daycares, Child Care Centers, and Nonaccessory Use Preschools)	Net floor area of facility is 2,500 square feet or less.	1 space for every 300 square feet used for child care, plus 1 space for each provider on duty at any one time.

	 	Daycares (Licensed Daycares, Group Daycares, Child Care Centers, and Nonaccessory Use Preschools)	Net floor area of facility is greater than 2,500 square feet.	8 spaces for the first 2,500 square feet used for child care, plus one space for every additional 5,000 square feet used for child care, plus 1 space for each provider on duty at any one time. (Ord. 1364, 2013)


20-012 LOADING AND UNLOADING OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS

Loading and unloading spaces shall be provided off street and in the side or rear yard for such uses involving receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by motor vehicle or rail. All loading and unloading operations shall be so located to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys and walkways. Such space shall include a 12-foot by 50-foot load area for loading and unloading operations and shall have a minimum height clearance of 14 feet. The number of spaces shall be provided as follows:

	Gross Floor Area 	Loading Spaces Required

	Under 3,000 sq. ft. 	1 space

	3,001 to 30,000 sq. ft. 	2 spaces

	30,001 to 90,000 sq. ft. 	3 spaces

	90,001 to 150,000 sq. ft. 	4 spaces

	150,000 to 230,000 sq. ft. and 

for each additional 30,000 sq. ft. 	5 spaces

1 space


20-013 DIMENSIONS OF PARKING AREAS

A.    Parking space dimensions shall be not less than 9 feet by 18 feet measured normal to the outside boundary lines.

B.    Minimum dimensions for parking lots shall be as follows:

1.    90 degree pattern single row parking – 40 feet wheel stop to opposite curb.

2.    90 degree pattern double row parking – 56 feet wheel stop to opposite curb.

3.    60 degree pattern single row parking – 39 feet wheel stop to opposite curb.

4.    60 degree pattern double row parking – 53 feet wheel stop to opposite curb.

5.    Parallel space – 9 feet by 23 feet.

The minimum space between wheel stops with bumper to bumper parking shall be 5 feet.

C.    In self-contained office or other low turnover parking, 30 percent of the required spaces may be designated for small cars and spaces 8 feet by 16 feet may be utilized.


20-014 PARKING LOT LIGHTING

The purpose of the parking lot lighting standards is to protect the users of parking lots and to regulate the spill of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses near light sources. (Amended by Ordinance # 1186 5/23/05)

A.    Illumination of parking areas used after dark shall be required for all parking areas with more than ten (10) parking spaces. The illumination must be provided through the use of light fixtures on a pole, and may not be provided by building mounted light fixtures except for industrial areas where the fixture is designed and located in a manner to generally not be visible from street right-of-way or residential properties. Any building mounted fixtures shall be for aesthetic and security purposes only. No fixtures that shine outward and create a glare from street right-of-way or residential properties shall be permitted. Lighting used to illuminate parking areas shall be arranged, located or screened to direct light away from adjoining or abutting residential districts or any street right-of-way. Light poles and fixtures shall meet the following criteria:

1.    The maximum pole height in nonresidential zoned properties adjacent to residential zoned properties shall be twenty-five (25) feet.

2.    Light fixtures shall be nonadjustable, horizontally mounted fixtures, or fixtures with less than ninety (90) degree luminaire cutoff. Fixtures that project light or glare toward street right-of-way or adjoining properties shall not be permitted.

3.    Parking lot poles/fixtures within a planned development shall be of the same style, height, color and intensity of lighting throughout the development area. Varying styles of fixtures may be permitted if it is demonstrated that the styles contribute to an overall theme for the area.

B.    Illumination for parking areas shall be provided as follows:

1.    Average Maintained Foot-candles: The maximum average maintained foot-candles for all parking lots shall be three (3), unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. For purposes of this ordinance the average maintained foot-candles shall be calculated at eight-tenths (0.8) of initial foot-candles. Exceptions to the maximum foot-candles may be granted by the Planning Commission for facilities with unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation, such as ball fields, playing fields, tennis courts, and other similar athletic facilities.

2.    Minimum Foot-candles and Uniformity Ratio: The minimum amount of maintained illuminations for open parking shall be as provided in the following table. For purposes of interpreting the table, the following rules shall apply: high activity uses include athletic events, cultural or civic events, shopping centers and similar uses; medium activity uses include fast food facilities, neighborhood-scale shopping centers, hospitals, residential complex parking and similar uses; low activity uses include local merchant parking, industrial employee parking, educational parking and similar uses.

	Uses	Foot Candles	Uniformity Ratio

	Low Activity	0.5	4.1

	Medium activity	1.0	3.1

	High activity	2.0	3.1

3.    The light fixtures shall be arranged in order to provide uniform illumination throughout the parking lot.

4.    The maximum maintained vertical foot-candle at an adjacent residential property line shall be one-half (0.5) foot-candle measured five (5) feet above grade.

5.    The required illumination within a nonresidential development shall be measured at grade.

C.    No flicker and flashing lights shall be permitted.

D.    Plan Submission Requirements: A point-by-point photometric plan shall be required when deemed necessary by the City Planner or City Planning Commission. Typically, a plan will be required for properties visible from an arterial roadway, areas adjacent to residential, or site sensitive locations in order to show compliance with the lighting standards. The calculation shall be measured at grade for lighting levels within the parking lot. (Amended by Ordinance #1186 5/23/05)


Section 21 NONCONFORMING USES


21-010 NONCONFORMING USES

The lawful use of a building or premises existing at the time of the effective date of this ordinance may as a non-conforming building or premises be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification shall apply. Whenever a non-conforming use has been changed to a more restricted use of to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. Generally, nonconformities are of three types: nonconforming lots of record, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses. * See Definition Section

A.    Whenever the use of a building or premises becomes non-conforming through a change in the zoning ordinance or district boundaries, such use may be continued and, if no structural alterations are made, it may be changed upon approval to another non-conforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification.

B.    In the event that a non-conforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the use permitted in the district in which it is located. (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05)

C.    No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which such building or premises is located, except when required to do so by law or order, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located.

D.    The casual, intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a non-conforming use and the existence of a non-conforming use on the part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to establish a non-conforming use on the entire lot or tract.

E.    If a building is damaged by more than 50% of its fair market value, such building shall not be restored if the use of such building is not in conformance with this Zoning Ordinance.

F.    Whether a non-conforming use exists shall be question of fact and shall be decided by the Board of Zoning Appeals after public notice and hearing and in accordance with the rules of the Board.

G.    Normal maintenance and incidental repair, or replacement, installation or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use.

H.    No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and no nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any location on the same or other lot, unless the entire structure and the use thereof or the use of land shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.

I.    The lawful use of any sign existing at the time of the passage of these ordinances, in conjunction with a nonconforming use, may be continued. Any sign installed subsequent to the passage of this Zoning Ordinance for a nonconforming use must conform to Section 25 of this Ordinance and in compliance with the district in which the nonconforming use is located.

J.    No use which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall continue after such principal use shall cease or terminate.


21-011 STATUS OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS

A.    Status of Existing Special Use Permits:

Where a special use permit exists at the effective date of these ordinances and is permitted by these regulations as a special use permit in the zoning district in which it is located, such use shall be deemed a lawful conforming use in such zoning district, as provided by prior approval. Where a special use permit exists at the effective date of these ordinances and is not permitted as a special use permit in the zoning district in which it is located, such use shall be deemed a continuing nonconforming use.

B.    Status of Future Special Use Permits:

Any use for which a special use permit has been approved, as provided in these regulations shall be deemed to be a lawful conforming use.


21-012 DEFINITIONS

A.    Dimensional Nonconformity: A nonconforming situation that occurs when the height, size, or minimum floor area of a structure, or the relationship between an existing building or buildings and the other buildings or lot lines, does not conform to the regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the property is located.

B.    Nonconforming Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a recorded subdivision or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations and neither said lot nor parcel complies with the lot width or area requirements for any permitted uses in the district in which it is located.

C.    Nonconforming Structure: Any existing structure, dwelling unit, or undertaking which does not comply with the lot coverage, height or yard requirements which are applicable to new structures or dwelling units in the zoning district in which it is located.

D.    Nonconforming Site Improvement: A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this ordinance, an existing site improvement on a lot, including but not limited to parking areas, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks and landscaping, no longer conforms to one (1) or more of the regulations of this ordinance applicable to the property.

E.    Nonconforming Use: An existing use of a structure, dwelling unit, or of land which does not comply with the use regulations applicable to new uses in the zoning district in which it is located.

F.    Nonconforming Situation: A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this ordinance, an existing lot, structure or improvement, i.e. parking and landscaping, or the use of an existing lot, structure or improvement no longer conforms to one (1) or more of the regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the lot, structure or improvement is located.

G.    Nonconforming Sign: A sign that, on the effective date of this ordinance, does not conform to one (1) or more of the regulations set forth in Section 25.


21-013 UNSAFE BUILDINGS

Nothing in this article shall prevent the strengthening and restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority.


Section 22 SPECIAL USES


22-010 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

Delegation of Power

The following uses may be located in any district by ordinance under such conditions as the Governing Body may impose after review and recommendation of the City Planning Commission and after public hearing in accordance with Section 27, as amended, provided that in their judgment such use will not seriously injure the appropriate use or safety of neighboring property and will conform to the general intent and purpose of this ordinance and shall comply with the height and area regulations of the district in which it may be located. The governing Body shall decide whether special use permits shall be granted only after having received a recommendation from the Planning Commission. In no event shall a special use permit be granted where the proposed use is not authorized by the terms of these regulations, or where the standards of this article are not found to exist.

The Special Use Permit is issued to the specific business use and if the business is to change hands, the special use shall continue; provided that the following two conditions are met. First, the business must remain open continually during the change. Secondly, no additions or alterations may be made without filing a new site and Special Use Permit application.

Special Use Permits in Residential Districts: In no event shall special use permits in residential districts be transferable from an owner applicant to a subsequent owner of the subject real estate or structure.


22-011 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS

Generally, before any permit shall be granted, the Planning Commission shall make written findings certifying that adequate provision has been made for the following:

A.    The location and size of the proposed use in relation to the site and to adjacent sites and uses of property, and the nature and intensity of operations proposed thereon.

B.    Accessibility of the property to police, fire, and refuse collection and other municipal services; adequacy of ingress and egress to and within the site; traffic flow and control; and the adequacy of off-street parking and loading areas.

C.    Utilities and services, including water, sewer, drainage, gas and electricity, with particular reference to location, availability, capacity and compatibility.

D.    The location, nature and height of structures, walls, fences, and other improvements; their relation to adjacent property and uses; and the need for buffering or screening.

E.    The adequacy of required yard and open space requirements and sign provisions.

F.    The general compatibility with adjacent properties, other properties in the district, and the general safety, health and comfort and general welfare of the community and surrounding neighborhood.

The following is a list of permitted special uses allowed in all zoning districts. However, if the permitted use is allowed in a specific zoning district, then the special use permit request for said use can be waived if it will be located in the zoning district for which the use is permitted.

A.    Amusement parks, commercial baseball or athletic fields, racetracks, circuses, carnivals or fairgrounds.

B.    Aviation fields or airports.

C.    Buildings or the use of premises for public utility services which are necessary for public convenience and welfare.

D.    Camping areas including minor and incidental concession facilities for patrons only.

E.    Cemetery, mausoleum, or crematory.

F.    Private clubs (establishments which dispense alcoholic beverages).

G.    Conservation or flood control projects.

H.    Daycares, specifically a licensed daycare home or a group daycare home (see Appendix A –Use Group by Category).

I.    Child care center, except in the business district(s) (See Appendix A – Use Group by Category).

J.    Preschool, except in the business district(s) (see Appendix A – Use Group by Category).

K.    Extraction of raw materials such as ore, rock, gravel, sand, clay and the like, including screening, crushing, washing or storage.

L.    Golf driving ranges, commercial.

M.    Gun clubs, skeet shoots or target ranges.

N.    Hospitals, clinics, correctional institutions and nursing homes.

O.    Nurseries and greenhouses. (Wholesale or retail.)

P.    Parking lots on land within two hundred (200) feet of and serving multiple families, commercial and industrial development.

Q.    Philanthropic or eleemosynary (charitable organizations) institutions.

R.    Water reservoirs, water wells, water tower, filter beds or water supply plants.

S.    Riding stables and commercial dog kennels.

T.    Sewage, refuse, garbage disposal plants and sanitary land fills.

U.    Communication towers, radio antennas, and similar appurtenances.

V.    Home occupations.

W.    Any use located within the flood plain as defined on the official flood insurance rate map of the City as issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

X.    Uses requiring special permit as enumerated in Section 18, “I-H” Heavy Industrial District.

Y.    Group homes, adult day care centers, and boarding homes for the elderly and/or infirm.

Z.    The use of an accessory building for any use other than as defined in Section 23 and which requires the extension of public water or sanitary sewer service.

AA.    Dance studios.

BB.    Senior citizens center.

CC.    Bed and breakfast facility.

DD.    In-home beauty salon.

(Ord. 1364, 2013)


22-012 SIGNS

Refer to Section 25 of this Zoning Ordinance for sign regulations.


22-013 PROCEDURES

A.    Application: Special Use Permits shall only be considered upon the applicant’s submittal of a completed application. A written application for a special use permit shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Department and shall include a statement indicating the section of the ordinance which the permit is sought, the grounds upon which it is requested, and sufficient evidence to show that the use will conform to the standards set forth in this Zoning Ordinance. The application shall include an area map, site plan and timeline of the subject property. The applicant shall submit a site plan along with his application, which shall show the uses and location of uses with respect to the existing buildings and uses in the surrounding area. The site plan will be used to determine what effect such use will have on the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the general welfare.

B.    Fees: Every application for a special use permit shall be subject to a filing fee which is in effect at the time of application and as established by the Governing Body.

C.    Hearing: Upon receipt of the formal application and all required material, the Planning and Zoning Department shall call a public hearing for the next scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission; provided, however, that notice must be published in the official city newspaper at least 20 days prior to the date set for the hearing. In addition, notice must be sent by mail to each property owner within 200 feet of the subject property at least 20 days prior to the date set for the hearing.

D.    Findings: In making a recommendation to the Governing Body, the Planning Commission shall specify the particular grounds relied upon and their relation to the proposed use and shall make affirmative that the proposed use conforms with the general standards set forth in this article. In no case shall an exception be granted if the proposed use will constitute a nuisance, public health, or safety hazard to adjacent properties or to the community at large.

E.    Action by Governing Body: The Governing Body shall consider the Planning Commission’s recommendation at the next regular scheduled Governing Body meeting after a 14 day waiting period for which the agenda item can be docketed. The Governing Body shall consider the recommendation of the Planning Commission and act in accordance with the procedures for amending zoning district boundaries.

F.    Publication: The final decision by the Governing Body, if approved, must be published in the official city newspaper within 30 days.


22-014 TIME LIMIT

A.    Sunset. A special use permit shall expire unless a building permit is taken within 12 months to effectuate such specially permitted use; or if no building permit is required, evidence of use is filed with building inspector.

B.    Abandonment. Once a specially permitted use ceases or is abandoned for a period of more than 12 months, the special use permit shall expire.

C.    Home Occupation. A special use permit for a home occupation shall not be transferable to a new owner of the real estate.


22-030 DAYCARES

A.    Home based daycares must provide all of the following additional requirements (these do not supersede any state requirements that may apply):

1.    The predominant use of the premises must be residential.

2.    The use be primarily carried on or conducted by members of a family residing in the dwelling.

3.    All open play areas must be completely enclosed with a fence (chain link, wood, or vinyl) at least four feet in height and in good repair.

B.    Home Based Daycares – Exceptions to Special Use Permit Requirements. Home based daycares are considered a use by right in certain districts when any of the following apply (these do not supersede any state requirements that may apply):

1.    Child care is provided for not more than two children unrelated to the provider for not more than 40 hours a week and the home has not been closed as a result of enforcement action by the state. Total time is determined by adding the hours each child is cared for weekly.

2.    Irregular child care is arranged between friends and neighbors on an exchange basis.

3.    Child care is provided in the child’s own home.

4.    Child care is provided in the home of the child’s relative.

C.    Licensed daycares, group daycares, and child care centers must provide all of the following additional requirements (these do not supersede any state requirements that may apply):

1.    The property must have a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 65 feet. (Note: These dimensions are consistent with the R-SF zoning, and are less than the multifamily zoning districts.)

2.    In any residential zoning, side setbacks must be at least 100% greater than the minimum side setback required in the district except where the interior side yard is attached to another residential unit.

3.    At least 75 square feet of outdoor play space must be provided on the lot for each child using the space at a given time. The total outdoor space shall accommodate not less than one-half of the licensed capacity, or shall include a minimum of 750 square feet, whichever is greater.

4.    All open play areas must be completely enclosed with a fence (chain link, wood, or vinyl) at least four feet in height and in good repair.

5.    The Council may impose additional requirements such as (but not limited to):

a.    Limitations on the number of children.

b.    Additional fence requirements or setbacks.

c.    Hours of operation.

d.    Other requirements that may affect the neighborhood or the health and safety of the children being cared for.

D.    Preschools – Exceptions.

1.    A special use permit is not required when preschools are an accessory use to any of the following:

a.    Elementary/grade school.

b.    Middle/junior high school.

c.    Senior high school.

E.    Daycares – Legal Conforming Prior to Adoption of the Ordinance Codified in this Section. Daycares that were previously legal conforming uses prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section (April 22, 2013), are licensed, in good standing with the state, and are no longer a permitted use in the district in which they exist upon passage of the ordinance codified in this section, may continue until at any time the use is discontinued for a period of at least 30 days. Any future use of the structure must meet the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1364, 2013)


Section 23 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS


23-010 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS

This district regulation hereinafter set forth in this article shall qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance.

A.    Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding ninety (90) feet, if the building, or the portion thereof exceeding the height limit, is set back from each property line one (1) foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is built provided, however, that such exceptions shall not be permitted within three thousand (3,000) feet of any airport or landing field.

B.    Except as provided in Paragraph D of this article, single family dwellings and two family dwellings in the dwelling districts may be increased in height by not more than ten (10) feet when the side and rear yards are increased over the yard requirements of the district in which they are located by not less than ten (10) feet, but they shall not exceed three (3) stories in height; provided, however, that such additional heights shall not be permitted within two thousand (2,000) feet of an airport or landing field.

C.    Except as hereinafter provided, especially in Paragraph D of this article, chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, and spires, church steeples, wireless towers, silos, farm buildings, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to any lawful and safe height.

D.    No building or structure or any portion thereof shall be erected within the approach zone of any existing runway or landing strip in excess of a height above the elevation at the end of said runway, equal to one-fortieth (1/40) of the horizontal distance from the end of said runway, measured along the centerline of said runway extended. The approach zone is considered to be a trapezoidal area extending from the end of, and in the same direction as said runway for a distance of two (2) miles. Such area is, in the case of an instrument runway, one thousand (1,000) feet wide at the end of the runway for four thousand (4,000) feet wide two (2) miles from the end of the runway, and in the case of a non-instrument runway, five hundred (500) feet wide at the end of the runway and twenty-five hundred (2,500) feet wide two (2) miles from the end of the runway. Engineering calculations shall be verified by federal and state regulatory agencies.

Further, no building or structure or any portion thereof shall be erected in the transition zones on either side of an approach zone of any existing runway or landing strip in excess of a height above the elevation at the end of said runway, computed as follows: one-fortieth (1/40) of the horizontal distance from the end of said runway measured along the centerline of said runway extended, plus one seventh (1/7) of the horizontal distance to the near edge of the approach zone, measured perpendicular to the centerline of said runway extended. For the purpose of computing glide angles for the zoning of approaches to any airport in Tonganoxie City, Kansas, in all cases where an airport is bounded by a public road the effective length of runways directed over any such public road shall be computed (using a slope of 40 feet horizontal to one foot vertical) to produce a height of fourteen (14) feet at the right-of-way line of such road nearest to the airport.

E.    Buildings on through lots and extending through from street to street may waive the requirements for a rear yard by furnishing an equivalent open space in lieu of such required rear yard.

F.    In computing the depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard where the rear or side yard opens onto an alley, none of the alley width may be included as a portion of the rear or side yard as the case may be.

G.    1.    Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building may be built in a rear yard not closer than two (2) feet to the rear lot line. Total square footage of all accessory buildings which are not part of the main building shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear yard. A swimming pool is not considered an accessory building. The rear yard shall be computed by multiplying the lot width times the rear setback.

2.    Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building may be built two (2) feet from the side lot line when located on the rear twenty-five (25) percent of the lot. Except for corner lots, in such cases where the side lot abuts a street right-of-way the accessory building must be setback not closer than thirty (30) feet to the side lot line. (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05)

H.    No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes.

I.    Every part of required yard not utilized by accessory buildings shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting not to exceed twelve (12) inches. (Amended by Ordinance #1233, May 29, 2007)

J.    Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire tower projecting into a rear yard not more than five (5) feet, and the ordinary projection of chimneys and flues are permitted.

K.    One directional name sign or sign advertising products sold on the premises may occupy required yards in a district where such sign is permitted by the use regulations of this ordinance, provided such sign is of not more than 30 square feet in area, does not contain flashing, moving, or intermittent illumination and provided the requirements of other ordinances or regulations are complied with.

L.    For the purpose of side yard requirements, a two family dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying a single lot, except that 2 single family attached dwellings may be built along common lot lines, when located in a two family or multiple family district and when both lots are owned by one person, provided all other Area and Parking Regulations are adhered to, in accordance with “RMF-1” requirements.

M.    In the event that a lot is to be occupied by a group of two or more related buildings to be used for residential, institutional, hotel or motel purposes, there may be more than one main building on the lot when such buildings are arranged around a court having direct street access; provided, however:

1.    That said court between buildings that are parallel or within 45 degrees of being parallel, shall have a minimum width of 30 feet for one story buildings, 40 feet for two story buildings, and 50 feet for three story buildings, and in no case may such building be closer to each other than 15 feet.

2.    Where a court having direct access is more than 50 percent surrounded by a building, the minimum width of the court shall be at least 30 feet for one story buildings, 40 feet for two story buildings, and 50 feet for three story buildings.

N.    Accessory, open and uncovered, swimming pools and home barbecue grills may occupy a required rear yard, provided they are not located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line nor closer than three (3) feet to a side lot line. All swimming pools must be fenced and secured

O.    An open unenclosed, paved porch or paved terrace, deck or /patio may project into a front or rear yard for a distance not exceeding sixteen (16) feet.

P.    Filling station pumps and pump islands may occupy the required yards; provided, however, that they shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from street right-of-way lines.

Q.    Condominium ownership shall not constitute violation of the lot and yard requirements of this ordinance (Amended by Ordinance 1230, 5/29/07)


23-011 OPEN STORAGE

The storage of salvage or scrap materials, inoperable motor vehicles, household goods or furniture, or business equipment or supplies for more than nine (9) consecutive days shall not be allowed unless such items are stored in a completely enclosed building and are clearly secondary to the primary use of the property.


Section 24 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING


24-010 PURPOSE

A.    To integrate the project with the site, in the particular relating to natural topography and existing vegetation.

B.    To enhance the architecture of the site structures and soften the view of paved areas.

C.    To minimize the environmental effect of a development by providing shade, erosion control, noise, glare and heat abatement.

D.    To protect the character and value of surrounding neighborhoods.

E.    To buffer or screen uncomplimentary land uses and their service areas, equipment and appurtenances.


24-011 PLAN REQUIREMENTS

A.    Landscape Plan Requirements. A landscape plan is required for all new multifamily, office and professional, commercial, and light industrial developments, and major additions to such developments, and shall include the following information:

B.    North point and scale (a scale of not less than 1" = 50’ is desirable 1" = 20’ may be required).

C.    Topographic information and spot elevations sufficient to adequately identify and properly specify landscaping for slope stabilization and required screening.

D.    The location, size and notation of site elements such as buildings, walks, parking areas, and above ground and underground utilities.

E.    The location, type and size of existing plant material to be retained.

F.    The location, type, size and quantity of all proposed plant material and related structural and decorative features. Common and botanical names shall be provided for all proposed plant material. Size at time of planting shall be specified according to American Association of Nurserymen Standards.

G.    The location of all trees 12-inch diameter or larger, measured at 1 foot above ground level, to be provided whether the tree is to be retained or is proposed for removal.

H.    Location of all watering sources.

I.    Screening Plan Requirements. When landscape screening is proposed, the screening plan shall be included in the landscape plan or include the same plan components. When architectural screening is proposed, construction details must be submitted.

J.    Approval. All landscape and screening plans shall be submitted to the City Planning Commission for review and approval as to adequacy, prior to the issuance of a building or land use permit. In case of disapproval of a permit for reasons of unacceptable landscape and/or screening plans, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Appeals Board for review and final determination.


24-012 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES

A.    Landscaping

1.    The area between the curb of a public street and the property line shall be brought to finish grade and planted in grass. In no case may this area be paved or covered with materials other than grass or an appropriate ground cover, except at approved driveways which shall be paved. Approved street trees may also be planted.

2.    All areas not covered by buildings, paved area, or other acceptably improved areas shall be landscaped with such landscaping continuously maintained. Where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development and where such plant material is not damaged by site development procedures, such plant material may be credited toward the minimum number specified for each zoning category. Such existing plant material must, however, be in keeping with the intent of this ordinance. This will be determined by its type, size and location as noted in the required landscape plan.

3.    No landscaping in street rights-of-way or in the required sight distance on corner lots shall be allowed to exceed 24 inches in height, except for approved street trees.

B.    Screening

1.    Screening setback. Screening shall not extend into the sight distance or beyond the required parking or paving setback where side or rear lot lines approach a street right-of-way.

2.    Existing screening. If existing screening on either side of a property line meets or exceeds screening requirements, no additional screening will be required. However, if at any time such screening fails to conform to ordinance requirements, compliance shall be provided by the owner of property in the less restrictive zoning district.

3.    Screening of outside trash bins or trash containers. All outside trash bins or trash container areas must be completely enclosed by an architectural screen to a height not less than the height of the bin or container. No trash enclosures may be located in required yards adjacent to street right-of-way. In commercially and industrially zoned areas where the trash container will not be visible from off the property due to other screening or topographic conditions and will not be visible from public parking or pedestrian areas on the site, such trash bin screening need not be provided.

4.    Screening of Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware whether on the ground or on a building shall be screened from public view. Such screening shall be harmonious with building design and materials.

5.    Screening of Parking Areas. Where a parking lot serves other than single family or two family dwellings and is adjacent to or across an alley from property zoned for single family or two family use, such parking lot shall be provided with an architectural screen at least 4 feet in height above the paving surface. Buffer plantings or landscape screening may be substituted if protection from headlights is not determined to be necessary. Where more stringent requirements exist, they shall apply.

C.    Fences, walls or hedges. Except as otherwise specifically provided in other Codes and regulations, the following regulations and design criteria shall apply to all fences, walls, or hedges. Any fences, walls, or hedges established according to ordinances prior to March 26, 2007 and made nonconforming upon adoption of these regulations may be continue d subject to Section 21. (Amended by Ordinance #1233, May 29, 2007)

1.    Maximum height. Fences, walls, or hedges may be constructed or planted to a maximum height of six (6) feet in residential districts and eight (8) feet in commercial and industrial districts, as measured above the average grade level on the property line. Fencing around tennis courts and other recreational facilities shall be exempt from these maximum height limitations.

2.    Corner Visibility. No fence, wall or hedge shall be constructed, planted, reconstructed or replaced in a manner which obstructs the intersection sight triangle as defined in Section 32.

3.    Setbacks in Residential Districts. No fences or walls shall be permitted in the front yard.

Fences, walls, and hedges may be permitted in interior side yards and corner side yards. However, no fence or wall shall be located within 8-feet of street right-of-way in corner rear yards or corner side yards.

Fences or walls shall maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from arterial street right-of-way. Residential properties along arterial streets may have fences or walls within the rear setback only when approved as part of the master fence/landscape screening plan.

Nothing herein shall discourage or prohibit the landscaping, planting, or screening and erection of stand alone decorative fences no taller than three (3) feet in the front yard or corner side yard that are not hazardous to traffic. Such decorative fences shall not include chain-link or wire type fencing materials.

4.    Setbacks in nonresidential districts. Fences and/or walls shall not be placed in the setback area from street rights-of-way or within the perimeter landscape areas for screening. Landscape screening shall be located between a property line and a fence or wall, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.

5.    Construction and Materials. Fences or walls shall be limited, or similar, to one of the following types of construction: brick or stone walls or pillars, solid board, shadow box, basket weave and lattice, crossed, chain-link, wood stockade, split rail, wood rail, wrought iron, spaced picket fence, imitation vinyl or other similar decorative material as approved by the Planning Commission.

Barbed wire and electric fencing (above ground) is prohibited in residential (except agricultural) and commercial districts.

All fences and walls shall be constructed with a finished surface facing outward from the property (e.g. in the case of a wooden fence, a “finished surface” means a surface of the fence where the pickets or slats are fully exposed to view). The posts and support beams shall be on the inside of the finished surface. However, the posts and support beams may be outside the finished surface if compliance with this standard is deemed impractical by the City Planner.

Retaining walls are permitted where the wall is reasonable necessary due to topography, where the wall is located at least two (2) feet from any street right-of-way, and where the wall does not extend more that six (6) inches above the ground level of the land being retained. Retaining wall construction is subject to approval by the City Engineer and City Building Inspector.

6.    Maintenance. All fences and walls shall be maintained in their original upright condition. Fences or walls designed to be painted or have other surface finishes shall be maintained in their original condition as designed. Missing boards, pickets, or posts shall be replaced in a timely manner with material of the same type and quantity.

7.    Graphics

a.    Line of Sight
[IMAGE]


b.    Required Yards
[IMAGE]



24-013 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS

Refer to Site Review Regulations (Ordinance #1020) for more detail.

A.    In the R-R, R-E, R-1, and R-SF Districts, one shade tree per dwelling unit is required in the front or corner side yard, and one tree per 7,000 square feet of site area for uses other than residences.

B.    In the RMF-1, and R-MF2 Districts, buffer plantings, which shall include the equivalent of a minimum of 1 evergreen tree or 1 shade tree and 3 large shrubs for each 30 feet of adjacent project boundary, shall be provided for such development adjacent to single family or two family zoned properties. Such buffer plantings may be arranged on any portion of the property. One tree and one shrub shall be provided in addition to the buffer planting for each 4 living units. Buffer plantings may be required to be concentrated along potentially unsightly areas or where sensitive areas exist on adjacent property.

C.    Districts GBD and LBD: A 6’ fence is required along any property line adjacent (or across the alley from) to any residential property.

D.    Districts I-LT, I-MD and I-H: A buffer area shall be provided along side and rear property lines common to or across an alley from residentially zoned property and shall consist of an area 15 feet in width improved with a six foot architectural screen adjacent to the property line and one row of shade trees spaced not more than 40 feet on center and one row of large shrubs spaced not more than eight feet on center.

E.    District I-H and Special Use Districts. Trees may be required depending on the particular location and surroundings of the project up to a maximum of 1 tree per 15,000 square feet of site area. Auto salvage yards shall be enclosed by a minimum 8 feet tall architectural screening fence, and nothing shall be stored to a height greater than the height of the fence.


24-014 EXISTING PLANT MATERIAL

Where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development and where such plant material is not damaged by site development procedures, such plant material may be credited toward the minimum number specified for each zoning category. Such existing plant material must, however, be in keeping with the intent of this ordinance. This will be determined by its type, size, and location as noted in the required landscape plan. No artificial plants or vegetation shall be used to meet any standards of this section


24-015 PLANTING REQUIREMENTS

The following include minimum planting sizes.

A.    Trees 1. Shade trees – two-inch caliper as measured 12 inches above ground. Nuisance trees should be avoided.

2.    The City encourages the planting of native materials which require less water and maintenance.

3.    Ornamental deciduous trees – 6 feet to 8 feet in height.

4.    Evergreen trees – 5 feet to 6 feet in height.

5.    Trees down to 75% of the minimum planting sizes may be permitted if a proportionately greater number of trees are planted.

B.    Shrubs (deciduous and evergreen) – size varies determined by function.

C.    Ground cover and vines used for ground cover – to be planted in size and number needed to provide 75% coverage after two full growing seasons. Areas intended for ground cover and subject to erosion must be provided with a form of temporary soil surface stabilization until vegetative cover can be established.

D.    Turf Grass – grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded. Areas subject to erosion must be sodded or, if other methods are used, proper soil stabilization must be provided until complete vegetative cover is achieved. Complete coverage must be established in the first growing season.

E.    Landscape Screening – plant material used for screening shall provide coverage of at least 50% of the required screening area in the first growing season. Total coverage must be accomplished by the third growing season. Deciduous plant material used for screening purposes shall have a twig or branch structure dense enough to provide a solid winter screen. Plant material used for screening purposes may exceed screening height requirements provided such plant material does not adversely affect adjacent properties. At the discretion of The City Planning Commission, plant selection for screening purposes shall be certified by a registered, licensed landscape architect or nurseryman that such plant material will conform to the standards and objectives of this ordinance.


24-016 MAINTENANCE

The owner, developer, their agents and successors shall be responsible for all maintenance. All landscaping must be maintained in a healthy and orderly appearance, and kept free of debris and dead plant material. All plant material which has died or has been severely damaged by insects, diseases, vehicular traffic, acts of God, vandalism, etc., must be replaced by the next planting period. Architectural screening shall be maintained in good repair.


24-017 LANDSCAPE MATERIAL AND SCREENING INSTALLED PRIOR TO FINAL OCCUPANCY

All landscape elements and screening must be in place and in proper condition prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy. In instances where adverse weather or seasonal restriction precludes planting, a temporary occupancy may be granted by the City Administrator.


Section 25 SIGNS


25-010 PURPOSE

A.    The purpose of this section is to recognize the community’s need for effective individualized identification, to prevent confusing and objectionable clutter, to promote traffic safety, to protect property values by enhancing the harmony between residential and commercial uses, and to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.    These regulations are adopted to assure fair and consistent regulation of signs within the City. No land, building or structure shall be used for signage purposes except as specified herein. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-011 DEFINITIONS

A.    “A” Frame Sign. A freestanding sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an “A” or some variation thereof, which is readily moveable, and is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure.


[IMAGE]


Example of “A” Frame (or Sandwich Board) Sign

B.    Abandoned Sign. A sign which no longer advertises or identifies a business, lessee, owner, product, activity, message or location that is available to the public.

C.    Animated Sign. A sign that has movement or the appearance of movement of either the sign content or components, which is produced either mechanically or electronically.


[IMAGE]


Example of Animated Sign (A Rotating Sign)

D.    Attention-Attracting Device. Any device intended to attract the attention of the public to an establishment, location, product or service, except signs as permitted by this section. Such device or sign may include balloons, flags or pennants, search lights, twirling signs, inflatable objects, etc.

E.    Average Grade. The area immediately below and within a radius of 20 feet of a sign.


[IMAGE]


F.    Awning Sign. A building-mounted sign that provides additional functionality as shelter. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building.


[IMAGE]


Example of an Awning Sign

G.    Banner. A sign made of flexible materials and supported along one or more sides or at two or more corners by staples, tape, wires, ropes, strings, or other materials that are not fixed or rigid.

H.    Canopy.

1.    Canopy Sign – Building. A roof-like cover, including an awning, attached to a building covering the entrance, exit, walkway, or loading dock, not including the building roof line extension. For the purpose of this section, when the pitch of a building canopy is 1:4 or less (25 degrees or less from vertical), the face of the canopy shall be considered part of the wall. A marquee is not a canopy sign.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Canopy Sign – Building

2.    Canopy Sign – Freestanding. A self-supported, detached roof-like structure, such as a structure covering gas fueling stations.


[IMAGE]


Example of Canopy Sign – Freestanding

I.    Changeable Copy Signs. A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols change manually though placement of letters or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Changeable Copy Sign

J.    Complex. A group of freestanding buildings, or buildings constructed in such a manner as to give an appearance of being interrelated because of architectural similarity and/or interconnected drives and parking areas; or a building divided into three or more separate offices, businesses, or apartments. A complex shall be limited to apartment, office or business complexes, shopping centers and/or industrial parks.

K.    Complex Sign. A freestanding sign used to advertise an apartment complex, office complex, business complex, shopping centers or industrial parks.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Monument Complex Sign

L.    Directional Sign. Signs designed to provide direction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

M.    Dissolve. A mode of message transition on an electronic message display accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.

N.    Electronic Message Board. Uses changing lights to form a sign message(s) or symbols that are electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes by remote or automatic means.

O.    Fade. A mode of message transition on an electronic message display accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.

P.    Flag. Any fabric or other flexible material attached to or designed to be flown from a flagpole or similar device.

Q.    Flashing Sign. A sign that gives the effect, either directly or indirectly, of intermittent movement, or changes to give two or more visual effects.

R.    Frame. A complete, static display screen on an electronic message display.

S.    Frame Effect. A visual effect on an electronic message display applied to a single frame to attract the attention of viewers.

T.    Illuminated Sign. A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.

U.    Incidental Sign. A sign providing information about the occupancy or conduct of business permitted on a premises, such as logos of credit cards accepted on the premises, hours of operation, a “closed” or “open” sign, emergency contact name and phone number, street address, “help wanted,” “no loitering or solicitations,” security system notices, notices required by law, and similar signs shall be construed to be incidental signs.

V.    Indirectly Illuminated Sign. A sign which is illuminated by a shielded light source.

W.    Internally Illuminated Sign. A sign illuminated by an internal light source diffused through a translucent material.

X.    Inflatable Sign. A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support.

Y.    Interim Sign. A sign that is designed to be used only for a specified period and not permanently mounted to a structure or permanently installed in the ground, such as (but not limited to) real estate signs, garage sale signs, political signs, and auctions.

Z.    Lights. The following lights are not allowed on a sign, as a sign, or in conjunction with a sign within the City of Tonganoxie:

1.    Search Light. A projected beam of light.

2.    Twirling or Flashing Lights. Lights that flash or twirl either erratically or rhythmically for the purpose of drawing attention to an object or event.

3.    Strobe Light. A device that utilizes a flash tube for high-speed illumination.

4.    Disco Balls. A sphere with miniature mirrored or reflective tiles attached to the surface for the purpose of reflecting light in many directions.

AA.    Marquee Sign. A sign mounted on a permanent canopy with changeable letters.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Marquee Sign

BB.    Monument Sign. A freestanding sign mounted on the ground and having a solid appearance and a low profile, normally consisting of a face and base. The width and length of the supporting base shall be no less than the sign face.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Monument Sign

CC.    Mural. A picture on an exterior surface of a structure. A mural is a sign only if it’s related by language, logo, or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business. Murals that are considered a sign must meet the requirements of wall signs in this section.

DD.    Name Plate. Containing the names of buildings and date of erection and/or other pertinent information, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials and attached flush with the wall surface.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Nameplate or Memorial Plate

EE.    Off-Site Sign. An outdoor sign whose message directs attention to a specific business, product, service, entertainment event or activity, or other commercial or noncommercial activity, or noncommercial message about something that is not sold, produced, manufactured, furnished, or conducted at the property upon which the sign is located. Also known as a third-party sign, billboard, or outdoor advertising.

FF.    Pennant. A sign, with or without a logo, made from one or two corners, used in combination with other such signs to create the impression of a line.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Pennant

GG.    Pole or Pylon Sign. A sign, placed so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above the average surrounding grade, and supported by one or more upright poles, columns, or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached to any building or structure.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Pylon Sign


[IMAGE]


Example of a Pole Sign

HH.    Political Sign. An interim sign intended to advance a political statement, cause, or candidate for office.

II.    Portable Sign. A temporary sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground, building or other structure, which may be mounted on wheels, and can easily be transported from place to place, but does include permitted temporary signs. Portable signs may be with or without electrical power.

JJ.    Private Sale or Event Sign. A temporary sign advertising private sales of personal property such as garage sales, rummage sales, etc., or private not-for-profit events such as picnics, carnivals, bazaars, game nights, art fairs, craft shows and Christmas tree sales.

KK.    Project Construction Sign. A sign erected on the premises on which development is taking place during the period of such development. Such sign may indicate the names of architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, or similar individuals, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors or similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project.

LL.    Projecting Sign. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects away from the building face and generally perpendicular to the building fascia, excepting signs located on a canopy, awning, or marquee. The sign shall not extend more than three feet from the face of the building.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Projecting Sign

MM.    Real Estate Sign. An interim sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.

NN.    Roof Sign. Any sign erected upon, against, or above a roof or roof eave, or on top or above the parapet, or on a functional architectural appendage above the roof or roof eave.


[IMAGE]


Example of a Roof Sign

OO.    Scroll. A mode of message transition on an electronic message display where the message appears to move vertically across the display surface.

PP.    Sight Triangle. An area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and eight feet above the grades of the outside edge of the street surface of the intersection streets, measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets, 90 feet in each direction along the centerline of the streets. The City Engineer shall establish sight distance triangles based upon standards in the policy manual published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).


[IMAGE]


Example of Sight Triangle

QQ.    Sign. Any identification, description, illustration, message, symbol, logo, or device used to inform or attract attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.

RR.    Sign Alteration. The replacement, enlargement, rewording, and reduction, reshaping, or repainting using different colors of a sign to serve an establishment or business.

SS.    Sign Face. The entire area within a single continuous rectangular, triangular, or trapezoidal shape which encloses all elements that form the display, including any background which is different from or in contrast with any building wall surface upon which it is mounted.

TT.    Sign Maintenance. The normal care and minor repair that is necessary to retain a safe, attractive sign and supporting structures. Repainting with the same colors, or repairing copy or logo, shall be considered maintenance if the name, product, service, place, activity, person, etc., depicted remains the same.

UU.    Sign Structure. The base, supports, uprights, braces, framework, and face of a sign.

VV.    Snipe Sign. A sign constructed of any kind of material that is attached to a utility pole, tree, fence, or similar object located or situated on public or private property.

WW.    Temporary Event Sign. A temporary sign or banner for special events such as sidewalk sales, civic club events, school activities, garage sales, etc., not including attention-attracting devices such as flags or pennants, balloons, search lights, twirling signs, inflatable figures, etc.

XX.    Transition. A visual effect used on an electronic message display to change from one message to another.

YY.    Travel. A mode of message transition on an electronic message display where the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.

ZZ.    Wall Sign. A building-mounted sign which is either attached to, displayed, or painted on an exterior wall in a manner parallel with the wall surface, and not projecting more than 12 inches from such surface.

AAA.    Window Sign. A sign that is applied on or behind a windowpane or located in such a manner within a building that it is visible from the right-of-way. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-012 ADMINISTRATION

A.    Applicability. Every sign shall conform to the requirements of this section, irrespective of when such sign was established within the City limits, unless otherwise allowed for in these sign regulations. Any sign shall, by definition, be considered a structure. All signs shall be constructed in such a manner and of such material that they shall be safe.

B.    Zoning District Requirements. Signs are allowed in each zoning district as described in this section. Signs may be permitted by right in a zoning district, conditionally permitted upon review and approval by the Planning Commission, prohibited in a zoning district, or permitted upon approval of a special use permit.

C.    Sign Permit Required.

1.    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or alter any sign as defined in this section without first obtaining a sign permit from the City including signs permitted by right, conditionally permitted, or permitted upon approval of a special use permit. This requirement shall not be construed to require a permit for sign maintenance as defined in Section 25-013, altering changeable copy on permitted signs, or signs exempted from a permit as described elsewhere in this section.

2.    Applications. Sign permits shall be made on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by two sets of plans drawn to scale indicating sign size, location, method of illumination, colors, materials of the sign and structure, and method of attachment. In addition, the applicant shall submit other information relating to the placement, construction, design, etc., of the sign as may be required.

3.    Issuance. The City shall issue a permit for the erection, alteration, or relocation of a sign when an application has been properly made and the sign complies with all appropriate laws and ordinances. The City shall approve or deny the sign permit application not later than 30 days following the date of its submission.

4.    Revocation and Denial. The City may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued on the basis of a misstatement of material fact or fraud. When a sign permit is denied by the City, a written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant, together with a brief written statement of the reasons for the denial.

5.    Sign Permit Appeals. An appeal of denial may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals upon denial of a sign permit. Said appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the denial of the sign permit. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the appeal not later than 45 days after the appeal has been filed unless a request for continuance is submitted by City staff or the applicant.

6.    Effect of Permit Issuance. No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall any permit hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign.

D.    Removal of Sign.

1.    If it has been determined that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe, or has been constructed, erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, written notice shall be given to the sign owner. The owner shall immediately remove or repair the sign to bring it into compliance and/or make it safe. If the owner fails to remove or repair the sign so as to comply within five days after the notice, the City may cause the sign to be removed or repaired to make it safe, at the expense of the permittee or owner.

2.    The City Clerk shall mail a statement of the costs for removal or repair of the unsafe or unlawful sign to either the last known address of the owner of record of the property, the person in charge of such property, or the sign permittee. If said costs are not paid within 10 days from the time of mailing the notice, the governing body of the City may proceed to pass an ordinance levying a special assessment for the cost against the subject lot or parcel of land. The City Clerk shall certify the assessment to the County Clerk for collection and payment to the City in the same manner as other assessments and taxes are collected and paid to the City. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-013 GENERAL STANDARDS

A.    Area Measurement.

1.    The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all lettering, background, emblem, logo, representation, or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight lines drawn at right angles. (See below.)


[IMAGE]


2.    Supporting sign structure, base, framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area.

3.    Double-faced (back-to-back) signs shall be regarded as a single sign only if mounted on a single structure, and the distance between each sign face does not exceed two feet at any point. Only one face of a double-faced sign shall be measured when determining maximum allowable area. In the case of different sign faces, the face with the largest computed sign area shall be used.

4.    Three-dimensional objects, sculpture or trademarks that project from the face of the sign shall be measured at their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. No object may project more than six inches from the sign face.

B.    Height Measurement. The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the uppermost point of the structural member(s) to the average grade immediately below and within a radius of 20 feet of the supporting structural member(s) of the sign.


[IMAGE]


C.    Illumination. The following standards are applicable for all illuminated signs to reduce any negative impacts upon surrounding neighborhood or right-of-way areas:

1.    External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign.

2.    The light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will create a negative impact on residential properties in direct line of sight to the sign.

3.    Signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or other illuminating devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness or color.

4.    Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices.

5.    Reflective type bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed 15 watts shall not be used on the exterior surface of signs so that the face of the bulb or lamp is exposed to a public right-of-way or adjacent property.

D.    Maintenance. All signs shall be of sound structural quality, be maintained in good repair, have a clean and neat appearance, and land within 10 feet in any direction from the base of the structure or wall shall be kept free from debris, weeds and trash.

1.    General maintenance of said sign shall include the replacement of nonfunctional, broken, or defective parts, painting, cleaning and upkeep of the premises immediately surrounding the sign or advertising structure, and any other action required for the maintenance of said sign or advertising structure. All signs and supporting structures shall be kept painted or treated in some manner to prevent rust, decay or deterioration.

2.    If signs are not maintained as described and the Code Enforcement Officer deems them a public safety hazard or nuisance, such signs shall be removed. All costs for removal of said signs shall be assessed against the property owner.

3.    Should any sign, which is placed in a public easement, be damaged due to maintenance of utilities in that easement by the City or others, the cost for repairs or replacement of said sign shall be borne by the sign owner.

E.    Removal or Replacement. A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises within 90 days of the discontinuance of the business that it advertises. When a sign is removed, all brackets, poles, and other structural elements that supported the sign shall also be removed. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent portion of the structure.

F.    Placement on Easement or Right-of-Way. No privately owned sign shall encroach into a public right-of-way, except as noted under projecting building signs. No private sign shall be placed in a public easement.

G.    Setbacks. Unless otherwise stated, all signs shall observe a minimum 15-foot setback from the property line.

H.    Sight Distance at Intersections. No sign, which obstructs the view, shall be allowed within the sight triangle of a street intersection as described in Section 32-010. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-014 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS

The following signs shall be permitted in all districts and shall not require a sign permit, unless otherwise noted. The signs must be in conformance with all other regulations and ordinances of the City.

A.    Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs must be approved by the Planning Commission. The Commission shall consider effect on area, location and sign format or programming when evaluating. Allowed (with approval) in all districts, but limited to church, school, public and semi-public uses in residential areas. These signs may be strictly limited in areas where they may cause a traffic hazard or nuisance or disruption to the surrounding neighborhood.

B.    Incidental and Directional Signs. Directional, incidental and/or accessory signs shall not exceed eight square feet in sign area and four feet in height if freestanding.

C.    Flags. Flags are permitted in all districts with the following requirements. “Flags” in this section shall mean a piece of fabric or other flexible material solely containing distinctive colors, patterns, standards, words, or emblems used as a symbol of an organization or entity, including but not limited to political jurisdictions, such as the United States.

1.    Flags may not contain commercial messages.

2.    Flags greater than 15 square feet must be flown on a flagpole appropriate for the size flag flown in accordance with the table below:

	Flag Size	Flag Location for Display

	2' x 3' or smaller	House-mounted flagpole

	2 1/2' x 4'	House-mounted flagpole

	3' x 5'	House-mounted or 20' flagpole

	4' x 6'	25' flagpole

	5' x 8'	35' flagpole

	6' x 10'	40' flagpole

	8' x 12'	45' flagpole

	10' x 15'	50' flagpole

	12' x 18'	60' flagpole

	15' x 25'	70' flagpole

	20' x 30'	80' flagpole

3.    No more than three flagpoles may be located on a parcel.

4.    No more than two flags may be flown on each flagpole with a maximum of six flags per lot.

5.    References to flagpole height refer to vertical flagpoles.

6.    References to the number of flags and flagpoles and flag dimensions refer to both vertical flagpoles and mast arm flagpoles, such as staffs extending at an angle from a building.

7.    Flags shall not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the zoning district in which they are located.

8.    A flag not displayed on a ground-supported staff shall meet the permit and display requirements of a banner if displaying a commercial message.

9.    On United States or Kansas holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations on manner of display.

10.    This section shall not be interpreted to restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners or noncommercial signage as outlined elsewhere in this section. Flags mounted directly on a building wall shall expressly be considered signs and shall be subject to wall sign regulations.

D.    Nameplate or memorial plate signs containing the names of buildings and date of erection and/or other pertinent information, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials and attached flush with the wall surface.

E.    Political signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and are restricted to posting six weeks prior to the beginning of the campaign/election date and removed no later than one week following the election date. No political signs may be placed in the public right-of-way, and all signs posted on private property must have the permission of the owner or resident of said property.

F.    Interim – Project Construction and Subdivision Signs. One temporary freestanding, nonilluminated sign shall be permitted on any site on which development or construction activities are taking place. Residential subdivision signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area per sign face, with two faces permitted. Such sign may not be erected until the final plat for the subdivision has been approved by the City Council and filed with the register of deeds. Project construction signs for nonresidential developments shall not exceed 64 square feet in area per sign face. The signs may have two sign faces.

G.    Temporary Event Signs. Temporary special events, such as sidewalk sales, civic club events, school activities, fundraisers, etc., shall be permitted to have temporary signs or banners without a permit.

H.    Window and Interior Signs. Such signs mounted on interior building surfaces, such as signs mounted on the inside of windows and doors. No sign shall occupy more than 50% of the window area.

 

	TABLE 1 – SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS 

	NO SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED

	 	TYPE OF SIGN	NUMBER OF SIGNS	PERMITTED SIGN AREA	MAXIMUM HEIGHT	ILLUMINATION	MINIMUM SETBACK	MAXIMUM TIME PERMITTED

	All Districts	Changeable Copy	As permitted by Planning Commission	As permitted by Planning Commission	As permitted by Planning Commission	As permitted by Planning Commission	Outside of easement or right-of-way	Indefinite

	Flags	Three per lot	Two flags per pole	Same as district in which located	External	10' from lot line and outside of easement	Indefinite

	Incidental or Directional	Any number as long as total of all such signs does not exceed eight sf per frontage	8 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way	Indefinite

	Interim – Single Lot Residential	One per frontage	8 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way	Indefinite

	Interim – Residential Subdivision	One per subdivision (temporary)	32 sf	12'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way	30 days after certificate of occupancy is issued

	Interim – Commercial Construction	One per project (temporary)	64 sf	12'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way	30 days after certificate of occupancy is issued

	Nameplate or Memorial Plate	One per building	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	Indefinite

	Public/Safety Signs	As required	As required	As required	As required	As required	N/A

	Temporary Events	Two per frontage	N/A	N/A	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way	At dusk

	Window and Interior Signs	N/A	50% of window	N/A	N/A	N/A	Indefinite

 (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-015 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

A.    All single-family residential properties including detached, semi-detached and townhomes that are located in residential zoning districts are permitted:

1.    Signs not to exceed eight square feet in total sign area per road frontage.

2.    Corner lots and lots with frontage on more than one street are entitled to eight square feet per frontage.

3.    This sign area allowance covers, but is not limited to: address signs, home occupation signs, lawn signs, and contractor signs.

4.    Signs may be freestanding, mounted to a permanent building structure or displayed in a window. Trees, rocks or other naturally occurring landscape features may not be used to support a residential sign.

B.    Subdivisions, apartments, multifamily dwellings and condominium complexes are permitted:

1.    A monument sign not to exceed 64 square feet; and further provided, that one such sign shall be permitted for each separate street frontage occupied by the subdivision, apartment, or condominium complex.

2.    Wall signs are also permitted not to exceed 5% of the area of the facade in elevation view upon which they are placed.

C.    For properties located in a residential zone as described in subsection B of this section:

1.    Other directional, incidental and/or accessory signs are also permitted to be located within the subdivision, complex or multifamily residential development. Such directional, incidental and/or accessory signs shall not exceed six square feet in sign area and four feet in height (if freestanding).

D.    Interim Signs. One interim sign bearing a noncommercial message or a message related to the sale, lease, rental, or construction of the units. Such sign may not exceed eight square feet in area or four feet in height.

 

	TABLE 2 – PERMITTED SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

	 	TYPE OF SIGN	NUMBER OF SIGNS	PERMITTED SIGN AREA	MAXIMUM HEIGHT	ILLUMINATION	MINIMUM SETBACK

	Residential Properties Including Single-Family Detached, Semi-Detached, and Townhomes	Monument or Wall	N/A	8 sf/lot	1' 6"	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Interim	One per frontage	8 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Residential Subdivisions1, Apartment Complexes, Multifamily Dwellings, and Condominiums	Monument	One per frontage	64 sf	6'	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Wall	One per frontage	5% of facade	N/A	None	N/A

	Incidental or Directional	Unlimited	6 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Interim	One per frontage	8 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Public or Semi-Public Buildings	Monument	One per frontage	64 sf	6'	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Wall	One per frontage	Lesser of 10% of facade or 100 sf	N/A	None	N/A

	Incidental or Directional	Unlimited	6 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Interim	One per frontage	8 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	1    Each residential subdivision shall be permitted permanent monument type neighborhood entry markers on each side of an entrance street of the subdivision. The entry markers may include a sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall be restricted to the subdivision name. Illumination of such signs may only be from an indirect light source.

(Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-016 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE HISTORIC BUSINESS DISTRICT

The following signs shall be permitted in the HBD district. Signs in the HBD district shall comply with the design guidelines for Tonganoxie’s central business district and may be more restrictive than the standards provided in this section.

A.    “A” frame sign or sandwich board signs are permitted one per business and allowed as follows:

1.    A permit shall be required for sandwich board signs. Permits are good for the life of the sign. The permit number shall be legible, placed on the sign, where an inspector may reasonably locate it, in black letters one-quarter inch tall.

2.    Sandwich board signs shall be on-premises signs.

3.    The sign may be located on the public sidewalk or the planting strip adjacent to the edge of the street on which it fronts. Signs shall not be placed in any raised streetscape or publicly owned planters.

4.    The sign may not exceed seven and one-half square feet in area per side and may have no more than two sides for the display of messages.

5.    The spread of the “A” at the open end shall be sufficient to insure stability and no wider.

6.    Signs shall be adequately weighted to resist wind gusts.

7.    Chalkboard, whiteboard, nonelectronic changeable letters, and any other nonelectronic changeable or erasable surfaces are permitted.

8.    All signs shall be in good repair. No attachments to signs are permitted, other than brochure pockets.

9.    Creative shapes that reflect the theme of the business are encouraged (e.g., ice cream shops may display a sign in the shape of an ice cream cone).

10.    The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. Rough-cut plywood is not acceptable. The sign lettering should be professionally painted or applied; a “yard sales” or “graffiti” look with hand-painted or paint-stenciled letters is not acceptable.

11.    The sign shall not be an electronic changeable message sign.

12.    The sign shall be displayed only during business hours and stored inside after hours.

13.    The placement of the sandwich board sign shall not impede pedestrian or wheelchair travel in the vicinity of the sign or otherwise create a traffic or other safety hazard by obstructing vision or otherwise, as determined by the person designated by the Administrator or his designee to enforce the provisions of this sign code.

14.    The owner must assume liability for damage or injury resulting from the use of a sandwich board sign and provide the City with an appropriate legal document satisfactory to the City Clerk holding the City harmless and indemnifying it for any resulting loss or injury.

15.    Except as otherwise provided in this sign code, a sandwich board sign may be posted for so long as it remains in good condition. Once a sandwich board sign is tattered or otherwise is no longer in good condition, it shall be removed or replaced.

16.    If the Administrator or his designee determines that a sandwich board sign is not in good condition, the property owner shall be notified of that determination and shall remove, repair or replace the sign within three days of that notification. Signs that are not removed, repaired, or replaced within three days of the notification shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement or removal by City staff. The Administrator or his designee’s determination that a sandwich board sign is not in good condition may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

17.    Incidental and Directional Signs. Directional, incidental and/or accessory signs shall not exceed eight square feet in sign area and four feet in height (if freestanding).

B.    Awning Sign. This type sign is permitted as an integral part of the awning to which they are attached or applied.

1.    Signs may be lettered on awnings located on a one- or two-story building. Awnings may be at either level of the building, and may face a parking lot, street right-of-way or a pedestrian walkway.

2.    Sign area shall occupy no more than 35% of the awning.

3.    The lower edge of an awning shall be no closer than 10 feet to any sidewalk nor 14 feet to any street or alley surface where vehicles may pass below.

4.    Awnings may not be internally lighted. Lighting directed downward and a nonilluminated sign are allowed.

5.    Awnings shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of excessive dust or visible defects.

C.    Canopy – Building Sign. This type sign is permitted as an integral part of the canopy to which they are attached or applied.

1.    Sign area shall occupy no more than 35% of the canopy/awning.

2.    The lower edge of a canopy shall be no closer than 10 feet to any sidewalk nor 14 feet to any street or alley surface where vehicles may pass below.

3.    Canopy signs may not be internally lighted. Lighting directed downward and nonilluminated signs are allowed.

4.    Canopies shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of excessive dust or visible defects.

D.    Interim Signs. One interim sign per frontage is permitted bearing a noncommercial message or a message related to the sale, lease, rental, or construction of the units. Such sign may not exceed eight square feet in area or four feet in height.

E.    Monument Sign.

1.    Monument signs in this district must be approved by the Planning Commission.

2.    A monument sign may be located only within a site frontage adjoining a street.

3.    A monument sign may be single- or double-faced. Maximum area of a sign shall be 60 square feet, with no sign face exceeding 30 square feet. Maximum overall height of a monument sign and structure shall be six feet.

4.    Monument signs must be mounted upon a solid base.

5.    The design of a sign shall be consistent with the overall scale of the building or location.

6.    The design and placement of the sign shall not interfere with the sight triangle at any intersection as set forth in Section 32.

F.    Projecting Signs. In lieu of a permitted wall sign, one projecting sign shall be permitted. The projecting sign shall be allowed on a structure having a zero setback from the front property line.

G.    Under Canopy Signs. Under canopy signs shall be permitted in addition to the signage described above. One such sign shall be permitted per business. Under canopy signs shall not exceed two square feet in area.

H.    Wall Signs. Each business or establishment shall be permitted not more than two wall signs, limited to one per wall. The area of the wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the area of the wall, upon which it is mounted, with the maximum sign area per wall not to exceed 50 square feet, whichever is less.

 

	TABLE 3 – SIGNS IN HISTORIC BUSINESS DISTRICT

	 	TYPE OF SIGN	NUMBER OF SIGNS	PERMITTED SIGN AREA	MAXIMUM HEIGHT	ILLUMINATION	MINIMUM SETBACK

	Historic Business District	A-Frame	One per business	7.5 sf/side	N/A	Electronic changeable message sign not permitted	See Section 25-16

	Awning	N/A 	35% of awning area	Lower edge no closer than 10' to sidewalk, or 14' to any street or alley where vehicles may pass	None	N/A

	Canopy Building	N/A 	35% of canopy area	Lower edge no closer than 10' to sidewalk, or 14' to any street or alley where vehicles may pass	None	N/A

	Incidental or Directional	Any number as long as total of all such signs does not exceed eight sf per frontage	8 sf	6'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Interim	One per frontage	8 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Historic Business District	Monument	One per right-of-way. PC approval required	30 sf	6'	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Projecting	One in lieu of one permitted wall sign	20 sf	Lower edge no closer than 10' to sidewalk, or 14' to any street or alley where vehicles may pass	Internal or external	Allowed on zero setback structure

	Under Canopy 	One per business	2 sf	N/A	None	N/A

	Wall	One per wall, max two per building	50 sf or 10% of wall, whichever is less	N/A	Internal or external	N/A

(Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-017 SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS – SINGLE TENANT

The following signs shall be permitted in commercial districts:

A.    Awning Sign. This type of sign is permitted as an integral part of the awning to which they are attached or applied.

1.    Signs may be lettered on awnings located on a one- or two-story building. Awnings may be at either level of the building, and may face a parking lot, street right-of-way or a pedestrian walkway.

2.    Sign area shall occupy no more than 35% of the awning.

3.    The lower edge of an awning shall be no closer than 10 feet to any sidewalk nor 14 feet to any street or alley surface where vehicles may pass below.

4.    Awnings may not be internally lighted. Lighting directed downward and a nonilluminated sign are allowed.

5.    Awnings shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of excessive dust or visible defects.

B.    Canopy – Building Sign. This type of sign is permitted as an integral part of the canopy to which they are attached or applied.

1.    Sign area shall occupy no more than 35% of the canopy/awning.

2.    The lower edge of a canopy shall be no closer than 10 feet to any sidewalk nor 14 feet to any street or alley surface where vehicles may pass below.

3.    Canopy signs may not be internally lighted. Lighting directed downward and nonilluminated signs are allowed.

4.    Canopies shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of excessive dust or visible defects.

C.    Canopy – Freestanding Sign.

1.    Sign area shall occupy no more than 35% of the canopy/awning.

2.    The lower edge of a canopy shall be no closer than 10 feet to any sidewalk nor 14 feet to any street or alley surface where vehicles may pass below.

3.    Canopy signs may be internally lighted.

4.    Canopies shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of excessive dust or visible defects.

D.    Changeable Copy Sign. These signs must be approved by the Planning Commission. The Commission shall consider effect on area, location and sign format or programming when evaluating. Allowed (with approval) in all districts, but limited to church, school, public and semi-public uses in residential areas. These signs may be strictly limited in areas where they may cause a traffic hazard or nuisance or disruption to the surrounding neighborhood. Temporary or moveable changeable copy signs are not permitted.

    These signs are permitted subject to the following minimum standards as shown in Table 4 that will be applied by the Planning Commission. Additional conditions may be applied.

	TABLE 4 – CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN GUIDELINES

	 	Sign Type	Maximum Height	Maximum Width	Lines of Copy	Illumination	Background Material	Setback

	Residential Districts	Wall, Monument, or Freestanding	6'	5'	4	Internal	Opaque	Out of right-of-way and sight triangle

	Nonresidential Districts	As approved by Planning Commission


[IMAGE]


Example of Permanent Changeable Copy Sign Permitted as Allowed by Planning Commission


[IMAGE]


Example of Temporary Changeable Copy Sign (Moveable/Transportable) Not Permitted

E.    Electronic Message Signs. Electronic message center (EMC) signs shall be allowed only along and oriented to roadways that are classified as collector or arterial roadways that are properties within the commercial and industrial districts.

1.    General Requirements.

a.    One EMC may be permitted per lot.

b.    No more than 50% of the permitted sign area may be an EMC.

c.    All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by photocell (hardwired) or via software settings that adjust the brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day and night not in excess of one-third foot candles above ambient light levels.

At least 30 minutes past sunset, and with the electronic display either turned off, showing all black copy, or blocked, a foot candle meter will be used to record the area ambient light level. An ambient reading will be taken with the meter aimed directly at the electronic display at a distance of 100 feet. To establish the illumination level, the electronic display will be turned on to show all white copy and a second reading taken.

The sign owner shall provide upon installation written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified above, and the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password protected software. The process for setting automatic dimming controls as outlined in the paragraph above need not be repeated upon receipt of the certification from the sign owner unless otherwise requested by the City.

d.    All EMC signs require a special permit.

2.    Operational Limitations.

a.    EMC signs are not permitted in residential districts except for churches and schools.

b.    In commercial and industrial districts, EMC signs shall have a minimum display time of eight seconds. It shall change instantaneously, without rolling, fading, or the illusion of movement, and shall not flash or vary in brightness except to change at sunrise or sunset.

c.    All EMC display features and functions are permitted, with the exception of (1) flashing, which is prohibited, and (2) full motion video or film display via an electronic file imported into the EMC software or streamed in real time into the EMC. Full motion video as described shall be permitted by special exception only.

d.    All electronic message center signs shall be constructed and operated so that the message center defaults to a dark screen when not displaying a message.


[IMAGE]


Example of Electronic Message Center Monument Sign

F.    Canopy Signs – Freestanding. Signs may be placed on freestanding canopies provided they meet the requirements of wall signs for buildings. Only the fascia of the canopy upon which the sign is placed shall be used for determining the size of the sign.

G.    Interim Signs. One interim sign per frontage bearing a noncommercial message or a message related to the sale, lease, rental, or construction of the units. Such sign may not exceed 32 square feet in area or eight feet in height. Signs located adjacent to U.S. 24-40 may be 15 feet in height.

H.    Monument Signs.

1.    A monument sign may be located only within a site frontage adjoining a street.

2.    A monument sign may be single- or double-faced. Maximum area of a sign shall be 60 square feet, with no sign face exceeding 30 square feet. Maximum overall height of a monument sign and structure shall be six feet.

3.    Monument signs shall be mounted upon a solid base.

4.    The design of a sign shall be consistent with the overall scale of the building or location.

5.    The design and placement of the sign shall not interfere with the sight triangle at any intersection as set forth in Section 32.

6.    Single business sites on property more than 10 acres and more than one street frontage or more than 1,000 linear feet of street frontage shall be permitted a second monument sign.

7.    When a single business is located on a site more than 10 acres in area, one of the two permitted monument signs may be increased to a maximum height of 21 feet and a maximum face area of 95 square feet; on a site more than 20 acres, both of the two monument signs may be increased in height to 21 feet and a maximum face area of 95 square feet.

I.    Pole or Pylon Sign. Pylon signs shall not be permitted, except upon approval of a special use permit for properties zoned GBD with direct frontage along U.S. 24-40 Highway.

1.    No more than one pylon sign shall be allowed per business property.

2.    Maximum area of a sign for business identification purposes shall be 85 square feet.

3.    Maximum overall height for a pylon sign is 20 feet above the average grade.

4.    Pylon signs are permitted only on parcels with frontage along U.S. 24-40 Highway that are zoned commercial or industrial.

5.    Two structural supports are required and shall be located at the outermost extremities of the sign face.

6.    No additional signs or advertising may be attached to the support structure.

7.    No exposed support piping is allowed.

8.    The structural supports shall be encased in the same materials and colors as the primary associated structure.

9.    There shall be a minimum of 200 linear feet separation between pylon signs.

10.    Lighting may be internal or external where it does not produce glare onto public streets or adjacent residential properties.

11.    Pole signs are not permitted in any district.

12.    Pylon signs not submitted during the site plan approval process must be submitted to and approved by the City Planner and Building Official to determine compliance with these requirements before a sign permit is approved and issued.

Should compliance with these requirements be disputed by the applicant or undetermined by staff, the sign permit application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for action.

J.    Projecting Signs. In lieu of a permitted wall sign, one projecting sign shall be permitted.

1.    The maximum sign area of a projecting bracket sign shall be 20 square feet per sign face, with two sign faces permitted.

2.    No projecting building sign shall project more than three feet or one-third of the sidewalk width from the wall of the supporting building, whichever is greater.

3.    The lower edge of a projecting bracket sign shall be no closer than 10 feet to any sidewalk nor 14 feet to any street or alley surface where vehicles may pass below.

4.    The upper edge of a projecting building sign shall not extend vertically above the eave line of a single-story structure or above the second story sill line of a multistory structure.

5.    Supports and brackets shall be compatible with the design and scale of the sign.

K.    Under Canopy Signs. In complexes with three or more tenants, under canopy signs shall be permitted in addition to the signage described above. One such sign shall be permitted per business. Under canopy signs shall not exceed two square feet in area.

L.    Menu Boards.

1.    Each drive-up, drive-through, or drive-in restaurant shall be permitted signage in addition to that described above. The additional signage shall be limited to one freestanding or wall-mounted preorder and menu board per lane. The menu board shall not exceed seven feet in height and 32 square feet in total surface area. Total surface area shall include the face of the menu board, the trim, the base, and other appurtenances. Whenever a menu board is visible from a public street, additional landscaping shall be used to screen the menu board from view from the street.

2.    A restaurant may have a menu board located at each order station. Such menu board at each order station shall not exceed four square feet in surface area per face.

M.    Freestanding Canopy Signs. Signs may be placed on freestanding canopies provided they meet the requirements of wall signs for buildings. Only the fascia of the canopy upon which the sign is placed shall be used for determining the size of the sign.

N.    Pennants or banners, or other similar objects, shall be permitted to be displayed a maximum of four 30-day periods per calendar year. In no case shall a 30-day period be carried over from month to month consecutively.

O.    Wall Signs. Each business or establishment shall be permitted not more than three wall signs, limited to one per wall. The area of the wall sign in LBD shall not exceed 10% of the area of the wall, upon which it is mounted, with the maximum sign area per wall not to exceed 50 square feet, whichever is less. The area of the wall sign in GBD shall not exceed 10% of the area of the wall, upon which it is mounted, with the maximum sign area per wall not to exceed one 100 square feet, whichever is less. Wall signs in the PUD-C district shall comply with those of the GBD district unless further regulated by the zoning and site plan approval.

1.    A sign may not obstruct any portion of a window, doorway, transom, or other architectural detail. However, these elements may be incorporated into the sign content.

2.    The top of the sign when placed on a parapet or a canopy shall not extend more than five feet above the actual roofline, provided the sign is located entirely on the canopy or parapet.

3.    The sign shall not project above the edge of the roof.

4.    Sign shall not project more than 12 inches from the wall surface of the building.

5.    Bonus Wall Sign Area. The area of any wall sign may be increased by 25% when the building is set back at least 200 feet from the public right-of-way and may be further increased an additional 25% for each additional 200 feet of setback, or fraction thereof, up to a maximum increase of 100%.

6.    Bonus Number of Wall Signs. The number of wall signs may be increased one per wall at 50% size of the first sign per 200-foot setback up to a maximum of three additional signs.



	TABLE 5 – SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS – SINGLE TENANT 

	 	TYPE OF SIGN	NUMBER OF SIGNS	PERMITTED SIGN AREA	MAXIMUM HEIGHT	ILLUMINATION	MINIMUM SETBACK

	Commercial Districts –

Single Tenant	Awning	One per awning	35%	Lower edge no closer than 10' to sidewalk, or 14' to any street or alley where vehicles may pass	Down directed	N/A

	Banners or Pennants	One per banner or pennant	32 sf	Building height with lowest edge 7' above ground	None	N/A

	Canopy – Building or Marquee	One per canopy	35% of canopy area	Lower edge no closer than 10' to sidewalk, or 14' to any street or alley where vehicles may pass	None	N/A

	Commercial Districts – Single Tenant	Canopy – Freestanding	One per canopy	Same as wall signs. Only fascia of canopy where sign is located to be used for determining size	Lower edge no closer than 10' to sidewalk, or 14' to any street or alley where vehicles may pass	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Electronic Message Board	One per lot	50% of permitted wall or freestanding sign	Wall – N/A

Freestanding – Same as pole or monument	Internal	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Incidental or Directional	Unlimited	8 sf	4'	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Interim	One per frontage	32 sf	8'

15' when adjacent to Highway 24/40	None	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Menu Boards	One freestanding or wall menu board per lane	32 sf	6'	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	In lieu of one wall or freestanding menu board, one permitted per order station	4 sf

	Monument	One in lieu of one wall sign	60 sf	6'	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	One additional when greater than 10 acres and more than one street frontage, or more than 1,000 linear feet of frontage	> 10 acres (and < 20 acres)

One sign up to 95 sf

> 20 acres both signs up to 95 sf	> 10 acres (and < 20 acres)

One sign up to 21'

> 20 acres both signs up to 21'

	Pylon	One per business fronting Highway 24/40	85 sf	20'	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Commercial Districts –

Single Tenant	Projecting	One in lieu of one wall sign, monument sign or pylon sign	20 sf	Lower edge no closer than 10' to sidewalk, or 14' to any street or alley where vehicles may pass	Internal or external	 

	Wall	N/A	LBD: Lesser of 10% of wall, max 50 sf

GBD and PUD-C: Lesser of 10% of wall or 100 sf	N/A	Internal or external	N/A

	Bonus: Increase 25% when set back at least 200 feet, additional 25% for each 200 feet up to maximum increase of 100%

 

	TABLE 6 – BANNERS

	 	TYPES OF SIGN	NUMBER OF SIGNS	PERMITTED SIGN AREA	MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SIGN	ILLUMINATION	MINIMUM SETBACK

	Banners	Banners (Residential)	Prohibited except for holidays, religious commemoration and special family events	32 sf	N/A	None	Max 90 days per calendar year

	Freestanding (Commercial)	One per lot or storefront	32 sf

Greater than 32 sf must meet permanent sign standards	6'	None	Max 90 days per calendar year

	Wall (Commercial)	One per frontage	N/A

 (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-018 SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS – COMPLEX SIGNS

A.    Complexes. The developer/owner shall prepare a set of sign standards for all exterior signs to be located in a complex. Such standards shall run with all leases or sales of portions of the development. The size, colors, materials, styles of lettering, appearance, or any logo, type of illumination and location shall be set out in such standards. Said standards shall be for the purpose of assuring harmony and visual quality throughout the project. Standards shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval. The sign plan application may be in conjunction with the site plan application process, but at a minimum it must occur prior to building permit approval for the complex. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-019 SIGNS PERMITTED IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS

Signs permitted in industrial districts shall be the same as permitted in Section 25-017, except as follows:

A.    Wall Signs. Each business or establishment shall be permitted not more than three wall signs, limited to one per wall. The area of the wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the area of the wall, upon which it is mounted, with the maximum sign area per wall not to exceed 150 square feet.

B.    Monument Signs.

1.    In lieu of one of the above permitted wall signs, one monument sign shall be permitted for each freestanding building housing one tenant.

2.    In addition to the signs permitted above, each complex as defined by Section 25-011 shall be permitted one monument (identification) sign with the names of tenants.

3.    Commercial complexes or single business sites on property more than 10 acres and more than one street frontage or more than 1,000 linear feet of street frontage shall be permitted a second monument sign.

4.    When a commercial complex is located on a site more than 10 acres in area, one of the two permitted monument signs may be increased to a maximum height of 21 feet and a maximum face area of 95 square feet; on a site more than 20 acres, both of the two monument signs may be increased in height to 21 feet and a maximum face area of 95 square feet. Monument signs for industrial park complexes shall be limited to the size, height, and sign face area as defined in Section 25-013.

 

	TABLE 7 – SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS

In addition to signs permitted in commercial districts

	 	TYPE OF SIGN	NUMBER OF SIGNS	PERMITTED SIGN AREA	MAXIMUM HEIGHT	ILLUMINATION	MINIMUM SETBACK

	Industrial Districts	Pole/Pylon	One per business fronting Highway 24/40	85 sf	20'	Internal or external	Outside of easement or right-of-way

	Monument	One in lieu of one wall sign. One additional when greater than 10 acres and more than one street frontage, or more than 1,000 linear feet of frontage	Commercial uses: Greater than 10 acres, one of the two monument signs may be increased to a max area of 95 sf; when more than 20 acres, both monument signs may be increased to max area of 95 sf

Industrial uses: 30 sf	Commercial uses: Greater than 10 acres, one of the two monument signs may be increased to a max height of 21'; when more than 20 acres, both monument signs may be increased in height to 21'

Industrial uses: 6'	Internal or external	15' 0"

	Wall	Three max, one per wall	10% of wall, 150 sf max	One per frontage	Internal or external	N/A

(Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-020 PROHIBITED SIGNS AND DEVICES

It shall be a violation of these regulations to erect, install, place or maintain the following signs:

A.    Any sign which is not otherwise included under types of signs permitted in this section.

B.    Any sign located in public right-of-way, except those signs required by governmental authority or political signs as may be permitted.

C.    Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination, may be confused with or construed as a traffic control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency vehicle, or which hides from view any traffic or street sign or signal or device.

D.    Animated signs or elements of signs that are animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving and/or rotating including search lights, strobe lights, and disco balls unless otherwise permitted in this section.

E.    Signs emitting audible sounds (except menu boards), odors, or visible matter.

F.    Off-site signs and/or billboards.

G.    Any sign or advertising structure with words, scenes or graphics which are obscene, indecent and prurient, within the meaning of K.S.A. 21-4301, as amended.

H.    Any sign or advertising structure which is erected, installed or maintained that obstructs any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening intended as a means of ingress or egress.

I.    Portable signs or signs mounted on a platform, trailer, or motor vehicle. Such prohibition shall not extend to trucks or other legitimate carriers and delivery vehicles that may be parked on said premises in the course of their normal operations.

J.    Abandoned signs.

K.    Roof signs.

L.    Snipe signs.

M.    Vehicle signs, except that company or corporation name or logo painted on a motor vehicle or semi-trailer normally in motion during use shall not be considered a vehicular sign when moved at least one time during a 24-hour period.

N.    Any sign not specifically, or by reasonable implication, permitted herein. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-021 ABANDONED SIGNS

Except as may be otherwise provided for in this section, any sign which is located on a building, structure, or real property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of 90 days or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises. When a wall sign is removed, the wall of the building or structure shall be restored to its normal appearance. Removal of a ground-based sign shall include the face and base. Any sign structure that is in conformance with this section may remain as long as it is maintained and does not become unsafe or unsightly.

If after the 30-day time period has elapsed and the sign has not been removed, the City shall notify, in writing, the property owner of record that the sign shall be removed within 30 days after the date of the notice. If the sign has not been removed within 30 days after the date of the notice, the Code Enforcement Officer may have the sign removed and the associated costs assessed to the property.

The City Clerk shall mail a statement of such cost for the removal of said sign to the last known address of the owner of record of the property, or person in charge of such property. If such costs are not paid within 10 days from the mailing of such notice, the governing body of the City shall proceed to pass an ordinance levying a special assessment for such cost against the lot or piece of land. The City Clerk shall certify such assessment to the County Clerk for collection and payment to the City in the same manner as other assessments and taxes are collected and paid to the City. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-022 NONCONFORMING SIGNS

Nonconforming signs are declared by this zoning code to be incompatible to, and inconsistent with, land development and other permitted signs set forth within any particular zoning district. It is the intent of this section to allow those nonconforming signs to continue until they are removed under the terms of this section, but not to encourage their survival.

A.    Alterations of Nonconforming Signs. No nonconforming sign or advertising structure shall be expanded, relocated or restored unless said sign or advertising structure is brought into conformance with the provisions of this section or any other applicable City code requirement.

B.    Replacement, Restoration or Reconstruction. In the event that any existing nonconforming sign, as provided for in this section, is damaged by any means, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, wind, explosion, act of God, or act of a public enemy, to an extent of 50% or more of the replacement, restoration or reconstruction value of the sign, or 50% of the square footage of the sign copy area, said sign shall not be replaced, restored or reconstructed unless it is brought into full compliance with the provisions of this zoning code. Any nonconforming sign which remains damaged or in disrepair, regardless of the percentage of construction (or damage) value or area of square footage which is damaged, for a period of 30 days following the date of damage without the issuance of a valid sign permit, shall not be replaced, restored or reconstructed unless it is brought into full compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances.

C.    Repairs and Maintenance. Routine repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs necessary to maintain health and safety may be permitted. Said repairs and maintenance shall include such activities as painting and the replacement of a damaged or deteriorated sign face. The cost of said repairs and maintenance shall not exceed 50% of the value of the sign which is to be repaired or maintained. Said value shall be that which is current at the time of the repair or maintenance. Prior to said repair and maintenance taking place, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be consulted to determine if a sign permit is necessary. If such determination is made, then all applicable work performed shall be accomplished through the issuance of a valid sign permit as required by this section.

D.    Termination of Nonconforming Signs. Upon the discontinuance of a use, to which any nonconforming sign or advertising structure is accessory to, the tenant or property owner shall remove all nonconforming signs, supports and structures upon the building or property upon which said use was located. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-023 ENFORCEMENT

A.    Signs erected without an approved permit shall incur a $50 fine. Each day the sign remains in place without an approved permit shall constitute a separate offense.

B.    All sign permits are revocable by the City if all conditions or agreements are not met or upheld by the owner or any future owner of the sign. If a permit is revoked, subject sign must be removed within 30 days of certified notice of said revocation.

C.    All signs must be maintained in accordance with Section 25-013.D. Signs not kept maintained may be deemed a public nuisance or safety hazard by the Code Enforcement Officer and removed from the site. All costs for removal shall be assessed against the subject property. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-024 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE

The governing body hereby determines that the public peace, safety, health and welfare require that all signs and sign structures hereafter constructed or erected shall conform and comply with such requirements forthwith. All signs which shall hereafter be constructed or erected in violation of the provisions of this section shall be declared public nuisance, and shall be removed and abated in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-025 NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGES

Any commercial sign permitted under this section is allowed to contain noncommercial speech in lieu of any commercial speech, subject to all applicable restrictions and performance standards. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


25-026 SIGN PERMIT PROCESS

In addition to a building permit as may be required under the City of Tonganoxie building code, a sign permit shall be obtained from the City prior to installation or construction of any sign regulated under this code, except for those signs specifically exempted under this code. All applications for a sign shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the City. Each application shall include all information or attachments needed for City staff or Planning Commission to make a determination on the permit. (Ord. 1393, 2015)


Section 26 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS


26-010 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS

A.    Appointment: A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby created. The Board shall consist of the members of the Planning Commission and may also include Members of the Public at Large. (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05). Appointment procedures shall be the same as observed by that body. (See Section 30, Planning Commission.) All requirements regarding quorums and majorities shall be based on the planning commission requirements outlined in Section 30 of this ordinance. (Ordinance #906 8/22/94)

B.    The board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor with approval by the Governing Body for the City of Tonganoxie. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.(Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05)

C.    Replacement of Board Members: All replacement of Board members shall be accomplished by the procedure outlined in Section 30 of this ordinance (Ordinance #906 8/22/94).

D.    Officers and Duties: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall annually elect a chairman and a vice-chairman. The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, shall preside at all meetings and shall decide all points of order or procedure.

E.    Rules and Meetings: The Board may adopt rules to govern its proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be held at any time at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be held at such place or places within the City as the Board may designate. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing evidence presented, findings of fact by the board, decision of the board, and the vote upon each question. Records of all official actions of the board shall be filed with the City Clerk at City Hall and shall be a public record.

F.    Staff Support: Staff members for the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of the City Planner and a Secretary, which shall be employees of the City.


26-011 POWERS & DUTIES OF THE BOARD

A.    Zoning Ordinance Appeals: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall administer the details of appeals from the provisions of the zoning ordinance, or other matters referred to it regarding the application of the zoning ordinance as hereinafter provided. In exercising these powers the Board, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination. To that end, the Board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is made to attach appropriate conditions to, issue or direct the issuance of a permit.

B.    Interpretation Upon appeal from a decision by the building inspector or other administrative official, the Board may decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision of the zoning ordinance, including:

1.    The determination of the exact location of any district boundary, if there is uncertainty with respect thereto, and

2.    The determination of an appropriate use group for a use that is not listed in the ordinance, and that the use is a similar use to the uses already in the use group.

C.    Exceptions: The board may grant exceptions to the provisions of this ordinance in those instances where the board is specifically authorized to grant such exceptions and only under the terms of the zoning ordinance. In no event shall exceptions to the provisions of the zoning ordinance be granted where the use or exception contemplated is not specifically listed as an exception in the zoning ordinance. Further, under no conditions shall the board have the power to grant an exception when conditions of this exception, as established in the zoning ordinance by the city commission, are not found to be present.

D.    Variances: The Board may authorize in specific cases a variance from the specific terms of this ordinance which will not be contrary to public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, and provided that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured; and substantial justice done. Such variance shall not permit any use not permitted in the zoning ordinance in such district. A request for a variance may be granted in such case, upon finding of the board that all of the following conditions have been met:

1.    That the variance request arises from such conditions which is unique to the property in question and which is not ordinarily found in the same zone or district; and is not created by an action or actions of the property owner or applicant.

2.    That the granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents.

3.    That the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance of which variance is requested will constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented in the application.

4.    That the variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare, and

5.    That granting the variance desired will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance.

E.    Appeals: The board may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error of law in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after the order of action appealed from has been made by filing written notice of such appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, with the Board of Zoning Appeals.

F.    Powers Specified Elsewhere in the Ordinance: The board shall also have those powers and duties specifically set forth in other parts of this ordinance.


26-012 PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS

A.    Application: Applications to the Board for any type of proceeding may be taken from any person aggrieved, from any officer of the city or from any governmental agency or body affected by any decision of the officer administering the provisions of the zoning ordinance. All applications shall be made to the Board in writing on forms prescribed by the Board within ten (10) days following the decision has been rendered by the building inspector or other administrative officer. Each application shall be accompanied by a current certified list (provided by a licensed abstractor/title company) of the names and mailing addresses of all property owners of record within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property to be considered in the application.

B.    Public Hearing and Notice: The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing on each application. The Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall cause to be published in the official paper of the City, a notice as to the time, place and date and subject of the hearing for each application. Such notice shall appear at least once in the official city paper no less than twenty (20) days prior to the date of hearing. The Secretary through the City Clerk shall also cause notice to be given by mail no less than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing to each of the property owners of record within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property to be considered in the application, as such owners are listed on the current certified list accompanying the application. Mailed notice shall also be given to each party to the appeal.

C.    Effect of Appeal An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from, unless the person affected by such appeal certified to the board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or a Court of record on application and notice to the person from whom the appeal was taken.


26-013 TIME LIMIT ON PERMITS.

No order of the board permitting the erection or alteration of a building, or the use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one hundred twenty (120) days, unless a permit for such erection, alteration or use is obtained within such period and work started in accordance with the building or use permit. The Board may, at their discretion, extend the period for obtaining a permit in increments of ninety (90) days without re-advertising or additional application.


26-014 RECORDS.

Every decision or determination by the board of zoning appeals shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk not more than ten (10) working days following the date of hearing and shall become a public record.


26-015 FEE.

The fee for an application for appeal to the board shall be the current fee as set by the governing body of Tonganoxie and no part shall be refundable. The City Clerk shall be responsible for the collection of the application fee.


Section 27 AMENDMENTS


27-010 WHO MAY PETITION OR APPLY

Applications for amendments, revisions or change in the Zoning District Map or Zoning Regulations in effect for the City of Tonganoxie may be made by any person who owns the land sought to be rezoned or an agent, as defined by these regulations, provided that such is not a general revision of the existing regulations and provided that it affects specific property. If such application is made by the owner’s agent, the agent must attach a letter signed and notarized by the owner or other legal documentation authorizing that person as the owner’s agent.

Recommendations for amendments, revisions or changes to the Zoning Regulations or Zoning District Boundary Map may also be made by the Tonganoxie City Planning Commission on its own motion, for final determination by the City Council. Likewise, the City Council may amend the Zoning Regulation or the Zoning District Boundary Map upon its own motion, provided, however, that such proposed amendments shall first be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation and report.


27-011 PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS OR CHANGES

All applications or requests for amendments, revisions or changes to the zoning Regulations of Zoning District Boundary Map shall be filed with the City Clerk on such forms as provided in conformance therewith. All such proposed amendments first shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation. Upon receipt of an application for rezoning or for a special use permit by the owner or the owner’s agent of a particular tract of land the payment of the appropriate fee, as established by the City council, the City Clerk shall note thereon the date of filing and make a permanent record thereof. Recommendations for amendments, revisions or changes to the Zoning Regulations or Zoning District Boundary Map by the City Planning Commission or the City Council, the City Clerk shall note thereon the date of filing and make a permanent record thereof. No filing fees shall be assessed for recommendations for amendment, revision or change by the Tonganoxie City Planning Commission or the City Council

All such proposed amendments first shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation. All such applications shall be set for hearing before the Planning Commission not later than sixty (60) days after receipt of a fully completed application if by an owner or the owner’s agent of a particular tract of land.

The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, and shall cause an accurate written summary to be made of the proceedings.(Ordinance #967 11/9/99) Notice of such hearing shall be published not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date of said hearing in the official city newspaper of the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas. In addition to the publication notice, written notice of the proposed amendment shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the hearing to all owners of record of land located within at least two hundred (200) feet of the area proposed to be altered. Such notice shall fix the time and place for the hearing and contain a statement regarding the proposed changes and regulations or restrictions or in the boundary of any classification of any zone or district. If such proposed amendment is not a general revision of the existing regulations and affect specific property, the property shall be designated by legal description or a general description sufficient to identify the property under consideration. All notices shall include a statement that a complete legal description is available for public inspection and shall indicate that such information is available at the office of the City Clerk. When the notice has been properly addressed and deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken by the Planning Commission or the Governing Body. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient to permit the Planning Commission to recommend amendments to Zoning Regulations which affect only a portion of the land described in the notice or which give all or any part of the land described a zoning classification that is more restrictive than that set forth in the notice. A recommendation of a zoning classification that is more restrictive than that set forth in the notice shall not be valid without republication and, where necessary, another mailing, unless the Planning Commission has previously established a table or publication available to the public which designates what zoning classification or more restrictive changes are authorized.

The applicant shall provide a list of the owners of record of said properties within the two-hundred (200) feet of the area proposed to be altered at the time of the filing of the application. If the property for alteration is located adjacent to the City limits, the area of notification shall be extended to one-thousand (1,000) feet in the unincorporated area. The applicant shall furnish proof that he or she is the owner of record, or the owner’s agent. The list of owners may be obtained from Leavenworth County, or a certified list shall be provided by a licensed abstractor/title company. (Amended by Ordinance # 1186 5/23/05)

At any public hearing held to consider a proposed rezoning, an opportunity shall be granted to interested parties to be heard.

Any amendment, if in accordance with the City of Tonganoxie Land Use Plan or the Land Use Element of the City of Tonganoxie Comprehensive Plan, shall be presumed to be reasonable. The following matters shall be considered when approving or disapproving a rezoning request:

A.    The character of the neighborhood;

B.    The compatibility with the zoning and uses of properties nearby;

C.    The suitability of the subject property for the uses to which it has been restricted;

D.    The extent to which removal of the restrictions will detrimentally affect nearby property;

E.    The length of time the subject property has remained vacant as zoned;

F.    The gain if any, to be public health, safety and welfare due to denial of the application as compared to the hardship imposed upon the landowner, if any, as a result of denial of the application; (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05)

G.    The adequacy of public utilities and infrastructure; (Amended by Ordinance #1184 5/9/05)

H.    Recommendations of permanent or professional staff; (Amended by Ordinance #1184 5/9/05)

I.    Conformance of the requested change to the adopted or recognized comprehensive plan of Tonganoxie, KS: (Amended by Ordinance # 1184 5/9/05)


27-012 ACTION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE GOVERNING BODY

A.    A majority of the members of the Planning Commission present and voting at the hearing shall be required to recommend approval or denial of the amendment to the governing body. If the planning commission fails to make a recommendation on a rezoning request, the planning commission shall be deemed to have made a recommendation of disapproval. When the planning commission submits a recommendation of approval or disapproval of such amendment and the reasons therefore, governing body may: (1) Adopt such recommendation by ordinance; (2) override the planning commission’s recommendation by a 2/3 majority vote of the membership of the governing body; or (3) return such recommendation to the Planning Commission with a statement specifying the basis for the governing body’s failure to approve or disapprove. If the governing body returns the planning commission’s recommendation, the planning commission, after considering the same, may resubmit its original recommendation giving the reasons therefore or submit new and amended recommendation. Upon receipt of such recommendation, the governing body, by a simple majority thereof, may adopt or may revise or amend and adopt such recommendation by the respective ordinance or resolution, or it need take no further action thereon. If the planning commission fails to deliver its recommendation to the governing body following the planning commission’s next regular meeting after receipt of the governing body’s report, the governing body shall consider such course of inaction on the part of the planning commission as a resubmission of the original recommendation and proceed accordingly. The proposed rezoning shall become effective upon publication of the adopting ordinance or resolution.

B.    If such amendment affects the boundaries of any zone or district, the respective ordinance or resolution shall describe the boundaries as amended, or if provision is made for the fixing of the same upon the official map which has been incorporated by reference, the amending ordinance or resolution shall define the change or the boundary as amended, shall order the official map to be changed to reflect such amendment, shall amend the section of the ordinance or resolution incorporating the same and shall reincorporate such map as amended.

C.    Regardless of whether or not the planning commission approves or disapproves a zoning amendment, if a protest petition against such amendment is filed in the office of the city clerk within fourteen (14) days after the date of the conclusion of the public hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to the publication notice, signed by the owners of record of 20% or more of any real property proposed to be rezoned or by the owners of record of 20% or more of the total area required to be notified by this act of the proposed rezoning of a specific property, excluding streets and public ways, the ordinance or resolution adopting such amendment shall not be passed except by at least 3/4 vote of all of the members of the governing body.

D.    In its discretion the Planning Commission may provide for additional notice by providing for the posting of signs on land which is the subject of a proposed rezoning, for the purpose of providing notice of such proposed rezoning


27-013 LIMITATIONS ON REAPPLICATION FOR AMENDMENTS

Whenever an application is requesting an amendment, supplement, change or rezoning and has been denied by the City Council, such application shall not be reconsidered sooner than six (6) months after the previous denial.


27-014 ACCOMPANYING DATA

An application for an amendment shall be accompanied by:

A.    A drawing to scale showing the boundaries of the property, the existing street and utilities presently serving the property, the proposed new streets and utilities to serve the property and the dimensions and location of the improvements.

B.    A copy of the deed showing fee simple title in the owner of record.

C.    In applicable cases, a letter signed and notarized by the owner or other appropriate legal documentation authorizing the person as an agent.

D.    A certified list (provided by a licensed abstractor/title company) of the property owners located within two hundred (200) feet of the area proposed to be altered or rezoned. Any error in the list of property owners will result in reapplication accompanied by a second application fee to be paid by the applicant and a new public hearing.


Section 28 ENFORCEMENT VIOLATION AND PENALTY


28-010 ENFORCEMENT

It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or City Administrator or other designated officer to enforce the zoning ordinance through proper legal channels and to refuse to issue any permit for any building or structure or the use of any premises which violate any of the provisions hereof. Appeal from decision of the Building Inspector, or other designated officer, may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals as previously provided herein.


28-011 VIOLATION AND PENALTY

Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance or fail to comply with any order or regulation, or who shall build in violation of any specifications or plans submitted and approved, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, shall, for each and every violation and non-compliance respectively be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each and every day a violation is permitted to exist shall be deemed a separate offense.

In accordance with KSA 12-759, Section D, appeals to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer of the city, county or any governmental agency or body affected by any decision of the officer administering the provisions of the zoning ordinance or resolution. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board, by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the payment of the fee required therefore.

Any person, company, corporation, institution, municipality or agency of the state that violates any provision of any regulation relating to floodplain zoning shall be subject to the penalties and remedies stated in this section.


Section 29 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE


29-010 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE

In case any section, clause, sentence or paragraph or part of this ordinance shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this ordinance.


Section 30 CITY PLANNING COMMISSION


30-010 PLANNING COMMISSION

A.    Appointment The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members of which five members shall be residents of the city and two members shall reside outside the city limits, but within the designated planning area of the city which is within at least three miles of the corporate limits of the city. K.S.A 12-744(a).The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Governing Body for the City of Tonganoxie. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.

B.    Terms and Vacancies: Terms for Commissioners shall be three (3) years, with the members divided as evenly as possible so that terms end on alternating years. Vacant, unexpired terms shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the consent of the Governing Body and such appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. Terms shall begin in April and expire in March. The Governing Body should provide by Ordinance or Resolution for the term of the members of the Planning Commission and for the filling of vacancies.


30-011 BY-LAWS

The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and hearing procedures.

A.    Officers and Duties The Commission shall annually elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, shall preside at all meetings and shall decide all points of order or procedure. The secretary will be responsible for signing approved plats and perform the duties of the Chairman during the absence or disability of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The chairman, vice-chairman and secretary shall serve for one year and until a successor is selected.

B.    Staff: A recording secretary who is not a member of the Commission shall be recommended by the chairman to the mayor for appointment with the consent of the city council. The recording secretary shall record the minutes of each meeting showing evidence presented findings of fact by the board, decision of the board, and the vote upon each question. Further staff support will also be provided by the City Planner.

C.    Meetings: The Bylaws shall fix a regular time and place for meetings. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson or in the chairperson’s absence by the vice-chairman. All meetings of the Board shall be held at such place or places within the City as the Board may designate. All meetings shall be open to the public. Records of all official actions of the board shall be filed with the City Clerk at City Hall and shall be a public record.

D.    Rules: The Commission shall adopt bylaws to govern its proceedings.


30-012 ACTIONS:

Except as otherwise provided in the Zoning ordinance, no action by the Planning Commission shall be taken except by majority vote of the membership thereof.


30-013 COMMITTEES:

If the Planning Commission deems appropriate, from time to time, it may establish sub-committees, advisory committees or technical committees to advise or assist in its activities.


Section 31 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RESIDENTIAL – DESIGN MANUFACTURED HOMES


31-010 MANUFACTURED HOMES

Nothing in this ordinance shall have the effect of excluding manufactured homes from the entire zoning jurisdiction set forth in this ordinance.

Nothing in this zoning ordinance shall be interpreted to have the effect of excluding residential-design manufactured homes from single-family residential districts solely because they are a manufactured home.


31-011 REQUIREMENTS (ORDINANCE #1030 4/24/00):

The following standards are required for placement of a manufactured home in a residential district:

A.    The minimum dimension of either the width or length of the home shall be 22 feet.

B.    The minimum roof pitch shall be 3 inches of rise in 12 inches of run.

C.    The home shall be sided in wood, masonry, composition board or finished aluminum lap siding. Other materials will be allowed if they are normally used in site built residential construction.

D.    The roofing material shall be wood shingles, composition or fiberglass shingles, asphalt shingles, clay or concrete tile or slate. Other materials will be allowed if they are normally used in site built residential construction.

E.    The main floor shall be no higher than 20 inches above the finished grade at the foundation.

F.    The home must be permanently mounted on a foundation or basement similar in appearance to other site built homes. Foundation must be constructed to meet the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City of Tonganoxie.

G.    If 70% of the homes on the block where the home is to be placed have garages, the manufactured home will need to also provide a garage constructed according to the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City of Tonganoxie.


31-012 RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS

Nothing in this section shall be construed to preempt or supersede valid restrictive covenants running with the land.


Section 32 DEFINITIONS


32-010 DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the word “structure” and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.

Accessory Building: A subordinate building having a use customarily subordinate, incidental to or customarily found in connection with the main use of the premises. An accessory building must be located on the lot occupied by the main building. A building housing an accessory use is considered to be an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a wall in common with the main building, or is under an extension of the main roof and designed as an integral part of the main building.

Accessory Use: A use of a building or land that is clearly incidental to or customarily found in connection with the principle use of the premises. An accessory use must be located on the lot occupied by the main use.

Addition: Any change to a structure that increases its bulk or footprint including a porch, deck or carport.

Adult Entertainment: Any business that receives 25% of the business’s revenue from the sale of literature of the type or nature regulated by the Federal or State government as profane or obscene; movies or theatrical performances that are rated at any level beyond an R-rating, as established by the American Motion Picture Association, or would not reasonably qualify for an R-rating as established by the American Motion Picture Association; or a club or business that charges admission to patrons to view nude (topless) or naked adults, whether admission is charged per capita or as a gratuity to a performer; or any combination of the sale of literature, sale or renting of motion pictures, or admission charge for viewing nude or naked adults that constitute 25% of the business’s gross revenues. See Section 13 Special Use for additional regulations. (Ord. #894)

Adult Entertainment Business: Any business including but not limited to:

1.    Adult media outlet;

2.    Adult motion picture theaters;

3.    Juice bars; and

4.    Establishments providing live dancers, models entertainers or other performers, having as a material portion of its business the offering of entertainment, stock in trade or materials, scenes or other presentations predominantly distinguished or characterized by emphasis or depiction or description of an erotic nature including, but not limited to, depiction or descriptions of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined by the adopted adult entertainment ordinance) to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an entertainer, manager, or server provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, patron or a member.

Alley: A public or private right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.

Alteration: A change or rearrangement in the structural parts of an existing structure. Enlargement, whether by extending a side, increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another shall be considered an alteration. For the purpose of this regulation, the following shall not be considered a structural alteration.

1.    Attachment of a new front facade where structural supports are not changed.

2.    Addition of fire escapes where structural supports are not changed.

3.    New windows where lintels and support walls are not materially changed.

4.    Repair or replacement of non-structural members.

Amusement Device: Any machine, game, table or device which is designed, intended or used as entertainment, and may be operated by the public upon the insertion of a coin or token. This does not include food vending machines, televisions, phonographs, soft drink and cigarette vending machines.

Animal Husbandry, Limited.

1.    The keeping, feeding and maintenance of animals are permitted for non-profit purposes only.

2.    No animals, other than household pets, shall be kept within twenty (20) feet of a dwelling or within 60 feet of all property lines.

3.    Housing or caging of animals shall be adequate and sanitary and subject to all State requirements for health and sanitation. All animal food except hay and straw shall be stored in rodent proof containers.

Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a dwelling or building that is intended or designed for use as a residence by a single family.

Apartment Hotel: A building arranged for or containing apartments and individual guest rooms, with or without housekeeping facilities, and which furnishes services ordinarily provided by hotels, such as maid, bellboy, desk, and laundry service, and may include a dining room with internal entrance and primarily for use of tenants of the building, the building shall not include public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms.

Apartment Building/House: A building or portion thereof designed or arranged for occupancy by more than two families.

Arcade: Any establishment displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation four or more amusement devices including, but not limited, to pool tables, air hockey tables, ‘pong’ games, mechanical rides (including children’s), electronic games and shooting gallery games.

Basement: A story having part but not more than one-half its height below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation and gross floor area measurement.

Bed and Breakfast: A house or dwelling in which a portion, or all, is used by transient guests who are lodged with one or more meals provided for compensation. Rooms or suites shall not be occupied by the same persons for more than (30) thirty consecutive nights. There shall be no more than 10 rooms available in the facility for this commercial use.

Block: A tract or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets or a combination of streets and public parks, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways or drainage ways, or municipal boundary lines.

Boarding or Lodging House: A building or part thereof, other than a hotel where, for compensation, lodging and/or meals, are provided for not more than ten persons, not transients.

Buffer Strip: An area established to protect one type of land use from another with which it is incompatible. Additional use, yard or height restriction may be imposed but normally a properly screened area can provide a buffer.

Building: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property.

Building, Height: The vertical distance from the ground surface to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridges for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
[IMAGE]


Building/Setback Line: A line parallel to the respective lot line that defines the building setback area.

A.    Front and rear setback lines shall extend from side lot line to side lot line.

B.    Side setback line shall extend from front lot line to rear lot line.

Camper: A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation.

Canopy or Awning: A roof-like cover having no supporting walls but supported otherwise from the ground, deck, floor, or walls of the building.

Care provider (or provider): Means a person, association, corporation or other organization who has control or custody of one or more children under 16 years of age who are unattended by a parent or guardian for the purpose of providing those children with care for less than 24 hours a day, except children related to the person by blood, marriage or legal adoption. (Ord. 1364, 2013)

Cellar: A story having more than one-half of its height below grade. A cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of height regulations.

Certificate of Occupancy: Official certification that a premises and its identified use conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance and building codes and may be used or occupied. This certificate is granted for new construction.

Child Care Center: A facility which provides care and educational activities for 13 or more children two weeks to 16 years of age for more than three hours and less than 24 hours per day including daytime, evening and nighttime care; or provides before and after school care for school-age children, and where the facility is not a residence. Child care centers may have less than 13 children if all other requirements are met as set out in this zoning code and as required by State licensing. (Ord. 1364, 2013)

City Council: Governing body for the City of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

Common Open Space: An area of land or water or combination thereof planned for passive or active recreation, which does not include areas utilized for streets, alleys, driveways or private roads, off-street parking or loading areas. However, the area of recreational activities such as swimming pools, tennis courts shuffleboard courts, etc., may be included as common open space.

Comprehensive Plan: Named Vision 2020 and also called the Plan, this document sets forth recommendations for annexation, zoning, transportation routes, and public improvements for future growth.

Conversion: Changing, by alteration or renovation, the current use of a building to a different use.

Covenant: A private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the deed of the property or otherwise formally recorded.

Cul-de-Sac: A minor street with only one outlet and culminated by a turnaround

Design: The arrangement elements and improvements on a plat.

Developer: A person, firm, or corporation engaged in subdivision development, zoning, or installation of public or private improvements

Disability: A record of having or being regarded as having a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities. Such term shall not apply to current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance or any person assigned to a community corrections program or diversion program, on parole from a correctional institution or on probation for a felony offense, or in a state mental institution following a finding of not guilty by reason of insanity.

District: A section or sections of the City of Tonganoxie for which the regulations governing the use of land and buildings are uniform.

Drinking Establishment: An establishment in which the primary function is the public sale and serving of alcoholic and/or cereal malt beverages for consumption on the premises, including private clubs, tavern, bar, etc.

Dwelling: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, manufactured homes, boarding and lodging houses, but not including hotels, apartment hotels, motels, or trailers.

Dwelling, Elderly or Handicapped: A residential structure – single, double or multi-family--having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by elderly or handicapped residents. This may include attendant support/maintenance personnel.

Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms occupied or intended to be occupied as separate living quarters by a person or household.

Earth Sheltered Residence. A complete structure below or partially below ground level, whose perimeter walls comply with the yard requirements of the district in which it is located.

Easement: A permanent or temporary grant of right by a landowner to the public, a corporation or other persons, of the use of a portion of a lot or tract of land for specified purposes where title to said portion of the lot or tract of land remains with the landowner.

Elderly Person: Those people who are at least sixty-two (62) years of age.

Entrance Directional Frontage: The directional orientation of any source of ingress and egress from an establishment (Ord. 894).

Family: A group of not more than four persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, plus any domestic servants. A family may include any number of gratuitous guest or minor children not related by blood, marriage or adoption.

Farm: A site which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, trees and grain, and their storage on the site, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep, fowl or poultry and swine. The term farming includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses.

Farmers’ Market: An establishment or premises where the farm products of a local farming community are sold at retail from uncovered or open air areas designated for individual retailers.

Fence: A structure used as a barrier to prevent escape/intrusion onto property, to mark property boundaries, to add decorative accent to a site, or to provide a screen/buffer between diverse uses.

Filling Station/Service Station: Any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories, including lubrication of automobiles and replacement or installation of minor parts and accessories but not including major repair work such as motor replacement, body, and fender repair or painting.

Floor Area – Commercial Buildings: For commercial, business and industrial buildings or buildings containing mixed uses. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings but not including:

A.    Attic space providing headroom less than seven feet;

B.    Basement space not used for retailing;

C.    Uncovered steps or fire escapes;

D.    Accessory water towers or cooling towers;

E.    Accessory off-street parking spaces; and

F.    Accessory off-street loading berths.

Floor Area – Residential Buildings: The gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling, exclusive of garages, unfinished basement areas and open porches, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.

Floor Area, Net: The horizontal area of a floor or several floors of a building or structure, excluding those areas not directly devoted to the principal or accessory use of the building or structure, such as storage areas or stairwells, measured from the exterior faces of exterior or interior walls. (Ord. 1364, 2013)

Foster Home: A dwelling or structure in which more than 12-hour care is provided to no more than six children, one or more of which are unrelated to the foster parents. Foster homes shall be permitted in all residential structures.

Garage, Private: An accessory building not exceeding 900 square feet in area designed or used for the storage of not more than four motor driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the premises to which it is an accessory, and not used solely for the storage of materials. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of two tons capacity or less. Legal vehicular access shall be provided from a public right-of-way. (Ord. 1230, 2007)

Garage, Public: Any building or premises that is operated for commercial purposes and used for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.

Gross Floor Area: The measurement of all floor area of a structure as measured from the exterior of the wall. Floors include basement and attic space with a headroom clearance of 7’ or more.

Group Daycare: The premises in which care is provided for a maximum of 12 children under 16 years of age, with a limited number of children under kindergarten age in accordance with KAR 28-4-114(f)(1), where this is the primary use of the land or within the daycare provider’s household. (Ord. 1364, 2013)

Group Home: Any dwelling licensed by the state and occupied by not more than 10 persons, including eight or fewer persons with a disability and no more than two staff residents, none of which need be related by blood or marriage. (K.S.A. 12-736)

Guest House: Living quarters within a detached, accessory building located on the same lot with the main building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises, such quarters having no more than two bedrooms and no kitchen facilities, no garage and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.

Half-Street: A street bordering one or more property lines of a subdivision tract to which the subdivider has allocated only a portion of the required street right-of-way width with the full intent that when the adjoining property is developed the remaining portion of the ROW will be dedicated.

Handicapped Person: Those people having an impairment which is expected to be of long, continuous and indefinite duration, is a substantial limitation to their ability to live independently.

Home Based Daycare: A daycare provided within a dwelling unit for up to two children and meets the requirements for an exception to licensing as authorized by K.S.A. 65-501 et seq. and CCL 008. (See Section 22-030(b) for exceptions.) (Ord. 1364, 2013)

Home Occupations: An accessory use of a service character, having no outwardly appearance that the building or premises is being used for any use except for dwelling purposes and which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character, thereof; and provided that there is:

A.    No separate outside entrance.

B.    No keeping of stock in trade.

C.    No persons employed other than the immediate family residing on the premises.

D.    No mechanical or electrical equipment, except such used for purely domestic or household purposes.

E.    No window display or sign over one square foot.

F.    No use occupying more than 25% of the gross floor area on one floor or more than 400 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is least.

G.    Provisions for at least two off-street parking spaces.

It is further provided that no group instruction or gatherings such as dancing and band instrument instruction, tea rooms, tourist homes, convalescent homes or mortuary establishments shall be deemed to be a home occupation.

Hospital: A building or group of buildings used for providing services for the inpatient medical or surgical care of sick or injured humans, and which may include related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices. Such related facility or facilities must be incidental and subordinate to the main use and must be an integral part of the hospital operation.

Hotel: A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided for more than 10 persons primarily transient and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A hotel may include such accessory uses or buildings as restaurants, taverns, or clubrooms, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms.

Improvements: Streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, storm drainage work, utilities, permanent street monuments, trees, and other items to be installed, or agreed to be installed, as per the development regulations, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private use of the lot owner’s in the subdivision, as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final plat.

Inoperative Vehicle: A vehicle that is wrecked, partially dismantled and/or damaged to the extent that the equipment required by State statute on any such vehicle used on the streets and highways is not present or is not in good condition or proper adjustment or such vehicle is in an inoperable condition or a condition that would render the operation on the streets and highways a hazard to public safety.

Junk Yard/Salvage Yard: A lot, land or structure or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts thereof.

Kennel, Commercial: Any place where more than two dogs, cats or other domesticated animals are boarded, bred and/or offered for sale in the operation of a business. The occasional raising and sale of a litter of puppies shall not constitute a commercial kennel.

Licensed Daycare Home: The premises in which care is provided for a maximum of 10 children under 16 years of age, with a limited number of children under kindergarten age in accordance with KAR 28-4-114(e)(1). (Ord. 1364, 2013)

Loading Space or Loading Berth: A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having a minimum dimension of 12 by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.

Lot: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Leavenworth County; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the deed to which was recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.

A.    Corner Lot. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, rights-of-way or any combination thereof.

B.    Depth of Lot. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

C.    Double Frontage Lot. A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.

D.    Front of Lot. When a lot has an ambiguous shape or fronts two streets, the lot front shall be along the right-of-way side with the narrower dimension.

E.    Reserved Frontage Lot. A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or at approximate right angles to the general pattern of lots in a block.

Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Leavenworth County; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the deed to which was recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.

Lot Split or Plat of Survey: A diagram drawn to scale showing all essential data pertaining to the boundaries and subdivisions of a tract of land, as determined by a boundary survey. Survey must be performed according to Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys # 1.

Maintenance Bond: A fully executed bond, which is required to be furnished by the developer to cover the costs of construction completions, repair or replacement of new construction arising from problems in construction or installation of any public appurtenances by the developer for a period of one (1) year after acceptance by the City.

Manufactured Home: A structure, which is subject to and built in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 5403 and constructed after June 15, 1976. (K.S.A. 12-742)

Manufactured Home Park or Court: A continuous parcel of land which is planned and developed for the placement of manufactured homes, provided, no manufactured home park shall be construed to include a manufactured home sales lot.

Manufactured Home, Residential Design: The following standards are required for placing a manufactured home or modular home in a residential district.

A.    The minimum dimension of either width or length of the home shall be twenty-two (22’) feet;

B.    The minimum roof pitch shall be three (3”) inches of rise in twelve (12”) inches of run;

C.    The home shall be sided in wood, masonry, composition board, finished aluminum lap siding, or other materials commonly found in site built residential construction;

D.    The roofing material shall be wood shingles, composition or fiberglass shingles, asphalt shingles, clay or concrete tile or slate, or other materials commonly found in site built residential construction;

E.    The main floor shall be no higher than twenty (20”) inches above the finished grade at the foundation;

F.    The home must be permanently mounted on a foundation or basement similar in appearance to other site built homes. Foundation must be constructed to meet the adopted building codes for the City of Tonganoxie.

G.    If 70% of the homes on the block where the home is to be placed have garages, the manufactured home will need to also provide a garage constructed according to the adopted building codes for the City of Tonganoxie.

Massage Therapy (Therapeutic). The practice of therapeutic massage as the application of various techniques to the muscular structure and soft tissues of the human body, as a healing art, strictly non-sexual, requiring proof of training or education from an institution or business with accreditation recognized by the State, or as an apprentice to a licensed therapeutic massage therapist.

Mobile Home: A transportable structure larger than 320 square feet in floor area designed for year-round residential use and built prior to June 15, 1976.

Modular Home: A manufactured residential structure built to a nationally recognized and accepted construction standard published by the Building Official Conference of America (BOCA) or the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) and the unit is inspected and certified at the factory that it meets said standard. A modular home shall have exterior structure materials and appearance similar to the customary single-family structures in the neighborhood and shall be permanently situated on a concrete foundation.

Motel, Motor Court, Motor Hotel or Motor Lodge: Same as “Hotel”, except that the building or buildings are designed primarily to serve tourists traveling by automobile and that ingress and egress to rooms need not be through a lobby or office.

Multi-Family Residential: Any single building or group of buildings containing connected single-family dwelling units including, but not limited to, apartments, townhouses or flats. Any subdivision platted with 3 or more contiguous duplex lots shall be considered multi-family residential for the purposes of landscaping and buffering.

Non-Conforming Use: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this ordinance or amendments thereto, which does not conform after the passage of this ordinance or amendments thereto with the use regulations of this district in which it is situated.

Nursing or Convalescent Home: An institution or agency licensed by the State for the reception, board, care, or treatment of three (3) or more unrelated individuals, but not including facilities for the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism, or narcotics addiction.

Open Porch. A roofed space attached to a building on no more than two sides, with the remaining sides left open.

Open Space, Common. An area of land or water or combination thereof, reserved for the passive and active recreation of the residents of a designated area. Such areas shall not include areas used for streets, alleys, driveways, private roads, off-street parking or loading areas, utility easements, trash collection points or private yard areas not open to common use by all designated residents.

Open Use of Land: A use which does not involve improvements other than grading, drainage, fencing, surfacing, signs or utilities. Open uses of land include, but are not limited to, auction yards, auto wrecking yards, junk and salvage yards, dumps. They are permitted as an accessory use for sale yards, storage yards, or racetracks.

Parking Lot: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces for motor vehicles.

Parking Space: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.

Pedestrian Way: A right-of-way, dedicated for public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.

Performance Bond: A surety bond or an irrevocable letter of credit or a cash escrow account made out to the City of Tonganoxie in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by these regulations, said costs being estimated by the City Engineer and said surety bond or letter of credit or cash escrow account being legally sufficient to secure to the City of Tonganoxie that the said improvements in lieu of completion will be constructed in accordance with these regulations.

Performance Standard: Criteria to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire, explosive hazards, glare, heat, or other affects generated by or inherent in uses of land and buildings.

Permanent Foundation: A foundation of formed and poured-in-place concrete, placed masonry units, or pressure treated material having concrete footings or piers extending below the frost line, laid up with such reinforcing materials as may be required for residential or commercial construction, which ever is applicable.

Planned Unit Development (PUD): A single parcel or contiguous parcels of land intended to be developed in accordance with an overall design plan which may include residential, commercial, industrial or public land uses or a mixture thereof.

Plat. A diagram drawn to scale showing all essential data pertaining to the boundaries and subdivisions of a tract of land, as determined by survey. A plat will show all data required for a complete and accurate description of the land that it delineates, including the bearings and lengths of the boundaries of each subdivision. A plat may constitute a legal description of the land and be used in lieu of a written description. A plat must meet all state plat statutes, local subdivision regulations and those set forth by Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys # 1.

Preliminary Plat: A map made for the purpose of showing the proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. The exterior boundary must be established according to Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys #1. This map need not be based on an accurate or detailed final survey of the lots in the subdivision. See also “Plat”.

Premises: A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.

Preschool: A facility with 13 or more children which provides learning experiences for children who have not attained the age of eligibility to enter kindergarten, who are 30 months of age or older; which conducts sessions not exceeding three hours per session; which does not enroll any child more than one session per day; does not serve a meal; and the facility is not used as a residence. Includes educational preschools, Montessori schools, nursery schools, church-sponsored preschools and cooperatives. Preschools may have less than 13 children if all other requirements are met as set out in this zoning code and as required by state licensing. (Ord. 1364, 2013)

Principle Structure: One in which the dominant use of the lot occurs.

Principle Use: The main or dominant use of a premise.

Private Club: A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which own, hires, or leases a building or premises, or portion thereof, the use of such building or premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such private club are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting. It shall be permissible to serve goods and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed, provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other common objective by the organization, and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable Federal, State and Municipal laws. (See Zoning Bulletin, Vol. 49, #8, Aug 10, 2001, pg 3)

Recreational Vehicle: A manufactured, transportable, single family dwelling unit suitable for year round occupancy and containing water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences.

Related (Relative, or Family): The following relationships by marriage, blood, or legal adoption: parent, grandparent, brother, sister, stepparent, stepsister, stepbrother, uncle, aunt; it also means the relationship of a legal guardian or ward. (Ord. 1364, 2013)

Re-plat: A map made as a revision to a previously recorded plat. Such map must meet all state plat statutes, local subdivision regulations and those set forth by Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys #1.

Re-subdivision (also Re-plat): The further subdivision of a tract of land which has previously been lawfully subdivided and for which a plat of such prior subdivision has been duly recorded. This procedure must follow the same procedure as a re-plat.

Right-of-Way: A public way established or dedicated by duly recorded plat, deed, grant, governmental authority or by operation of the law.

Roadway: That portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid the portion from back to back of curbs.

Screening: A solid or semisolid fence or wall at least six (6) feet high but not more than eight (8) feet high, having a density of not less than eighty (80) percent per square foot. A landscaping screen that meets the density requirements may be used in lieu of a fence or wall. All screens must be maintained in good condition by the owner(s).

Setback or Required Yard: The required minimum horizontal distance between the structure line and the related front, side, or rear property line. All parts of the required yard or setback area shall remain open to the sky.

Shed: A subordinate structure or building used primarily for storage purposes, of a height no greater than eight feet, and the total square footage of which does not exceed 120 square feet. (Ord. 1230, 2007)

Sight Triangle: An area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of 2½ feet and 8 feet above the grades of the outside edge of the street surface of the intersection streets, measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets, 90 feet in each direction along the centerline of the streets. The City Engineer shall establish sight distance triangles based upon standards in the policy manual published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).

Signs: Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to, painted on, or represented on a building, fence or other structure, upon which is displayed or included any letter, work, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, decoration, device, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction, advertisement, or other attention directing device. A sign shall not include a similar structure or device located within a building except illuminated signs within show windows. A sign includes billboards, but does not include the flag or pennant, or insignia of any nation or association of nations, or of any state, city or other political entity, or of any charitable, educational, philanthropic, civic, political, or religious organization. See Section 25, Signs

Small Limited Business: A secondary use permitting the keeping of stock-in-trade, the sale of economic goods, and/or office in connection with a commercial or industrial enterprise, provided the person engaged in the business is the resident/owner of the dwelling unit, that no person other than members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit shall assist in the operation of the business, and in no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the dwelling unit be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character.

Stable, Private: A stable for horses, ponies or mules which are owned by the occupants of the premises and which are not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.

Stable, Riding: A structure in which horses or mules used exclusively for pleasure riding or driving are housed, boarded, or kept for hire; including riding tack.

Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the ceiling next above it.

Story, Half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story containing an independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.

Street. All property dedicated for the purpose of providing right-of-way for public streets, highways freeways, toll-ways, or roadways purposes. The term “street” shall be construed in all cases to include the lands dedicated for the right-of-way purpose, as described above, and the physical improvement constructed or scheduled for construction within the limits of said right-of-way. In any case, the street shall be approved and accepted only through due process by the City Engineer and the Governing Body.

Street Network:

A.    Boulevard. A supplementary designation to the functional classification indicating that such a street, in addition to the standards for the right-of-way and paving width, shall be developed with the following additional standards:

1.    Vertical face curbs

2.    Sidewalks a minimum of five (5) feet in width located six (6) inches from the property line in the city right-of-way.

3.    Street trees planted at intervals of forty (40) feet.

4.    Ornamental poles for street lighting with all utility service lines underground.

B.    Collector. A street located within a neighborhood or other land use area which collects and distributes traffic from local streets to arterial streets Access to community or neighborhood facilities may be provided. Collectors are identified by their function. While some are designated specifically in Vision 2020, the Planning Commission may designate others in the review of plats as areas develop.

C.    Freeway/Expressway/Highway. A divided multi-lane arterial street designed for rapid, unimpeded movement of large volumes of traffic with full control of access and grade separations at intersections. An expressway differs from a freeway in that intersections are at grade and generally speed limits are lower.

D.    Frontage Street/Road. A minor street which is generally parallel to and adjacent to major streets, traffic ways, highways, or railroad rights-of-way, and which provides access to abutting properties from through traffic.

E.    Local or Minor Street. One that serves the function of providing access to abutting property

F.    Parkway. A supplementary designation to a primary thoroughfare or expressway to provide a multi-lane arterial street designed to physically and visually tie together parks and recreational areas through additional wide rights-of-way, planted medians and roadside landscaping to enhance the thoroughfare’s visual quality. All trees and landscape plantings shall be planted in accordance with Landscaping and Screening Section of the Zoning Ordinance.

G.    Primary Arterial. A multi-lane arterial street designed primarily for traffic movement and secondarily for providing access to abutting properties with a minimum number of at grade intersections.

H.    Secondary Arterial. A multi-lane street intended for both traffic movement and for access to abutting property. Such a street may provide a connection between local and collector streets to primary thoroughfares or freeways.

Street, Local. A street that provides access to individual properties.

Street, Collector. A street that conducts traffic from local streets to arterials, with access to properties

Street, Arterial. A street that carries traffic out of, and through the area, subject to certain control of entrances, exits and curb cuts. Allows limited access to individual property and no access to residential properties without the benefit of a variance.

Structural Alteration: (See Alteration)

Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, manufactured homes and advertising signs.

Subdivider: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein, and includes any agent of the subdivider.

Subdivision:

A.    The division of any contiguous unit or parcel of land into two or more parcels, sites or lots, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership;

B.    The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial, or industrial structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening, or extension of any street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures;

C.    The division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or leaseholders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage, and other public facilities.

“Subdivision” (as Amended March 16th, 1998)

The division of a tract of land into two or more parts, lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development.

A.    The pending transfer of ownership any part of an existing lot or parcel of land through “contract” sale or similar agreement is a subdivision of the original tract.

B.    If a new street or additional right-of-way is involved, any division of a tract of land.

C.    The term “subdivision” includes resubdivision, and the term “resubdivision”, as used herein, shall include any further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously subdivided for sale, use, or other purposes, which varies from the latest approved subdivision of the same.

The following shall be exempt from the requirements of these regulations:

A.    A division of ownership of a single parcel or tract as the result of the culmination of a legally recognized will, shall not be defined as a subdivision until improvements for any use are initiated or procedures commenced on any one of the separate plots or tracts so divided.

B.    Any parcel vacated by the Governing Body.

C.    Any parcel divided, either by a natural barrier, such as a river or stream or a man- made barrier, such as a railroad track or state, county, or township road which creates a natural division of land, because of its characteristics.

D.    Any lot, parcel, or tract of land that has been ordered by law to be partitioned.

E.    Land that is to be used for cemetery purposes.

F.    A transaction between owners of adjoining land involving only a change in the boundary between the land owned by such persons and which does not create an additional lot or which does not result in the creation of a substandard lot by either owner according to any applicable development regulations.

G.    Land used for a public purpose including the dedication of land for a public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land for a public use.

H.    Land used for street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or other public utility subject to local, state, or federal regulations, where no new street or easement of access is involved and therefore not creating additional buildable lots.

Subdivision Regulations: A portion of the Development Regulations that regulates the subdivision of land and infrastructure improvement thereon.

Tower: A structure situated on a nonresidential site that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications, excluding those used exclusively for dispatch communications.

Travel Trailer. A unit designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation, having body width not exceeding 8 feet and its body length does not exceed 32 feet. Said unit may be a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis (travel trailer), an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle (motor home), or a canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels (camping trailer).

Variance: A variation from a specific requirement or allowed use in an ordinance that is not a rezoning.

Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.

Yard, Front: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being a minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or entranceway.

Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.

Zoning Regulations: A portion of the Development Regulations governing the use of land.


Section 33 Special Events and Vending

As amended by Ordinance 1363, April 22, 2013


Division I.  SPECIAL EVENTS


33-010 PURPOSE AND INTENT

The purpose and intent of this Division is to provide for the temporary use of land for Special Events in a manner consistent with its normal use and beneficial to the general welfare of the public. Furthermore, it is the intent of this Division to protect nearby property owners, residents and businesses from Special Events that may be disruptive, unsafe or inappropriate given site conditions, traffic patterns, land use characteristics and the nature of the proposed event.


33-011 AUTHORITY

Special Event Permits as used in this section may be issued by the Governing Body, or as otherwise directed in this section, without the requirements of a public hearing. Conditions may be attached to the permits that are deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Tonganoxie.


33-012 DEFINITIONS

The terms used in this Division, for purposes of the regulations in this Section, shall be defined as follows:

A.    Special Event. A temporary, short-term use of land or temporary structure(s), located or conducted outside. A Special Event may be on a public or private street right-of-way, public property, or private property within the corporate limits of the City of Tonganoxie, and may include, but not be limited to, the following types of activities:

1.    Athletic Event. An organized competitive or recreational event in which a group of people collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise, including but not limited to: running, jogging, walking, bicycling or skating, on any public street right-of-way or upon public property in the corporate limits.

2.    Auction/Estate Sale. Any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner thereof.

3.    Block Party. A neighborhood event, in which a street is temporarily closed and designated as a “play street.”

4.    Commercial Event. Commercial activities, either on the same property as the primary commercial use, or on other private commercial property, which are intended to sell, lease, rent or promote specific merchandise, services or product lines, including, but not limited to: tent sales, sidewalk sales, trade shows, flea markets, product demonstrations or parking lot sales of food, art work or other goods. This definition does not include Street or Mobile Food Vending (see Division II of this Section).

5.    Entertainment Event. An organized event having as its primary purpose the entertainment or amusement of a group of people, including but not limited to: carnivals, festivals, public firework displays, fairs, or concerts, on public or private property within the corporate limits.

6.    Film Production. The process of making a film on public or private property within the corporate limits.

7.    Garage Sales. The sale of personal property that is conducted on premises within a residential district upon which is located a dwelling, or on any portion of a lot used for residential purposes.

8.    Non-commercial Events. Fund-raising or non-commercial events sponsored by non-profit groups or non-profit organizations.

9.    Parade. Any march or procession consisting of people, animals, or vehicles, or any combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, jogging trail, or bike path, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.

10.    Political Event. An organized event, not including an athletic or entertainment event, having as its primary purpose the exercise of expressive activities of a political nature, including but not limited to speech making, picketing, protesting, marching, demonstrating or debating public issues.

11.    Seasonal Sales. Farmer’s market, Christmas tree sales, fruit, flower or vegetable sales, or sale of other seasonal products, when sold on property other than on the site where grown, constructed or assembled.

12.    Sidewalk Cafe. A portion of an eating or drinking establishment located on a public sidewalk or mall which functions as an extension of the use of the adjacent private property by an eating or drinking establishment. A sidewalk cafe is open to the sky except that it may have awnings or umbrellas. No portion of the sidewalk cafe shall be used for any purpose other than dining, drinking, and the associated circulation therein.

13.    Private Events. Events held on private property meeting all applicable codes and ordinances, including but not limited to wedding receptions and birthday events.

B.    Non-Profit Group or Organization. Any person(s), partnership, association, non-profit corporation, a 501(c)(3) corporation, or other group that does not distribute its surplus funds to its owners, shareholders or members, and whose activities are conducted for charitable, civic, or humanitarian motives, or for the benefit of others, and not for the private gain of any individual or group and may include, but shall not be limited to, patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, cultural, charitable, scientific, historical, athletic, or medical activities.

C.    Special Event Signage. Signage that is temporary in nature, is not permanently attached to the ground or sign surface, and is used to advertise any type of Special Event as listed herein, whether or not a Special Event Permit is required.

D.    Governmental Agency. The United States or any department, commission, agency, bureau or other instrumentality thereof; the state or any department, commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof; any local government, or any department or commission, agency or other instrumentality thereof, any school board or other special district, authority, or entity with regulatory or taxing authority. (Ord. 1383, 2014)


33-013 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED

A.    Except as otherwise provided under Section 33-014, Exemptions, a Special Event Permit is required for the following Special Events:

1.    Athletic Event.

2.    Commercial Event.

3.    Entertainment Event.

4.    Non-Commercial Event, unless conducted entirely on private property owned or leased by the sponsoring non-profit group or organization.

5.    Seasonal Sales Event.

7.    All Special Events requiring street closure.

8.    All Special Events which include Street or Mobile Food Vendors to be located on a public right-of-way.

B.    A Special Event Permit is also required for the following temporary uses in any district upon review and finding of the Governing Body that the proposed use is in the public interest. The use shall be approved for a specific short-term duration. This Special Event Permit is not to be used as a method to avoid the process for those uses normally allowed in zoning districts or under a Special Use Permit. (See Section 25-013.s for sign requirements for this subsection). Performance requirements in Section 33-070.j do not apply to the following temporary uses.

1.    Batching plant, asphalt or portland cement concrete plant in connection with a large-scale road or building project. The term shall be for no more than the expected duration of a specific project and the plant is to be completely removed and the site restored to its original condition at completion of the project.

2.    Off-site construction structure or construction materials yard in connection with a large-scale building or road project. The term shall be for no more than the expected duration of a specific project and the operation is to be completely removed and the site restored to its original condition at completion of the project. Temporary event permits shall not be required for this type of use when located wholly on the construction site.

3.    Commercial flea markets, swap meets or auctions including those events held at the Leavenworth County Fairgrounds or other similar location that provide sufficient services and amenities for special events of this type.

4.    Movie or video filming operations involving a combined cast, crew and extras of greater than ten (10) persons, except that one (1) permit may be acquired for a single movie or video filming operation at different locations over a (6) month period provided the applicant informs the Police Department of each filming location twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencing filming operations.

5.    Other temporary uses which are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses.

6.    Farmer’s market or similar activity for no more than two (2) days per week for the traditional summer season.


33-014 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT EXEMPTIONS

The following Special Events are exempt from the requirements of this Section and do not require a Permit, unless the Special Event requires street closure:

A.    Commercial, non-commercial or private events that have a minimal impact on the community. Criteria for determining minimal versus significant impact shall include, but not be limited to the following:

1.    Public services required

2.    Tent or other structures required

3.    Traffic circulation

4.    Parking considerations

5.    Anticipated attendance. This could include centralized Special Events held within a shopping center parking area, not connected to individual businesses within the shopping center, with no off-site impact.

B.    Garage sales, rummage sales, farm sales, one-time estate auction sales held by private individuals or non-profit organizations. Garage sales, rummage sales or farm sales on private property are permitted up to 4 times per year, not to exceed five (5) days per event and twenty (20) days per year.

C.    Charitable not-for-profit organizations and governmental agencies are exempt from fees in this section, regardless if street closure(s) is required.

D.    Political Events.

E.    Any Special Event sponsored or co-sponsored by the City. Such events shall comply with the performance standards set forth herein.

F.    Any Special Event held within a public park. These events shall be governed by other provisions of the Municipal Code regulating conduct in City parks and recreation areas.

G.    Any business already operating under a Special Use Permit that regulates the display and sale of outdoor goods or is authorized the operation of any Special Event as defined herein.

H.    Vendors selling at the City’s designated Farmers’ Market.

I.    Seasonal sales of produce and vegetables when sold on private property with the permission of the property owner.

J.    Athletic events conducted exclusively on school owned property.

K.    The City Administrator or his designee shall determine if one or more permits are required for a specific event, based upon the impact of the event(s). (Ord. 1383, 2014)


33-015 FEES FOR SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS

A.    Application Fee. An Application Fee shall be required upon submittal of each Special Event Application in accordance with the City’s Schedule of Fees and Charges.

B.    Fees for City Services. If the Permit applicant requests City services, or City staff determines the need or the City Council upon referral or appeal, as described in this Section, determines, as a condition of granting the permit, that public services or equipment must be provided to protect the public health or safety, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee for City services in accordance with the City’s Schedule of Fees. Payment for City services shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit.


33-016 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS

A.    Application Required. A Special Event Application shall be submitted for any Special Event requiring a Special Event Permit, as outlined above under “Permit Required.”

B.    Application Deadline. A complete application shall be submitted at least 20 calendar days prior to the requested start date of a Special Event. The City Administrator or his designee shall have the authority to waive the application deadline.

C.    Submission Requirements. The application shall include the following:

1.    Applicant Name and address and brief description of the event.

2.    Name and address of the owner of the premises or property on which the proposed event is to be held.

3.    Description of City services required for the event such as traffic control, street sweeping etc., if applicable.

4.    Fees, as required.

5.    A written narrative, fully describing the proposed event, including:

a.    Location.

b.    Hours of operation.

c.    Anticipated attendance.

d.    Buildings or structures to be used in conjunction with the event.

e.    Proposed signs or attention attracting devices.

f.    Public streets to be used, if any.

6.    A statement that the standards set forth in this Division have been satisfied.

7.    A site plan in the form and the level of detail as required by the City Administrator or his designee, showing the location of all existing or proposed uses, structures, parking areas, outdoor display areas, signs, streets, and property lines.

8.    Date and time of the event to include start and ending dates and times.

9.    Written approval from the property owner agreeing to the proposed event, if the applicant is not the same as the property owner.

10.    Location and number of proposed temporary public toilets, if appropriate.

11.    Proposed temporary potable water supplies, which shall be reviewed by the Water Utilities Department, if applicable.

12.    Proof of liability insurance. If the Special Event will take place on public property, said certificate of insurance shall name the City as an additional insured party in an amount determined by the City Administrator or his designee based on the nature of the Special Event.

13.    A statement that ensures indemnification of the City and that public property will be protected and/or restored to its condition prior to the Special Event.

D.    The City Administrator or his designee (unless otherwise specified in this Division), may approve any Special Event Permit after determining that the event will comply with all applicable terms in this Division,

E.    Conditions of Approval. When issuing a Special Event Permit, the City Administrator or his designee, or City Council may establish additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure compatibility with adjacent land-uses and to minimize potential adverse impacts on nearby uses, including, but not limited to:

1.    Special Events which require City services during the event shall be limited to one (1) per day or (1) per weekend subject to availability of personnel, as determined by City staff. Scheduling shall be on a first come-first served basis.

2.    Signs. The number, size, location, or time limit for signs may be limited.

3.    Temporary arrangements for parking and traffic circulation.

4.    Modifications or restrictions on the hours of operation, duration of the event, size of the event or other operational characteristics.

5.    The provision of traffic control or security personnel to ensure the public safety and convenience.

6.    Posting of a security deposit in an amount required by the City Administrator for Special Events where the anticipated attendance is five hundred (500) or more people to help ensure that the operation of the event and the subsequent restoration and cleanup of the site are conducted according to required Special Event standards and conditions of approval. This security deposit may be waived at the discretion of the City Administrator.

F.    Prohibition on Transfer. No Special Event Permit issued under the provisions of this Division shall be assignable or transferable to any other person or transferable to another location for the operation of a Special Event by that person or at a different location.


33-017 SPECIAL EVENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

Special Events shall comply with the following standards. Failure to comply with these standards may be cause for early closure of the event.

A.    Location. Special Events that do not require the use of public right-of-way shall be conducted on private property in a commercial or industrial zoning district, except that non-profit organizations may conduct Special Events on any property where the owner grants permission.

B.    Land-Use Compatibility. The Special Event shall be compatible with the purpose and intent of this Division and with adjacent land uses. The Special Event shall not impair the normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site. The Special Event shall not endanger or be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the immediate vicinity of the Special Event.

C.    Compliance with Other Regulations. Permit holders must at all times comply with all applicable legal and regulatory provisions, including, without limitation, health code regulations.

D.    Restoration of the Site. Any temporary structure shall be promptly removed upon the cessation of the event. Within forty-eight (48) hours of cessation of the event, the site shall be returned to its previous condition, including the removal of all litter, signage, attention- attracting devices or other evidence of the Special Event. If the site is not returned to its previous condition, the City may restore the site at the expense of the applicant.

G.    Traffic Circulation. The Special Event shall not cause undue traffic congestion or accident potential given anticipated attendance and the design of adjacent streets, intersections, parking and traffic controls. All sidewalks shall be left open for pedestrian traffic unless special approval is received for blockage. No alleys, driveways, fire lanes or other access points shall be blocked by the Special Event unless specific approval is granted for the Special Event.

H.    Parking Restrictions. Approval of a short-term parking restriction can be granted through a Special Event application as determined by the City Administrator or his approved designee.

I.    Street Closings and Temporary Traffic Control. Special Event Permit holders shall be responsible for securing or arranging for installation and removal of all required temporary traffic control devices, including but not limited to all barricades and signs when street or lane closures are approved. All temporary traffic control shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, subject to approval by the City Administrator or his approved designee. The approval of a Special Event Permit shall waive the requirement for any applicable Temporary Traffic Control Permit required.

J.    Off-street Parking.

1.    All off-street parking surfaces used for special events shall be on asphalt, concrete, or other improved impervious surface unless otherwise approved with the Special Event Permit.

2.    Parking lot stalls shall not be reduced by more than twenty percent (20%) of the amount required for the associated structure by the Special Event.

3.    Parking lot stalls shall not be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) of the amount of required parking for the associated structure when used for seasonal sales, which can occur for up to 90 days each, three times a year, with at least a 30 day break between events regardless of the length of the sale.

4.    Special Events shall not cause a shortage of parking for the primary use on the property on which they are located. Special Events shall also not create a shortage of parking for uses on surrounding the property on which they are located.

K.    Anchoring Devices. No spikes, nails, anchors or other devices shall be driven into any public street or sidewalk.

L.    Fire Safety. The City’s Fire Department shall be consulted for the following requirements and inspection, as necessary.

1.    Fire lanes a minimum of 20 feet in width and 12 feet in height or as otherwise approved by the Fire Chief, must be provided in order to allow Fire Department access within 150 feet of all structures and on at least two sides of all two-story structures within 500 feet of the location of the Special Event.

2.    All fire hydrants in the area of the Special Event must be left with five (5) feet of clearance on all sides and shall be accessible from the fire lanes that are designated with the event.

3.    No open fires shall be permitted unless written advance approval is obtained from the Fire Department.

4.    Fire extinguishers shall be available as determined by the Fire Chief.

5.    Temporary electrical wiring for the Special Event shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code.

6.    Tents shall comply with the Fire Code and applicable building codes.

7.    Exit signs and proper exiting aisles shall be provided in temporary Special Event structures.

M.    Nuisances. The Special Event shall not generate excessive noise, dust, smoke, glare, spillover lighting or other forms of environmental or visual pollution.


33-018 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT DENIAL

A.    A permit may be denied where

1.    An applicant is found to have an unpaid civil judgment against him or her which relates to the duties and responsibilities of the special event which shall be determined by the nature and the amount of the judgment, the relationship of the judgment to the purpose of the permit, and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further activity that would lead to unsatisfied civil judgments; or

2.    An applicant has been convicted of a crime which directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the special event which shall be determined by the nature and seriousness of the crime, the relationship of the crime to the purpose of the permit, and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further criminal activity; or

3.    The required information is incomplete or incorrect or shows that a person is not otherwise entitled to conduct the special event; or

4.    The opportunity to reissue a permit has been denied due to previous violations as described in this Division.

B.    The denial of any application by the City Administrator or his designee shall be in writing.


33-019 APPEAL OF A SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL

A.    The notice of revocation, suspension or denial of a Special Event Permit shall include the procedure for appealing the suspension, revocation or denial

B.    If a City official revokes, suspends or denies a Special Event Permit, the applicant of the permit which has been revoked, suspended or denied shall have the right of appeal to the City Council by submitting an appeal in writing to the City Clerk within ten 10 business days of the revocation, suspension or denial.

C.    Pending action on the appeal of a permit which has been revoked or suspended shall be considered revoked or suspended.

D.    If a written appeal is not submitted within ten 10 business day of revocation suspension or denial or if the appeal is denied, the permit shall hence be considered revoked, suspended or denied

E.    Schedule. Appeals shall be placed on the first available City Council meeting agenda for consideration.

F.    City Council Consideration. The City Council action shall be final and may include additional fees to cover the cost of providing city services and/or any other conditions deemed necessary to protect the general welfare of the City and the public.


33-020 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION

A.    A Special Event Permit may be revoked upon conviction of any offense committed by an individual in the City of Tonganoxie while engaged in the special event or if a final conviction occurs or is found to have existed at the time of application or if civil judgments as set forth above are placed or found of record against an applicant. A Special Event Permit may be suspended in the event of pending charges of a crime as set forth above upon a magistrate determination of probable cause in connection with such charges.

B.    A Special Event Permit may be revoked for non-conformity to the application location, specifications or requirements as well as to non-conformity to an approved location plan or diagram.

C.    Any employee working for an applicant permitted as an employer under this Division may be denied the right to operate under the Special Event Permit or such rights may be suspended or terminated under the same circumstances and procedures which apply to the holder of the permit. Revocation or suspension of an employer permit terminates all employee permits.

D.    A Special Event Permit may be suspended or revoked for not complying with the requirements of this Division or any other ordinances or laws.


33-021 SPECIAL EVENT REAPPLICATIONS AFTER REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT

A.    If a Special Event Permit holder or applicant is not in compliance with this Division or any other ordinances, laws or the approved special event application, the following actions will be taken

1.    One violation. A warning may be issued or the permit may be revoked or suspended and the applicant or permit holder may become ineligible for new or reissued permit for three (3) months.

2.    Two violations. Permit will be revoked and the applicant or permit holder may become ineligible for new or reissued permit for three (3) months

3.    Three violations. Permit will be revoked and the applicant or permit holder will become ineligible for new or reissued permit for one (1) year

4.    If an applicant’s permit has been denied and the appeal is denied, the applicant may not reapply for three (3) months.


33-022. RESERVED


Division II.  STREET and MOBILE FOOD VENDING


33-100 PURPOSE AND INTENT

The purpose and intent of this Division is to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Tonganoxie. The Governing body find that it is necessary to regulate various activities, including those of Street or Mobile Food Vendors. This Division is designed to provide standards relative to the accessibility, appearance, and safety regarding those uses.


33-101 AUTHORITY

Street and Mobile Food Vending permits as used in this Division may be issued by the City Council, or as otherwise directed in this Division without the requirements of a public hearing. Conditions may be attached to the permits that are deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Tonganoxie.


33-102 DEFINITIONS

The terms used in this Division, for purposes of the regulations in this Division, shall be defined as follows:

Governmental Agency. The United States or any department, commission, agency, bureau or other instrumentality thereof; the state or any department, commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof; any local government, or any department or commission, agency or other instrumentality thereof; any school board or other special district, authority, or entity with regulatory or taxing authority.

Local Produce. Produce grown within 70 miles of the City limits of Tonganoxie, Kansas.

Lot, Vacant. A vacant lot on which there are no permanent buildings.

Mobile Food Cart. A vehicle that may not legally travel on roadways and is not self-propelled or a temporary stand that is limited to serving (1) non-potentially hazardous foods, as defined by the Kansas Department of Agriculture, or (2) commissary-wrapped food maintained at proper temperatures, or (3) limited to the preparation and serving of hot dogs or similar sausages.

Mobile Food Vehicle. An enclosed vehicle, truck, van or trailer that may legally travel on public roads with which a person travels from place to place to serve food or beverage.

Mobile Food Vending. The act of selling food and/or beverages by operating a mobile food truck, a mobile food cart, or a mobile packaged food delivery truck.

Mobile Packaged Food Delivery Truck. An enclosed vehicle licensed to operate on public roads in which a person travels from place to place to deliver packaged food that has been previously ordered.

Push Cart. A non-self-propelled vehicle used for street vending.

Single-Unit Mobile Food Truck. A Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Class 1-7 vehicle, with vehicle weight less than 33,000 pounds, that is licensed to operate on public roads in which a person travels from place to place to sell packaged food items.

Street Vending. The act of selling or offering to sell any personal service or item, perishable or otherwise, in or upon any public street, public sidewalk, public alley, public way, public building, public park, or other public place in the City; or in or upon any private property within the City.

Street Vendor. One who sells or offers to sell any personal service or item, perishable or otherwise, in or upon any public street, public sidewalk, public alley, public way, public building, public park, or other public place in the City; or in or upon any private property within the City. (Ord. 1383, 2014)


33-103 VENDING PERMIT REQUIRED

A.    No person shall engage in street or mobile food vending except as specifically authorized by this Division.

B.    Except as otherwise provided in this Division, a Street or Mobile Food Vendor Permit is required for any push cart, street vending, mobile food vending, or mobile food cart.

C.    A permit for a Street or Mobile Food vendor may be issued on a daily, monthly, annual or event basis and shall continue in force until the expiration of the permit, or as otherwise provided within this Division. All permits expire on December 31st of the issuing year, and must be renewed. Annual and monthly fees are not prorated for a partial month or year.

D.    In addition to any local permits that are required, vendors must meet all applicable state laws and regulations.

E.    No vendor shall be issued more than one city of Tonganoxie Street or Mobile Food Vending Permit.


33-104 VENDING PERMIT EXEMPTIONS

Street or Mobile Food vendor permits are not required for the following:

A.    Mobile Packaged Food Delivery Trucks

B.    Neighborhood Refreshment Stands and other similar products.

C.    Noncommercial Events such as private events held on one and two family residential properties, provided that all required permits are obtained and that the Street or Mobile Food vendor:

1.    Is not open to the public, such as at an outdoor weddings or employee parties;

2.    Is located on a site with a single user and/or tenant; and

3.    Will not make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which exceeds the limits set forth in the City of Tonganoxie’s Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time, and

4.    Will not generate adverse traffic, or other nuisance impacts on adjacent properties.

D.    Vendors selling at the City’s designated Farmers’ Market.

E.    Events held exclusively for the benefit of a non-profit (501c3) organization.

F.    Seasonal sales of local produce and vegetables when sold on private property with the permission of the property owner. (Ord. 1383, 2014)


33-105 FEES FOR STREET or MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMITS

An application fee shall be required upon submittal of each Street or Mobile Food Vendor Permit application, in accordance with the City’s Schedule of Fees and Charges.


33-106 PERMITTED LOCATIONS FOR STREET or MOBILE FOOD VENDING

A.    Private Property. Street or mobile food vending is permitted in all commercial and industrial zoning districts on private property if:

1.    The vendor has obtained the permission of the property owner; and

2.    The vendor is in compliance with all provisions of this Division; and

3.    The vending is operated on asphalt, concrete, or other improved impervious surface; and

4.    The vendor is not offering for sale any food and/or beverage from any unoccupied or vacant lot, except as part of a City Approved Event; and

5.    Only one (1) Street or Mobile Food Vendor shall be allowed on any one (1) parcel less than one-half (1/2) acre in size, and no more than one (2) Street or Mobile Food Vendors shall be allowed on any one (1) parcel, except as part of a City Approved Event; and

6.    The vendor shall not locate within one-half mile from the boundary of any special event requiring street closure, except:

a.    When the vendor has written authorization from the event coordinator to operate within the festival boundaries or within one-half mile thereof; or

b.    When the vendor has a previously approved permit to operate elsewhere.

B.    Residential Property. Street or mobile food vending is limited in residential districts to the following:

a.    Single-Unit Mobile Food Trucks that do not exceed a 15-minute parking duration for sales/services.

b.    Ice cream truck as permitted in Division III of this ordinance.

C.    Public Property (Sidewalks). Where the vending occurs on a public sidewalk, the vending must be setback no more than six feet from the curb leaving at least a three-foot passageway for pedestrians. All merchandise shall be securely and adequately placed so as not to endanger a passerby or protrude into any street, alley or way.


33-107 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS FOR STREET or MOBILE FOOD VENDING

A.    Similar Businesses. Street or mobile food vendors shall not sell or offer to sell any service or item within a 50-foot radius of a public entrance of an established brick and mortar business offering similar products to the public during the hours that the business is open to the public, unless they have written permission from the business owner.

B.    Residential Property. Street or mobile food vending is prohibited in residentially zoned districts, except as provided in section 33-106.B.

C.    Public Street. Street or Mobile Food Vendors are prohibited from offering for sale any food and/or beverage from a public street, except as part of a City Approved Event.

B.    School Proximity. Street or Mobile Food vendors shall not sell or attempt to sell any item or attempt to make any sale within two hundred (200) feet of a primary or middle school on a day in which school is in session, during the 30 minute period preceding school or the 30 minute period after adjournment.

C.    Adjacency. Street or Mobile Food vendors shall not vend or locate equipment adjacent to on- street parking spaces reserved for disabled access, entries and exits from buildings or facilities, street intersections, in driveways, alleys, fire lanes, or other access points where equipment may obstruct vehicle and pedestrian sight distance. Mobile Food Vending shall not cause undue traffic congestion or accident potential given anticipated attendance and the design. All sidewalks shall be left open for pedestrian traffic unless otherwise approved. (Ord. 1383, 2014)


33-108 PERMITTED HOURS OF OPERATION FOR STREET or MOBILE FOOD VENDING

A.    Vending shall only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, unless otherwise approved.

B.    All Street or Mobile Food vendors shall adhere to designated time and day requirements and shall be allotted one hour set-up and one hour breakdown and travel time before and after stated selling hours, unless otherwise approved.


33-109 STREET or MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

The following conditions are made applicable to street or mobile food vending within the city:

A.    Any person engaging in street vending must apply for and obtain all business licenses and permits as required by this Code and must keep those licenses and permits current as long as vending occurs.

B.    Any person engaging in street or food vending who offers to the public any food or beverage item must also apply for and obtain all licenses and permits as required by the applicable Health Department, and must keep those licenses and permits current as long as vending occurs.

C.    A vendor permit including all required licenses and permits must be prominently displayed on the vehicle or push cart from which the Street or Mobile Food vendor operates, and in a manner prescribed by the City Administrator or his designee, and department of health (as applicable). If a Street or Mobile Food vendor vends without a push cart or mobile unit, the Street or Mobile Food vendor must prominently display a hanging Street or Mobile Food vendor permit upon his or her person. It shall be a violation of this Division to vend without a properly displayed vendor permit. All permits shall be made available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request

D.    Any person engaging in street or mobile food vending shall have prominently displayed upon the side of the vehicle or push cart from which the Street or Mobile Food vendor operates his or her business name, or personal name as registered with the Secretary of State, in letters not less than four inches in height.

E.    Any Street or Mobile Food vendor who changes his or her place of residence or business, or who transfers ownership of the vehicle or push cart from which the Street or Mobile Food vendor operates, shall notify the City Administrator or his designee and Department of Health of the change or sale, as applicable, within 15 days.

F.    No Street or Mobile Food Vendor Permit issued under the provisions of this Division shall be assignable or transferable to any other person or transferable to another location for the operation of a Street or Mobile Food vendor by that person or at a different location

G.    No person under the age of 16 years, other than the Street or Mobile Food vendor or the Street or Mobile Food Vendor’s employees, shall be allowed in or upon any vehicle or push cart engaged in street vending.

H.    Street or mobile food vendors selling or offering to sell any service or item must comply with all ordinances applicable to the business in which they are engaged and the services and items being offered to the public.

I.    Street or Mobile Food vendors offering food or beverage shall provide a trash receptacle and must clean the litter and food deposits from that receptacle as often as necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable health code ordinances and regulations, but in no event less than once per day.

J.    Restoration of Site. Immediately upon cessation of the vending, the site shall be returned to its previous condition, including the removal of all litter, or other evidence of the vending. If the site is not returned to its previous condition, the City may restore the site at the expense of the applicant.

K.    Health and Safety Criteria. Mobile Food Vending shall not impair the normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site. Mobile Food Vending shall not endanger or be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the immediate vicinity of the vending, given the nature of the activity, its location on the site and its relationship to it.

L.    Signs shall be in conformance with Section 25-013.t ‘Street or Mobile Food Vendor Signs’.

M.    The failure of a Street or Mobile Food Vendor to satisfy any of the conditions established by this Division shall render the street or mobile food vending unlawful.

N.    Off-street Parking.

1.    All off-street parking surfaces used for Street or Mobile Food vending shall be on concrete, asphalt or other improved impervious surface.

2.    The Street or Mobile Food vendor sales area shall not exceed more than two (2) parking spaces or six hundred square feet in area, whichever is greater. However, at no time may the required number of parking spaces for the principal use of the property be rendered nonconforming due to vendor use.

3.    Street or mobile food vending shall not create a shortage of parking for uses on properties surrounding the property on which they are located.

O.    A Street or Mobile Food Vendor shall be permitted to conduct sales a maximum duration of four consecutive (4) hours per approved location per day, unless part of a special event.

P.    Anchoring Devices. No spikes, nails, anchors or other devices shall be driven into any public street or sidewalk.

Q.    No Street or Mobile Food vendor shall use any sound device or sound reproducing or amplifying device in the course of business. All Street or Mobile Food vendors shall operate in compliance with Chapter XI, Article 2, Section 11-201 of the City of Tonganoxie’s Code of Ordinances.

R.    Vendors shall maintain a twelve (12) foot distance between one another while selling, offering for sale, or soliciting offers to purchase food, unless part of a special event (Cross reference 33-210.A.5).

S.    Street or Mobile Food Vendors may travel along any public right-of-way within the city of Tonganoxie to reach their destination. However, vending shall be limited to the location(s) on the permit issued. Street or Mobile Food vendors shall not be allowed to vend, expose or otherwise advertise merchandise, solicit sales, or loiter greater than fifteen (15) feet outside of the permitted locations.

T.    Nuisances. The Mobile Food Vending shall not generate excessive noise, dust, smoke, litter, glare, spillover lighting or other forms of environmental or visual pollution.

U.    Vending vehicles or carts cannot be left unattended at any time, parked or placed with 15 feet of any intersection or within 25 feet of any fire hydrant. (Ord. 1383, 2014)


33-110 EXEMPTIONS

A.    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit businesses from operating a sidewalk cafe, provided they have obtained an annual sidewalk cafe permit.

B.    Nothing in this article shall be construed to alter or prohibit the operation of any municipal market, presently existing or established in the future by an act of the city council.

C.    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit street vending within an area closed by Special Event Permit issued by the city, including, but not limited to, permits for street fairs, parades and block parties, but vendors must comply with the ordinances herein.

D.    This Division is not intended to regulate door-to-door sales. See Municipal Code Chapter 5, Article 2 for regulations pertaining to door-to-door sales. (Ord. 1383, 2014)


33-111 VENDING APPLICATIONS

A.    Application Required. A Street or Mobile Food Vendor application shall be submitted to the City Clerk on a form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose, in addition to paying the Street or Mobile Food Vendor’s Permit Fee.

B.    Application Deadline. A complete application shall be submitted at least three business days prior to the requested start date of vending. The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to waive the application deadline.

    The application shall provide the following information:

1.    The applicant’s full legal name, business name, and federal tax identification number, if applicable.

2.    The applicant’s permanent address, business mailing address, and telephone number.

3.    A copy of the applicant’s government-issued photo identification.

4.    The applicant’s valid Kansas sales tax number.

5.    A brief description of the nature of the business and the product, food and/or beverage to be offered for sale.

6.    If licensed, the license plate number of each street or mobile food unit.

7.    A copy of a valid State of Kansas license for food service establishments, if such is required.

8.    If applying for an annual permit, proof of a valid City of Tonganoxie business license.

9.    If a vendor proposes to vend from a single location for more than four consecutive hours at a time, the vendor must identify the location of an available restroom to be used by the vendor. If the restroom is not public, the applicant shall provide in advance of the vending date(s) written permission from its owner to use the restroom.

10.    Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of $500,000 or more, as required by the City Manager.

11.    A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has had a street or mobile food vendor’s license, or any similar license, revoked in this jurisdiction within the preceding two years.

12.    The applicant’s signature. (Ord. 1408, 2016)

C.    The City Administrator or his designee may approve any Street or Mobile Food Vendor Permit after determining that the event will comply with all Street/ Mobile Food Vending performance standards and application criteria and requirements.

D.    Prohibition on Transfer. No Street or Mobile Food Vendor Permit issued under the provisions of this Division shall be assignable or transferable to any other person or transferable to another location for the operation of Street/ Mobile Food Vending by that person or at a different location.


33-112 VENDING PERMIT DENIAL

A.    A permit may be denied where

1.    An applicant is found to have an unpaid civil judgment against him which relates to the duties and responsibilities of the permitted occupation which shall be determined by the nature and the amount of the judgment, the relationship of the judgment to the purpose of the permit, and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further activity that would lead to unsatisfied civil judgments; or

2.    An applicant has been convicted of a crime which directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation which shall be determined by the nature and seriousness of the crime, the relationship of the crime to the purpose of the permit, and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further criminal activity; or

3.    The required information is incomplete or incorrect or shows that a person is not otherwise entitled to conduct business as a Street or Mobile Food vendor; or

4.    The opportunity to reissue a permit has been denied due to previous violations as described in this Division.

B.    The denial of any application by the City Administrator or his designee shall be in writing.


33-113 VENDING PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION

A.    A permit may be revoked upon conviction of any offense committed by an individual operating as a Street or Mobile Food vendor in the City of Tonganoxie while engaged in the permitted business or if a final conviction occurs or is found to have existed at the time of application or if civil judgments as set forth above are placed or found of record against an applicant. A permit may be suspended in the event of pending charges of a crime as set forth above upon a magistrate determination of probable cause in connection with such charges.

B.    A permit may be revoked for non-conformity to the application location, specifications or requirements as well as to non-conformity to an approved location plan or diagram.

C.    Any employee working for an applicant permitted as an employer under this Division may be denied the right to solicit under such permit or such rights may be suspended or terminated under the same circumstances and procedures which apply to the holder of the permit. Revocation or suspension of an employer permit terminates all employee permits.

D.    A permit may be suspended or revoked for not complying with the requirements of this Division or any other ordinances or laws.


33-114 APPEAL OF VENDING PERMIT REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL

A.    The notice of revocation, suspension or denial of a permit shall include the procedure for appealing the suspension, revocation or denial.

B.    If a City official revokes, suspends or denies a Street or Mobile Food Vendor Permit the holder or applicant of the permit which has been revoked, suspended or denied shall have the right of appeal to the City Council by submitting an appeal in writing to the City Clerk within ten 10 business days of the revocation suspension or denial.

C.    Pending action on the appeal of a permit which has been revoked or suspended shall be considered revoked or suspended.

D.    If a written appeal is not submitted within ten (10) business days of revocation, suspension or denial, or if the appeal is denied the permit shall hence be considered revoked, suspended or denied.

E.    Schedule. Appeals shall be placed on the first available City Council meeting agenda for consideration.

F.    City Council Consideration. The City Council action shall be final and may include additional fees to cover the cost of providing city services and/or any other conditions deemed necessary to protect the general welfare of the City and the public.


33-115 REAPPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF VENDING PERMIT

A.    If a Street or Mobile Food vendor or applicant is not in compliance with this Division or any other ordinances, laws or the approved vendor application, the following actions will be taken.

5.    One violation. A warning may be issued or the permit may be revoked or suspended and the vendor may become ineligible for new or reissued permit for three (3) months.

6.    Two violations. Permit will be revoked and the vendor may become ineligible for new or reissued permit for three (3) months.

7.    Three violations. Permit will be revoked and the vendor will become ineligible for new or reissued permit for one (1) year.

8.    If an applicant permit has been denied and the appeal is denied, the applicant may not reapply for three (3) months.


33-116 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT

A.    Penalties. Any violation of this Division is an ordinance violation and shall be punishable as outlined in Section 28-011. Each offense shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.

B.    It shall be the duty of the City Police Department or other City Administrator designee to enforce and carry out the provisions of this Division.


33-117. RESERVED


33-118. RESERVED


Division III.  MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDING


33-119 DEFINITIONS

The following words and terms as used in this Division shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows:

Mobile Ice Cream Vending Operation shall mean any person, firm, partnership or corporation who conducts or engages in the business of selling or offering for sale any prepackaged ice cream novelties, intended for immediate consumption, from a vehicle that travels from house to house, street to street, or place to place. Provided that, this definition shall not include any person, firm, partnership or corporation who conducts or engages in the business of selling or offering for sale prepackaged ice cream novelties that are sold or delivered to the ultimate consumer on a prearranged date that is scheduled with the consumer.

Mobile Ice Cream Vendor shall mean a person who drives a vehicle used for a mobile ice cream vending operation, or who assists the driver from within such vehicle.


33-120 LICENSE REQUIRED

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile ice cream vending operation unless such person has obtained the license required by this Division.

B.    It shall be unlawful for any person to be a mobile ice cream vendor unless such person has obtained the license required by this Division.


33-121 LICENSE APPLICATION; TERM; FEES; EXEMPTION.

A.    The application for a mobile ice cream vending operation license shall be on a form provided by the city clerk, and a complete application shall be submitted to the city clerk, accompanied by the appropriate fee. The application shall include a photograph of, and the vehicle identification number (VIN) for each vehicle used for the mobile ice cream vending operation in the corporate limits of the city.

B.    The license shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it was issued.

C.    The annual license fee shall be $150. The license fee shall not be pro-rated and is non- transferable and non-refundable.


33-122 STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE.

A.    The mobile ice cream vending operation shall comply with all food safety laws and requirements of the state of Kansas. The mobile ice cream vending operation must have a valid Kansas food license for the mobile ice cream vending operation, and/or for each vehicle used by the operation, as required by the state of Kansas.

B.    The applicant must provide a Kansas Retail Sales Tax Number for the mobile ice cream vending operation.

C.    The applicant must secure and maintain commercial general liability insurance for the mobile ice cream vending operation, written by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in Kansas, with minimum limits of $500,000 combined, single limit for bodily and property damage, each occurrence and $500,000 in the general aggregate. Evidence of compliance with the insurance requirements shall be in the form of a certificate of insurance that shall be submitted with the application. Such insurance certificate shall include coverage for premises/operations liability, products/completed operations, and personal/advertising injury.

D.    The applicant must provide proof that each vehicle used for the mobile ice cream vending operation complies with the vehicle regulations listed in Sec. 24-31(a) through (e).

E.    No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who:

1.    Is required to register pursuant to the Kansas Offender Registration Act, K.S.A. 22- 4901 et seq., as amended, or pursuant to an offender registration act of any state; or,

2.    Has been convicted of a felony; or,

3.    Has been convicted in the past five (5) years of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving force, violence, deceit, or fraud; or,

4.    Has been convicted in the past three (3) years of any law prohibiting leaving the scene of an accident; driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs; reckless driving; fleeing or alluding a police officer; driving while license is suspended or revoked; failure to report an accident; or five or more traffic violations (not including parking violations).


33-123 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

A.    The licensee shall only engage in mobile ice cream food vending between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset.

B.    The licensee shall remain mobile, which means that the licensee shall only stop when summoned by a customer, and that such stop shall be for a maximum duration of ten (10) minutes.

C.    The licensee shall not vend on any street at a location where the speed limit is greater than thirty miles per hour. In no case shall the licensee’s speed exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour in a residentially zoning district when soliciting customers.

D.    The licensee shall comply with all traffic regulations. The licensee shall not stop, stand, or park at any location prohibited by the most recent version of the standard traffic ordinance. Further, the licensee shall not vend from any location marked where official signs or yellow- painted curb markings prohibit stopping, standing, or parking. The licensee shall not obstruct or interfere with traffic, nor shall the licensee stop or vend in any location that creates a danger to pedestrians or other drivers.

E.    The licensee shall not operate within alleys or public parking lots, nor can the licensee vend within fifty (50) feet of an intersection. The licensee shall only vend from the curbside window, to individuals standing on the curb or on private property. The licensee shall not vend to individuals standing or located within city streets.

F.    The licensee shall not solicit or conduct any transaction within two blocks from the property lines containing any public or private school property, for a period beginning thirty minutes before the regular school day of any such school and continuing until thirty minutes after the adjournment of the regular school day.

G.    The licensee shall not operate within city parks and recreation facilities without first receiving the permission of the city parks and recreation department. If the licensee receives permission from the city parks and recreation department, the licensee shall comply with the requirements imposed by the parks and recreation department, including limitations on hours and location of operation.

H.    Any sound equipment used by the licensee shall be limited to music or human speech and can only be used between 10 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The sound emitted from such equipment shall not be played in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the vehicle. The sound must be turned off when the vehicle is stopped for vending.

I.    When occupying a motor vehicle used for the mobile ice cream vending operation, the licensee shall not allow anyone to occupy such vehicle other than one other licensed mobile food vendor.

J.    The licensee shall comply with all food safety laws and requirements of the state of Kansas.

K.    The licensee shall not make more than two stops in anyone block to make any sale.

L.    The licensee shall not stop anywhere within twenty-five feet of an intersection when making a sale or attempting to make a sale.

M.    The licensee shall not make a U-turn on any block;

N.    The licensee shall not drive the vehicle backwards to make or attempt any sale.

O.    The licensee shall not permit any person to hang on the vehicle or permit any person to ride in or on the vehicle, except a bona fide assistant or assistants.

P.    The licensee shall not sell or attempt to sell along any particular route more than one time during a twenty-four hour period.


33-124 MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS

A.    Each motor vehicle used for the mobile ice cream vending operation must be equipped with the following:

1.    Prominent signs, visible from the front and the rear of the vehicle, with the wording “Caution – Children”, or similar language, in letters at least six inches tall;

2.    Flashing amber yellow caution lights on the vehicle, visible from the front and rear, which may include a swinging arm equipped with such lights;

3.    Left and right outside rearview mirrors, as well as two additional outside wide-angle mirrors on the front and back of the vehicle to enable to driver to see around the entire vehicle; and,

4.    A serving window that is located on the curbside of the vehicle only.

B.    Each motor vehicle used for the mobile ice cream vending operation must be in good working order and kept in a safe and clean condition.

C.    Each motor vehicle must have a valid registration.

D.    Each motor vehicle must be insured with business automobile liability insurance, written by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in Kansas, with minimum limits of insurance of $50,000 for bodily injury or death to any one person; $100,000 for injury or death of any number of persons; and $10,000 for property damage in any one accident. Evidence of compliance with the insurance requirements shall be in the form of a certificate of insurance that shall be submitted with the application for a mobile food vending operation license.

E.    No vending vehicle attached to a motor vehicle by means of a hatch or any other connecting device shall be permitted.

F.    When used for the mobile ice cream vending operation, each motor vehicle must be driven by a licensed mobile food vendor, and occupied by no more than one additional person, who shall also be a licensed mobile food vendor.


33-125 CONDITIONS OF LICENSURE

The city clerk, or an officer of the Tonganoxie Police Department, may deny, suspend or revoke a license in the following circumstances:

A.    Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in any application, including attachments, for such license;

B.    Failure to comply with the standards of issuance and maintain such compliance throughout the license term;

C.    Failure to comply with the motor vehicles requirements for each motor vehicle used for the mobile ice cream vending operation; and,

D.    Fails to display, at all times while operating any motor vehicle for the mobile ice cream vending operation, a copy of the city license issued under this article and a copy of the licensee’s Kansas food license. The copies of such license shall be prominently displayed on, or in close proximity to, the serving window of each motor vehicle, so that they can be clearly and easily viewed by a customer at the serving window.


33-126 RIGHT TO APPEAL

The applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued under this article to the City Administrator. The applicant or licensee shall file a written notice of appeal with the City Administrator within five (5) business days following the notification that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked.


33-127 RESERVED

Fee Structure 

	Special Event Permits	 

	Application fee with no booths or tents	$50

	Application fee with booths and/or tents	$250

	City services fee for special event of one day or less, if required	$250

	City services fee for special event of two days, if required	$500

	City services fee for special events of three or more days, if required	$1000 or as determined, by the city administrator

	Non-Profit 501(c)3 organizations	50% of listed fee

	 	 

	Street or Food Vending Permits	 

	Push Cart, Street Vendor (selling from on their person)	$10 daily

	Push Cart	$50 monthly

	Push Cart (includes business license fee)	$100 annually

	 	 

	Mobile Food Cart or Mobile Food Truck	$10 daily

	Mobile Food Cart or Mobile Food Truck	$50 monthly

	Mobile Food Cart or Mobile Food Truck (includes business license fee)	$100 annually

	 	 

	Mobile Packaged Food Delivery Truck	Exempt

	Single-Unit Mobile Food Truck	Exempt

	Sidewalk Cafe Permit	Exempt

	Not-for-Profit (including fund raisers)	Exempt

(Ord. 1408, 2016)


Appendix A Use Groups By Category 

	CATEGORY	DEFINITION	USES	R-R	R-E	R-SF	R-I	R-MF1	R-MF2	R-MF3	MHP	PUD-R	HBD	LBD	GBD	PUD-C	BP	ILT	IMD	IH	Com. Plan

	RESIDENTIAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Accessory Uses I	Normal residential accessory uses allowed in most districts. Uses shall be for personal needs and scaled to the neighborhood. Also see Supplemental Regulations.	Swimming Pool; Cabana; Detached garage(s)/ carport; Storage building(s); Antenna/dish; Boat house/dock; Patio/deck/porch/balcony; Gazebo; Greenhouse; Sauna/; Tree house; Workshop; Art studio	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X

	Accessory Uses II	Accessory uses associated with rural living	Storage buildings for machinery/tools, agricultural uses, equipment, etc.; Animal shelter; Arena; Gas pump island;	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Accessory Uses III	Accessory uses associated with multi- family living	News rack; Recreational amenities	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Accessory Uses IV	Uses associated with temporary living uses	Meeting rooms; Convention center; Exhibition hall; Restaurant/food service; Recreation/ athletic areas and equipment; News rack/stand;	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	 	 	 

	Accessory Uses V	Building/area for production of goods or services for personal use. (Commercial uses require a Special Use Permit)	Workshop; Art Studio;	X	X	X	X	 	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Agriculture, General	Raising, producing or keeping plants or animals	Accessory Buildings; Ag Produce Warehouse (no retail); General Ag Uses/Farming; Apiary/Bee-keeping; Aquaculture; Boarding Stable/Riding Academy/Event Arena; Irrigation System; Forestry; Sod Farm; Veterinary Clinic w/large animal yard; commercial fishing lake; farm and truck gardens	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Agriculture, Moderate	Propagation of special crops or the keeping/ breeding of animals that may be more extensive or specialized than normal agricultural uses.	Kennels; Mushrooms; Commercial Greenhouse	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Assisted Living	An area developed exclusively for the residential use of a specialized group-- older adults, handicapped adults and any reasonable accessory use thereof.	Detached Homes, Attached Units, Multi-Unit structures, Group home, Assisted Care Facilities, Nursing Home, Rest Home	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Group Home	Residential occupancy of a single- family dwelling unit by a group of disabled persons who do not meet the definition of 'household'.	Group home for handicapped persons or endangered youth/adults	X	 	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Group Living	Multi-unit residential buildings consisting of living units with one or more communal spaces.	Dormitory; Student residence; Fraternity/sorority house; Convent/monastery; Shelter/mission;   Rooming/boarding/lodging house;	 	 	X

(s)	 	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Manufactured Home Park	An area developed exclusively for the placement of housing units that are partially or wholly manufactured off-site according to the HUD Minimum Standards.	Single or double-wide manufactured homes; Modular homes; Prefabricated home	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Multi-Unit Living I	A single structure containing 1 to 4 separate living units	Duplex; Four-plex; Townhouses; Apartments; Condominiums	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Multi-Unit Living II	A single structure containing 2 - 16 separate living units. No Single Family dwellings	Apartments; Condominiums	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Multi-Unit Living III	A single structure containing 16 + separate living units	Apartments; Condominiums	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Private Planned Development	Homes developed around a recreational theme	Fly-in Development; Golf course development; Lake development; Arena development	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Secondary Residential	A secondary residential use in addition to a main dwelling unit for use on a temporary, seasonal or subsidiary basis. Main dwelling unit must be occupied by the owner of the property.	Guest house; Bunkhouse; Caretaker's dwelling; Granny flat	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Single Family Residential	Independent, detached dwelling unit designed for occupation by a single family	Residence; Single or Double-wide manufactured homes; Modular homes; Prefabricated home	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Two-Family Residential	Single structure designed to house two families in separate living quarters	Duplex	 	 	 	X	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	INSTITUTIONAL & SERVICES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Aviation	Facilities for the landing and takeoff of flying vehicles, including loading and unloading areas	Airport; Airfield; Hangars; Flying School; Heliport; Helistop	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Community or Social Services/Groups	Public, non-profit, or charitable uses, generally providing a local service to a specified group or the community at large	Lodge/Club/Fraternal Hall; Art Gallery; Museum; Library; Cultural Facility; Senior Citizens Center; Community Center; Social Services Center	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Daycare:

Child Care Center (or) Preschool	Care, protection, tutelage and/or supervision for children on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day	13 or more children for more than three hours and less than 24 hours. See Section

22-030 for additional requirements	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	 	X (S)	X (S)	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	X (S)

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Daycare:

Home Based	Care, protection, tutelage and/or supervision for children on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day	Up to 2 children unrelated to the provider for not more than 20 hours a week	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Daycare:

Licensed Daycare (or) Group Daycare	Care, protection, tutelage and/or supervision for children on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day	Up to 10 or 12 children under the age of 16. See Section 22-030 for additional requirements	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	 	 	X (S)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Detention and Correctional Facilities	Privately operated facilities for the judicially required detention or incarceration of people. Inmates and detainees are under 24-hour supervision by peace officers, except when on an approved leave	Prisons; jails; Probation Center; Juvenile or Adult Detention Center	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Education, College	Institutions of higher learning or specialized education	College; University; Trade School	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	C	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Education, Other	Institution offering classes or tutelage or instruction in the arts or athletics	Schools for dance/music/arts; Athletic instruction; Learning Center or Tutoring Services; Adult Education	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	 	 	X (S)	X	X	X	X	C	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Education, School	Institution offering education for children and youth from the pre-school level through college preparatory. Includes parochial, private or public instruction.	Preschool as an accessory use to any of the following: Elementary/Grade School; Middle/Junior High School; Senior High School; College Prep-School	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	 	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Health Care, Short Term	Medical or surgical care to patients	Day Surgery; Hospital; Clinic	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	C	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Health Care, Long Term	Medical or surgical care to patients	Nursing Home; Sanitarium; Home Health Care	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Interment Facilities I	Buildings and/or site for preparation of the human body for interment.	Morgue; Funeral home; Undertaker.	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Interment Facilities II	Site for the interment of the human body.	Cemetery; Columbarium, Mausoleum. Special Use permit required.	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Interment Facilities III	Facilities for cremation of the human body	Crematorium. Special Use permit required.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Municipal Services	Provides services to large areas of the City or the City at large	Post Office; Administrative/Governmental Offices and Services	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	C	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Personal Care Facilities	Care, protection, tutelage and/or supervision for adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day.	Adult Care Facility	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	X (S)	 	 	X (S)	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	 

	Public Transportation	Land/bldgs for facilities for loading/ unloading freight & passengers & normal accessory uses	Bus terminal/station; Train station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Religious Institution	Meeting area/site for religious activities to include worship and secular activities connected with a recognized organized religious organization	Church/Synagogue/Temple; Bible Institute; Christian Science Reading Room; Religious sponsored schools/libraries/educational institutions; Social or recreational center	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Safety Services	Public safety and emergency response services	Police Station; Fire Station; Ambulance/paramedic services	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Utilities, Local	Infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided.	Substation or pump station; Transformer station for electric or communication services; Well-- oil, gas, water; Water Tower	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Waste Processing	1. Uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for processing or disposal on site or for transfer to another location.

2. Uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the processing of organic material.	Grinding pit; Sewage works/facility; Packing/bailing site; Incinerator; Landfill	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Utilities, Major	Large-scale facilities providing services for regional areas.	Flood control project; Railroad facilities; Power generating station; Energy storage facility; Reservoir, Water supply plant/filter beds; Maintenance facility; Recycling center; Animal shelter/ pound	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	RECREATIONAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

		 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Athletic Facilities, Indoor	Building(s)/facilities for indoor athletic activities	Skating Rink; Hockey Field/Rink; Bowling Alley; Swimming Pool; Health Club/Fitness Center; Racquetball/ Handball Courts	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Athletic Facilities, Outdoor	Site and facilities for outdoor athletic activities	Athletic/Sports Field(s); Driving Range; Golf Course; ; Skateboard Park; Playground; Recreational Community Buildings	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	 	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Lodging Facilities III	Lodging facilities provided for tourists, travelers and short-term recreational use	Campground; Summer camp; Base lodge or hunting camp/lodge; Ski resort; Vacation farm/dude ranch; Retreat; Cabins; Recreational vehicle park; Country inn	X (S)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Open Space or Areas	Natural areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping	Historical Marker; Conservation & Wildlife Sanctuary/Park; Natural Area; Forest; Wooded Area; Walking/Biking paths; Archeological Site; Nurseries; Orchards; Public Parks	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Recreation/ Entertainment I	Commercial uses that provide moderate to large sized space or facilities for recreation- or entertainment-oriented activities in an indoor or outdoor format.	Banquet hall; Assembly Hall; Auditorium; Exhibition Hall; Conference Center; Convention hall/facility; Arcade; Billiard Parlor; Game room; Pavilion; Bar; Private Club; Nightclub/Cabaret/ Dance hall; Miniature Golf course; Theater	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Recreation/ Entertainment II	Large, generally commercial uses that provide for recreation- or entertainment- oriented activities in an outdoor format	Stadium; Fairground; Aquarium; Adventure Game; Gun Club/Skeet Shoot/Target Range; Marina; Yacht Club; Drive-in or Amphi-theater	X (S)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Recreation/ Entertainment III	Commercial recreation/entertainment sites in excess of twenty acres	Race Track; Ski Slope/Facilities; Amusement Park; Theme park; Recreational Lake; Casino; Zoo	X (S)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	COMMERCIAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Adult Entertainment	Adult bookstore, adult cinema or adult entertainment facility. Activities involving nudity or partial nudity.	Exotic Cabaret; Adult video rental/viewing; Adult books/goods	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Lodging Facilities I	Lodging facilities provided for tourists, travelers and short-term residential use (less than 6 months)	Rooming/boarding/lodging house	X	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	X	X	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Lodging Facilities II	Lodging facilities provided for tourists, travelers and short-term recreational use	Hotel; Motel; Hostel; Resort	X (S)	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 	 	X (S)	 	 	X	X	C	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Parking Facility	Parking when it is the main use, not an accessory use, of a piece of property.	Municipal or private garage or parking lot	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 

		 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Professional Offices	Activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, medical, or financial services	Doctor offices, Dentist offices, Administrative Offices; Radio/Television production studio/ offices-no tower; Publishing-no production	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Restaurant I	Site for preparation of food for service to the public for consumption at tables on-site or for drive-thru/carry-out service either inside or outside of the building.	Restaurant; Fast-Food Restaurant w/o drive- through facilities	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	C	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Restaurant II	Site for preparation of food for service to the public for consumption at tables on-site or for drive-thru/carry-out service either inside or outside of the building.	Drive-In or Drive-Thru Restaurant	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	C	X	 	 	 

	Retail Sales/Service I	The sale, lease or rental of new or used products to the general public. Also personal services, product repair or services for consumer and business goods.	Veterinary Clinic-no exterior pens; Bakery/Bake Shop/Caterer; Jeweler/Clockworks; Bicycle Repair; Beauty/Barbershop; Dry Cleaner; Laundry; Shoe Repair; Manicure; Massage; Haberdashery; Dressmaker/Tailor; Day Care; Mail/Packaging; Travel/Tour Guide; Locksmith; Photo Developing Outlet; Photography Studio; Upholstery/Furniture Refinishing; Engraving; Financial Institutions, Gun Shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Retail Sales/Service II	The sale, lease or rental of new or used products to the general public.

Provision of personal services, product repair or services for consumer and business goods.	Farmer's Open-Air Market; Garden Ctr/Nursery; Agricultural Supply Store; Agricultural Chemicals; Farm Implement Sales/Service w/display yard; Landscaping Service; Motor Vehicle Dealership-Used/ New w/display yard; Vehicle or machinery rental or leasing agency; Restaurant; Hotel/Motel; Restaurant/Hotel/Motel Supplies; Retail Warehouse/Outlet; Office Equipment/Machinery; Data Processing; Printing/Photocopying; Courier/ Messenger Service; Taxicab; Detective/ Protective services; Veterinary w/exterior pens; Exterminating; Employment Agency	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	X	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Trades Contractors, Small Scale	Retail outlets for service businesses with limited on-site product or equipment storage	Electrical, Plumbing Carpentry, HVAC, Communications, Welding; Trades Workshop, Painter; Remodeling	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	 	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Vehicle Repair	Vehicle repair firms servicing passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Generally, the customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed.	Motor Vehicle Repair Garage; Auto Body Repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	X	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Vehicle Service, Limited	Provide direct services to motor vehicles where the driver/passengers generally wait in the car or nearby while the service is performed.	Car Wash; Gas Station, Service Station; Oil Change Service; Tire Service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	 	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	INDUSTRIAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Industrial Service	Firms engaged in the provision of services geared toward industrial uses or services that have the potential of impact upon the community.	Specialized or custom cleaning or maintenance services; Paint Shop; Vending Machine supplier; Dry cleaning/dyeing or laundry plant; Photo processing lab; Auto tow lot	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Manufacturing/ Production I	Firms involved in the final stages of manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods	Publishing--books, newspaper, periodicals, music, recordings, art, etc; Commercial Bakery; Mfg of Jewelry/Optical goods; Production of paper goods, stone products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Manufacturing/ Production II	Firms involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods and related uses that typically have few, if any, negative external impacts on surrounding properties. Moderate scale uses.	Products from glass, metals, plastics, wood; Textile or apparel mfg; Ice; Vegetable/Food products or processing; Milk distribution; Pharmaceutical production	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Manufacturing/ Production III	Firms involved in the processing of raw materials for manufacturing purposes. Also large scale manufacturing uses. Also includes establishments that produce odors, dust, vibration, noise, vibration or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject property	Asphalt or concrete batching plant; Mfg of rubber, plastic, paint/paint products; metals, paper/pulp, lumber, porcelain/china, tobacco; Rubber reclamation; Distillation Plant; Processing plant for fish, animals or their by- products; Foundry; Grain/mill products; Gas or petroleum refining or production; Mfg of aircraft, pre-fabricated homes, vehicles, soap/cleaners/ toiletries/detergents; Mineral processing; Storage of unsightly equipment/ materials; Tanning & Leather processing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 

		 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Research Laboratory I	Facilities for the scientific study, testing and analysis of ideas/products, etc.	Research laboratory	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Research Laboratory II	Facilities for the scientific study, testing and analysis of ideas/products, etc. where either the materials or the methods used for testing have the potential to cause harm to people or the environment.	Research laboratory	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Retail Sales/Service, Industrial	The sale, lease or rental of products that could have a detrimental effect on the general public.	Industrial chemicals; Sales/leasing of heavy equipment, construction equipment, farm machinery ; Bus/train garaging or equipment maintenance; Fuel storage tank(s); Landscaping service w/equipment storage; Truck Stop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Self-Service Storage	Providing separate storage areas for individual or business uses.	Storage units/building(s), mini storage warehouse, storage business	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X (S)	 	 	X	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Trades Contractors, Large Scale	Sites for service contractors including storage yards for equipment and supplies	General trades contractor w/equipment yard; Roofing/siding/sheet metal contractor	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	C	X	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Vehicle/Equipment Repair,

Industrial	Large scale facilities providing repair services for large or oversized vehicles and equipment.	Large scale equipment or machinery repair shops; Fleet service shops; Farm or construction equipment repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Warehouse	Storage, wholesale sales and distribution of materials and equipment to parties other than the general public.	Warehouse, moving and storage firms, trucking or cartage operations, and truck staging or storage areas	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	X	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Wholesale Sales	Firms involved in the sale, lease, or rental of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses.	Alcoholic Beverages; Groceries; Manufactured goods distributors	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	X	X	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	OTHER	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	 	 	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Temporary Uses	Uses established for a limited amount of time that may create a negative impact upon the public well-being.	Food booth/stall for an event; Portable Processing Plant for aggregate processing/concrete batching/asphalt production; Construction Office Temporary Housing during construction or repair to home or business; Large-Scale Event; Auction	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	(s) = Special Use Permit Required

	 	(C) = Conditional Use per Section 15-512.d

	The following uses can only be located in the I-H Zoning District and require a Special Use Permit:

	 	Disposal of dead animals; Offal reduction; Fat/Oil Rendering

Intensive agricultural uses such as feedlots, large-scale production of animals, poultry

Fish processing plant

Foundry or steel works

Hazardous waste disposal

Mining, quarrying

Salvage Yard, Junk Yard

	 

(Ord. 1364, 2013; Ord. 1443, 2018)

 



-----------------------------

The Tonganoxie City Code is current through Ordinance 1480, passed December 16, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Tonganoxie City Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.tonganoxie.org/ City Telephone: (913) 845-2620

Code Publishing Company