
Campbellsville, KY Code of Ordinances


CITY OF CAMPBELLSVILLE, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 16-10, passed 1-21-2016
State legislation current through KRS Pamphlet 2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CAMPBELLSVILLE, KENTUCKY
CITY OFFICIALS



 



Mayor
 
Brenda Allen


City Clerk
 
Cary C. Noe


City Attorney
 
John Miller


 
 
Randall Herron


 
 
Terry Keltner


 
 
David Nunery


 
 
Diane Ford-Benningfield


 
 
Greg Rice


 
 
Jay Eastridge


 
 
Stan McKinney


 
 
Ronnie Dooley


 
 
Donnie Munford


 
 
Dan Hayes


 
 
Faye Howell




 



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Computation of time



   10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent



   10.06   Writings and signatures



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Revivor



   10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance



   10.10   Construction of section references



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Ordinances saved



   10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.15   Conflicting provisions



   10.16   Reference to offices



   10.17   Errors and omissions



   10.18   Historical and statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
Campbellsville Code, for which designation "codified ordinances" or "code"
may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code. 



(KRS 446.140)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to
those components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code".
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01". Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTION.  Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.



(KRS 446.010(1))



   AND.  May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.



   ANIMAL.  Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human
being. 



(KRS 446.010(2))



   AVIS.  The Automated Vehicle Information System established and
maintained by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration
information on vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle
operator’s licenses and personal identification cards.



(KRS 446.010(55))



   CERTIFIED MAIL.  Any method of governmental, commercial, or electronic
delivery that allows a document or package to have proof of:



      (1)   Sending the document or package;



      (2)   The date the document or package was delivered or
delivery was attempted; and



      (3)   The signature of the receipt of the document or package.



(KRS 446.010(8))



   CITY,MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY.  When used in this code
shall denote the City of Campbellsville, irrespective of its population or
legal classification.



   COMPANY.  May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
person, partnership, joint stock company or association. 



(KRS 446.010(9))



   CORPORATION.  May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company or association. 



(KRS 446.010(10))



   COUNCIL.  The city legislative body. 



(KRS 83A.010(5))



   COUNTY.  Taylor County, Kentucky.



   CRUELTY.  As applied to animals, includes every act or omission
whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or
permitted. 



(KRS 446.010(12))



   DIRECTORS.  When applied to corporations, includes managers or
trustees. 



(KRS 446.010(13))



   DOMESTIC.  When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust,
or limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by
authority of this state. 



(KRS 446.010(14))



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal converted to domestic habitat.



(KRS 446.010(15))



   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY.  The Mayor. 



(KRS 83A.010(6))



   FEDERAL.  Refers to the United States. 



(KRS 446.010(17))



   FOREIGN.  When applied to a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership. business trust, statutory trust or limited liability company,
includes all those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state. 



(KRS 446.010(18))



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and
all rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest. 



(KRS 446.010(23))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY.  The City Council. 



(KRS 91A.010(8))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER.  A City Council member. 



(KRS 83A.010(8))



   LIVESTOCK.  Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas,
buffaloes or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, procine, caprine, equine
or camelid species.



(KRS 446.010(25))



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive. 



(KRS 446.010(26))



   MONTH.  Calendar month. 



(KRS 446.010(27))



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Campbellsville, Kentucky.



   OATH.  Includes affirmation, in all cases in which an affirmation may
be substituted for an OATH.  (KRS 446.010(28))



   PARTNERSHIP.  Includes both general and limited PARTNERSHIPS.



(KRS 446.010(30))



   PEACE OFFICER.  Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers,
metropolitan and urban- county government correctional officers, marshals,
police officers and other persons with similar authority to make arrests. 



(KRS 446.010(31))



   PERSON.  May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships,
joint stock companies and limited liability companies. 



(KRS 446.010(33))



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Any governmental, commercial, or electronic method
of delivery that allows a document or package to have:



      (1)   Its chain of custody recorded in a register to enable
its location to be tracked;



      (2)   Insurance available to cover its loss; and



      (3)   The signature of the recipient of the document or
package available to the sender.



(KRS 446.010(36))



   REGULAR ELECTION.  The election in even-numbered years at which
members of Congress are elected, and the election in odd-numbered years at
which state officers are elected. 



(KRS 446.010(37))



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory. 



(KRS 446.010(39))



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STATE.  The Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   STREET.  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the city.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



   SWORN.  Includes affirmed in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.



(KRS 446.010(43))



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of the premises, alone or with others.



   VACANCY IN OFFICE.  Exists when there is an unexpired part of a term
of office without a lawful incumbent therein, when the person elected or
appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has
been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies
whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the
state, county, city or district, or otherwise. 



(KRS 446.010(46))



   VIOLATE.  Includes failure to comply with. 



(KRS 446.010(47))



   YEAR.  Calendar year. 



(KRS 446.010(49))



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number
only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to
one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend
and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or
things. 



(KRS 446.020(1))



   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine
gender only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.



(KRS 446.020(2))



   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be
liberally construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the
intent of Council. 



(KRS 446.080(1))



   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be
retroactive, unless expressly so declared.



(KRS 446.080(3))



   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of language, but technical words
and phrases and others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law, shall be construed according to that meaning.



(KRS 446.080(4))



§ 10.04  COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order
of court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act,
event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on
which the public office in which a document is required to be filed is
actually and legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of
the next day which is not one of the days just mentioned.  When the period
of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.



   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an
act to be done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before
the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in
computing the time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act
is required to be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on
which the public office in which the act is required to be completed is
actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is
none of the days just mentioned.



   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act
is directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is
Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the
next day that is not a legal holiday.



(KRS 446.030)



   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice
shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of
the duty or compliance with the notice.



§ 10.05  MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.



   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or
other persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the
officers or other persons. 



(KRS 446.050)



   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include those acts when done by an authorized agent.



§ 10.06  WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.



   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party
thereto, it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is
subscribed at the end or close of the writing.



   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the
English language.



(KRS 446.060)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides
otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably
connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is
apparent that Council would not have enacted the remaining parts without the
unconstitutional part; or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are
incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of
Council.



(KRS 446.090)



§ 10.08  REVIVOR.



   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is
revived when the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance
enacted at the same meeting of Council.



   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived
by the enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same
or any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the
effective date of the original repealer.



   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting
of Council which enacted the amendment.



   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the
amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council, as
long as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of
the original amendment.



   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment, as the case may be.



(KRS 446.100)



§ 10.09  RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former
ordinance as to any offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to
any act done, or penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever
to affect any offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture
or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the
new ordinance takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall
conform, so far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the
proceedings.



   (B)   If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any
provision of the new ordinance, the provision may, by the consent of the
party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance
takes effect.



(KRS 446.110)



§ 10.10  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.



   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance,
all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the purpose
effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall remain
in effect and are saved.



§ 10.14  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code
by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance
with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be
excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the
subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.



   (B)   The method of amendment set forth by the city should be used
by the city to amend, add or repeal a chapter, section or division of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.15  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.16  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.17  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.18  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example: 



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads word-for- word the same as the statute.
Example: 



(KRS 83A.090)



   (C)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should
refer to that statute for further information. Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall
be deemed a violation, and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for
each offense.



Statutory references:



   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065



   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   CITY COUNCIL





         31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS





         32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT





         33.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES





         34.   TAX AND FINANCE





         35.   PERSONNEL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Meetings; regular and special



   30.02   Meetings which must be rescheduled



§ 30.01  MEETINGS; REGULAR AND SPECIAL.



   (A)   Regular meetings. Pursuant to the authority of KRS 83A.130 and
specifically KRS 83A.130(11), the meetings of the City Council shall, from
and after the effective date of this section, be held on the first Monday of
each month commencing at the hour of 7:00 p.m. local prevailing time in the
Campbellsville Civic Center located on the corner of Broadway and South
Columbia Avenue in the city.



   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Council shall be
held by call of the Mayor or upon other terms as may be set out in KRS
83A.130(11).



(2000 Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. 13-08, passed 11-4-2013)



§ 30.02  MEETINGS WHICH MUST BE RESCHEDULED.



   (A)   Any meeting of the City Council which must be rescheduled due
to holiday or other conflict shall from and after the effective date of this
section be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday of each month
commencing at the hour of 7:00 p.m. local prevailing time in the
Campbellsville Civic Center located at the corner of Broadway and South
Columbia Avenue in the city.



   (B)   Any meeting which would otherwise be conducted on the first
Monday of a given month, but which is scheduled for the next day pursuant to
this section, shall not be deemed a special-called meeting but shall instead
be deemed a regular meeting of the City Council.



(Ord. 02-19, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 13-08, passed 11-4-2013)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section



Generally



   31.01   Exchange of services, benefits, funds and materials



   31.02   Department of Disaster and Emergency Response



Economic Development Authority



   31.15   Established



   31.16   Purpose; duties; powers



   31.17   Composition; appointment



   31.18   Dissolution of Authority



   31.19   Quorum



   31.20   Compensation of Authority members



   31.21   Revenue



   31.22   Property vested in Authority; tax exemption



   31.23   Purpose of property acquisition enumerated



Cable Television Communications Authority



   31.35   Authority established; short title



   31.36   Functions and powers



GENERALLY



§ 31.01  EXCHANGE OF SERVICES, BENEFITS, FUNDS AND MATERIALS.



   All past, present and anticipated exchange of services, benefits, funds
and materials between the city, its departments and agencies, is hereby
approved as a necessary function of business of the city, its departments and
agencies.



(Ord. 02-15, passed 9-2-2002)



§ 31.02  DEPARTMENT OF DISASTER AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE.



   The City Council does hereby create a department to be known as
Department of Disaster and Emergency Response, which Department shall have
the powers and authorities as enumerated in KRS 39B.010 et seq.



(2000 Code, § 2-126)



ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



§ 31.15  ESTABLISHED.



   The Campbellsville-Taylor County Economic Development Authority is
hereby created pursuant to KRS 154.50-316 to 154.50-340. The Authority shall
be a body politic and corporate with the usual corporate attributes, and its
corporate name may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and do
all things reasonable or necessary to effectively carry out the duties
prescribed by KRS 154.50-316 to 154.50-340.



(2000 Code, § 2-51)  (Ord. 08-01, passed 3-10-2008)



§ 31.16  PURPOSE; DUTIES; POWERS.



   The purpose, duties and powers of the Authority shall be to:



   (A)   Acquire, retain and develop land for industrial and commercial
purposes in the city and the county; aid in the development and promotion of
industrial sites, parks and subdivisions to meet industrial and commercial
needs in the city and the county;



   (B)   Encourage the acquisition, retention and development of land
for industrial and commercial needs by other local development organizations,
both public and private;



   (C)   Acquire by contract, lease, purchase, gift or otherwise any
real or personal property, or rights therein, necessary or suitable for
establishing industrial sites, parks or subdivisions. The Authority may
dispose of any real or personal property, or rights therein, which in the
opinion of the Authority are no longer needed to carry out the purposes of
KRS 154.50-316 to 154.50-340. The Authority may sell or convey any or all
land owned or optioned by it to any public or private organizations,
governmental unit or industry for the purpose of constructing and/or
operating any industrial or commercial facility. Provided, however, that no
sale or conveyance of any land shall be made to a private organization or
industry without the organization or industry first having executed a written
contract with the Authority providing that if no actual construction of an
industrial facility is commenced within two years, the organization or
industry shall reconvey the land, free and clear of liens and encumbrances,
to the Authority, and the Authority shall return to the organization or
industry 95% of the purchase price paid therefor; and



   (D)   Upon the adoption by the Authority of a resolution reciting
that property is needed for industrial sites, parks and subdivisions and
cannot be acquired by negotiation and purchase at its fair market value, the
governmental units in which the land is located may direct and institute
condemnation proceedings in the name of the governmental units, for the use
and benefit of the Authority. The procedure for condemnation shall conform to
the procedure set out in the Eminent Domain Act of the state being KRS
416.540 to 416.680. Upon acquisition of the property, the governmental unit
shall convey the property to the Authority upon payment by the Authority to
the governmental unit of an amount of money equal to the judgement and costs
paid by the governmental unit.



(2000 Code, § 2-52)



§ 31.17  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The Campbellsville-Taylor County Economic Development
Authority shall consist of six members, three of which shall be appointed by
the Mayor of the city, and three of which shall be appointed by the
Judge-Executive of the county.



   (B)   The City Council shall approve the city's members and fiscal
court shall approve the county's members.



      (1)   Members of the Authority shall serve for a term of four
years, and until their successors are appointed and qualified, provided,
however, that initial appointments shall be made so that two members are
appointed for two years, two members for three years and two members for four
years. Upon expiration of these staggered terms, successors shall be
appointed for a term of four years.



      (2)   A member may only be replaced by the appointing
Authority upon a showing to the appointing Authority of misconduct as an
Authority member or upon conviction of a felony.



      (3)   No Authority member shall hold any official office with
the appointing Authority.



(2000 Code, § 2-53)  (Ord. 08-01, passed 3-10-2008)



§ 31.18  DISSOLUTION OF AUTHORITY.



   In the event the city or county should desire to withdraw from
participation in the joint Authority created herein, withdrawal or
dissolution of the Authority shall be governed by KRS 154.50-330.



(2000 Code, § 2-54)



§ 31.19  QUORUM.



   A quorum for the transacting of the business of the Authority shall
consist of four members. Meetings of the Authority may be called by the
Chairperson or by four members.



(2000 Code, § 2-55)



§ 31.20  COMPENSATION OF AUTHORITY MEMBERS.



   (A)   Members of the Authority shall serve without compensation but
shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in
the conduct of the affairs of the Authority.



   (B)   The Authority shall, upon the appointment of its members,
organize and elect officers.



   (C)   The Authority shall choose a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
who shall serve for terms of one year.



   (D)   The Authority may fix a salary for the Secretary-Treasurer,
and the Secretary-Treasurer shall execute an official bond to be set and
approved by the Authority, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the
Authority.



      (1)   The Authority may employ necessary counsel, agents and
employees to carry out its work functions and prescribed rules and
regulations as it deems necessary.



      (2)   The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep the minutes of all
meetings of the Authority and shall also keep a set of books showing the
receipts and expenditures of the Authority. He or she shall preserve on file
duplicate vouchers for all expenditures and shall present to the Authority,
upon request, complete reports of all financial transactions and the
financial condition of the Authority. The books and vouchers shall at all
times be subject to examination by the legislative bodies by whom the
Authority was created. He or she shall transmit at least once annually a
detailed report of all acts and doings of the Authority to the legislative
bodies by whom the Authority was created.



(2000 Code, § 2-56)



§ 31.21  REVENUE.



   The legislative bodies of both city and county may make an annual
appropriation from its general fund to the Authority for industrial
development. All funds derived from the appropriations shall be turned over
to the Authority for the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the
Authority.



   (A)   The Authority may borrow money on its own credit in
anticipation of revenue to be derived from appropriations or other income.
For those purposes, the Authority may pledge the appropriations or income
anticipated. The Authority may pledge the industrial sites or other assets as
security for monies borrowed.



   (B)   The Authority is authorized to defray the cost of acquiring
and developing industrial sites through the issuance of revenue bonds issued
under the terms, conditions and procedures set forth in KRS 103.200 to
103.285.



   (C)   The Authority may, as an alternative method and in addition to
all other methods provided by law, acquire and develop land for industrial
and commercial use, and issue revenue bonds in connection therewith under the
terms and provisions of KRS Chapter 58 and under the law the term
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY shall mean the Authority and the term PUBLIC PROJECT
shall mean industrial sites, parks and subdivisions.



(2000 Code, § 2-57)



§ 31.22  PROPERTY VESTED IN AUTHORITY; TAX EXEMPTION.



   The title to all property acquired by the Authority shall vest in the
Authority. All property acquired for the development of industrial sites,
parks and subdivisions shall be exempt from taxation to the same extent as
other property used for public purposes. All revenues collected by the
Authority shall also be exempt from taxation.



(2000 Code, § 2-58)



§ 31.23  PURPOSE OF PROPERTY ACQUISITION ENUMERATED.



   The acquisition of any lands for the purpose of developing industrial
sites, parks and subdivisions is hereby declared to be a public and
governmental function, exercised for a public purpose, and a matter of public
necessity, and the lands and other property, easements and privileges
acquired in the manner and for the purposes enumerated in KRS 154.50-316 to
154.50-340 shall and are hereby declared to be acquired and used for public
and governmental purposes and as a matter of public necessity.



(2000 Code, § 2-59)



CABLE TELEVISION COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY



§ 31.35  AUTHORITY ESTABLISHED; SHORT TITLE.



   (A)   Franchise granted. The city has granted a cable television
franchise to operate a cable television system within the city.



   (B)   Authority established. The Council for the city wishes to
establish a governing Authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of
the franchise agreement. It is hereby ordained by the City Council that the
Cable Communications Authority shall be established.



   (C)   Short title. The Authority shall be known as the
"Campbellsville Cable Communications Authority".



   (D)   Membership. The membership of the Authority shall consist of
seven members of which four shall be residents of the city and three shall be
members of the Council. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Council.



      (1)   Each resident member shall serve a term of four years;
provided, however, that appointments to the first Authority shall be for
one-, two-, three- and four-year terms, respectively. Members from the
Council shall be appointed annually.



      (2)   Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by appointment
of the Mayor with approval of Council for the remainder of the term. No
employee or person with any ownership interest in any cable television
franchise granted pursuant to ordinance shall be eligible for membership on
the Authority.



      (3)   The Mayor, or his or her authorized representatives, may
serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the Authority. The Authority
shall annually select from among its number a Chairperson who shall preside
over the meetings.



(2000 Code, § 2-86)



§ 31.36  FUNCTIONS AND POWERS.



   The Authority shall have the following functions and powers:



   (A)   Advise the Council on applications for franchises;



   (B)   Advise the Council on matters which might constitute grounds
for revocation of the franchise in accordance with the franchise agreement;



   (C)   Resolve disagreements among franchisee and public and private
users of the system to the extent possible;



   (D)   Advise the Council on regulation of rates in accordance with
the franchise agreement;



   (E)   Facilitate government, education, community groups and
individual use of the public channels;



   (F)   Determine general policies relating to the services provided
subscribers in the operation and use of the access channels, with the view of
maximizing the diversity of programs and services to the subscribers. The use
of access channels shall be allocated on a first come first serve basis
subject to limitations on monopolization of system time or prime times;



   (G)   Encourage use of access channels along the widest range of
institutions, groups or individuals within the city;



   (H)   Submit an annual report to the Council, including the total
number of hours of utilization of access channels and a review of any plans
submitted during the year by franchisees for development of new services and
relevant information concerning education uses, public access for local
programming under public control, local government access, pay television and
channel leasing;



   (I)   Cooperate with other systems in supervising interconnecting of
systems;



   (J)   Maintain a knowledge of current developments in cable
communications by subscribing to trade publications and attending cable
communication seminars and meetings;



   (K)   Audit all franchise records required by the franchise
agreement and, in the Authority's discretion, require the preparation and
filing of information additional to that required by that franchise;



   (L)   Conduct a detailed evaluation of the system at least every
three years and make recommendations to the Council for amendments to the
franchise agreement;



   (M)   Employ, as necessary, services of a technical, accounting,
legal and administrative nature;



   (N)   Act on behalf or as the designee of the Council for purposes
of proposing regulations and arbitration procedures as deemed necessary by
the Council and/or to provide any other service to the council that may be
reasonably required by the Board under authority of the franchise agreement;
and



   (O)   In conjunction with the renewal of franchises, as provided for
under state or federal law, the Authority shall develop procedures for the
implementation of a renewal procedure of the cable franchise.



(2000 Code, § 2-87)



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



Generally



   32.01   Department established



   32.02   Police escort guidelines



   32.03   Training incentive program



   32.04   Authority to carry weapon



Auxiliary Police Force



   32.15   Established



   32.16   Number of members



   32.17   Qualification of members



   32.18   Appointment



   32.19   Dismissal



   32.20   Rules; regulations



   32.21   Not entitled to certain benefits



   32.22   Compensation



   32.23   Uniform; insignia



   32.24   Primary duties



   32.25   Statutory powers



   32.26   Immediate supervision



   32.27   Weapons restricted



   32.28   Delegation of supervision



GENERALLY



§ 32.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Police Department for the city,
with an original establishment date of February 23, 1837.



   (B)   There is hereby created the Office of Chief of Police of the
city. Powers and duties are hereby established and laid out in the city's
personnel policy manual and the City Police Department Standard Operating
Policy Manual.



   (C)   The office of city police officer is hereby established, which
shall consist of a minimum of 20 officers. The powers and duties of the
office of city police officer shall be as stated in the City Personnel Manual
and the city police Standard Operating Policy Manual.



(2000 Code, § 2-132)



§ 32.02  POLICE ESCORT GUIDELINES.



   City police officers shall adhere to the following with regard to
police escorts.



   (A)   Required. No person shall participate in or form any civic
event/parade unless a permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police. For
general purposes of this section, a CIVIL EVENT or PARADE is defined as any
organized gathering of persons or an event upon the streets or public
passageways in the city.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities, provided that the conduct is under
the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



   (C)   Application process. A person seeking a civic event/parade
permit shall file application with the chief of police on the forms provided
by the city.



      (1)   Filing period. An application for a civic event/parade
permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police not less than 30, nor more
than 45 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the civic
event/parade.



      (2)   Contents. The application for a civic event/parade
permit shall set forth the following information:



         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the civic event/parade;



         (b)   If a civic event/parade is proposed to be
conducted for or on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number and headquarters of the organization and of the authorized
responsible heads of the organization;



         (c)   Name, address and telephone number of the person
who will be the civic event/parade chair and who will be responsible for its
conduct;



         (d)   Date when the civic event/parade is to be
conducted;



         (e)   Route to be traveled. The starting point and
termination point;



         (f)   The approximate number of persons who and animals
and vehicles which will constitute such civic event/parade and the type of
animals and description of vehicles;



         (g)   Hours the parade will start and terminate;



         (h)   Statement as to whether the parade will occupy all
or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;



         (i)   Location by streets of any assembly areas for the
civic event/parade;



         (j)   Time at which the units of the parade will begin
to assemble and any like assembly area;



         (k)   The interval of space to be maintained between the
units in the civic event/parade;



         (l)   If the civic event/parade is designed to be held
by, and on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant, the
applicant for the permit shall file with the Chief of Police a communication
in writing from the person proposing to hold the civic event/parade,
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit as an agent; and



         (m)   Any additional information which the Chief of
Police finds reasonable and necessary for a fair determination of whether a
permit should be issued.



      (3)   Late application. The Chief of Police, where good cause
is shown, may consider an application which is filed less than 30 days before
the date of the civic event/parade.



      (4)   Fee. No permit fee shall be required.



   (D)   Standards for issuance. In determining whether to issue a
permit, the Chief of Police shall consider the following factors based on the
representations in the application and any other information relevant to the
conduct of the civic event/parade:



      (1)   Traffic congestion. The conduct of the civic
event/parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement
of other traffic contiguous to its route.



      (2)   Police resources. The conduct of the civic event/parade
will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the
city to properly protect the line of movement in the areas contiguous thereto
as to prevent normal police protection to the city.



      (3)   Emergency medical services. The conduct of the parade
will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to
prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to
be occupied by the proposed line of the march and contiguous areas.



      (4)   Police and fire protection generally. The concentration
of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not
unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of areas
contiguous to the assembly areas.



      (5)   Firefighting. The conduct of the parade will not
interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire.



      (6)   Time and location. The time and location of the parade
and the manner of its conduct is not of the type likely to disturb the
reasonable and orderly repose of the citizens of the city nor to unreasonably
create a disturbance.



      (7)   Delay in route. The parade is scheduled to move from its
point of origin to its point of termination as expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays in route.



      (8)   Conditions. The Chief of Police shall approve a parade
permit, subject to conditions which will satisfy any of the above listed
concerns, unless rejected pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (E)   Rejection of application.



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a
parade permit within three days after its filing. If the Chief of Police
disapproves of the application, a notice of the action stating the reasons
for the denial of the permit shall be mailed to the applicant within five
days after the date upon which the application was filed.



      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the Chief of Police's rejection
of a permit may appeal the denial to the City Council. The appeal shall be
taken at the next regular meeting of the City Council, and the City Council
shall give the applicant an opportunity to be heard and the Police Chief an
opportunity to state the rationale for the denial.



   (F)   Issuance.



      (1)   Copies to city officials. Immediately upon the issuance
of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy to the Mayor, Fire
Chief, Director of County Rescue Squad and the general manager or responsible
head of any transportation utility which may be affected by the route of the
proposed parade.



      (2)   Contents. Each parade permit shall state the following:



         (a)   Starting time;



         (b)   Minimum speed;



         (c)   Maximum speed;



         (d)   Minimum interval of space to be maintained between
the units in the parade;



         (e)   Portions of the street to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade;



         (f)   Maximum length of the parade and miles or
fractions thereof; and



         (g)   Other information as the Chief of Police shall
find necessary to the enforcement of this section, including any conditions
imposed on the permit.



      (3)   Duties of permittee. Permittees under this section shall
comply with all permit directions and conditions and all applicable laws and
ordinances.



      (4)   Possession. The parade chair or other person heading or
leading the activities shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person
during the conduct of the parade.



   (G)   Permit and internal policy. The Chief of Police is directed to
adopt and implement a permit and internal policy for police escorts which are
encompassed by this section.



(Ord. 10-2, passed 2-1-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.03  TRAINING INCENTIVE PROGRAM.



   The city shall participate in the Kentucky Law Enforcement Foundation
Program Fund Training Incentive Program. While participating in the fund, the
city shall comply with KRS 15.410 through 15.510 and all regulations of the
state justice cabinet relating thereto.



(2000 Code, § 10-1)



§ 32.04  AUTHORITY TO CARRY WEAPON.



   Any regular police officer of the city may, at any and all times while
he or she is either on or off duty and whether uniformed or not, carry upon
his or her person a deadly weapon, whether concealed or not.



(2000 Code, § 10-2)



AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE



§ 32.15  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established an auxiliary police force for the city to
perform duties as are enumerated in this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 10-26)



§ 32.16  NUMBER OF MEMBERS.



   The number of persons constituting the auxiliary police force for the
city shall not exceed 50.



(2000 Code, § 10-27)



§ 32.17  QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.



   Before any person may be appointed or made an auxiliary police officer
for the city, he or she shall possess the qualifications for a police officer
set forth in KRS 95.440 and any applicable city ordinances pertaining to
qualifications of police officers or auxiliary police.



(2000 Code, § 10-28)



§ 32.18  APPOINTMENT.



   Auxiliary police officers shall be appointed by the Mayor.



(2000 Code, § 10-29)



§ 32.19  DISMISSAL.



   An auxiliary police officer may be dismissed by the Mayor, the Chief of
Police or any police officer holding the rank of captain or lieutenant who is
a shift commander. The dismissal may be for cause or for any other reason
that may be deemed appropriate.



(2000 Code, § 10-30)



§ 32.20  RULES; REGULATIONS.



   Auxiliary police officers shall be subject to all rules and regulations
that regular police officers of the city are subject to, including statutory
regulations, city ordinance or departmental regulation, in addition to any
regulations contained in this subchapter or regulations which may hereafter
be adopted by the Council pertaining to auxiliary police officers.



(2000 Code, § 10-31)



§ 32.21  NOT ENTITLED TO CERTAIN BENEFITS.



   Auxiliary police officers shall under no circumstances be considered
regular police officers of the city for the purposes of being covered by
statutory benefits such as death, disability or retirement benefits.



(2000 Code, § 10-32)



§ 32.22  COMPENSATION.



   Auxiliary police officers shall work and be paid on an hourly basis,
the rates of hourly pay to be set by the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 10-33)



§ 32.23  UNIFORM; INSIGNIA.



   Auxiliary police officers shall be uniformed as regular police officers
of the city, except there shall be some insignia indicating to the general
public that the person wearing the uniform is not a regular police officer of
the city and is, in fact, an auxiliary police officer.



(2000 Code, § 10-34)



§ 32.24  PRIMARY DUTIES.



   The primary duties of auxiliary police officers shall be traffic
control. In exceptional cases, they shall be used for emergency service.



(2000 Code, § 10-35)



§ 32.25  STATUTORY POWERS.



   Auxiliary police officers shall have the powers enumerated in KRS
95.510, which makes the auxiliary police officer a peace officer of the city
and state with the same powers to make arrest, execute process and enforce
the laws as have constables and sheriffs.



(2000 Code, § 10-36)



§ 32.26  IMMEDIATE SUPERVISION.



   All auxiliary police officers shall be under the immediate jurisdiction
of the Mayor, Chief of Police and any police officer holding the rank of
shift commander, and shall perform the functions assigned them by any
officer; however, any auxiliary police officer shall at all times be subject
to the direction of any regular police officer of the city.



(2000 Code, § 10-37)



§ 32.27  WEAPONS RESTRICTED.



   No auxiliary police officer shall be armed with a deadly weapon unless
specifically directed to be armed by the Chief of Police or any police
officer holding the rank of a shift commander.



(2000 Code, § 10-38)



§ 32.28  DELEGATION OF SUPERVISION.



   The Mayor may delegate unto the Chief of Police or any police officer
holding the rank of shift commander the responsibility of supervision and
regulation of auxiliary police officers.



(2000 Code, § 10-39)



CHAPTER 33:  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



Generally



   33.01   City Clerk and Tax Collector



   33.02   City Attorney



   33.03   Mayor Pro-Tem



   33.04   Nonpartisan elections



   33.05   Insurance



   33.06   Old-age and survivor's insurance



   33.07   Policy and procedures; adoption



Code of Ethics



   33.20   Title; findings



   33.21   Purpose and authority



   33.22   Definitions



   33.23   Conflicts of interest; general and in contracts



   33.24   Receipt of gifts



   33.25   Use of city property, equipment and personnel



   33.26   Representation of interests before city government



   33.27   Misuse of confidential information



   33.28   Post-employment restriction



   33.29   Honoraria



   33.30   Who must file



   33.31   When to file statements; amended statements



   33.32   Form of the statement of financial interests



   33.33   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial
interests



   33.34   Contents of the financial interests statement



   33.35   Noncompliance with filing requirement



   33.36   Certain practices prohibited



   33.37   Board of Ethics created



   33.38   Alternate members



   33.39   Facilities and staff



   33.40   Power and duties of the Board of Ethics



   33.41   Filing and investigation of complaints



   33.42   Notice of hearings



   33.43   Hearing procedure



   33.44   Appeals



   33.45   Limitation of actions



   33.46   Advisory opinions



   33.47   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited



 



   33.99   Penalty



GENERALLY



§ 33.01  CITY CLERK AND TAX COLLECTOR.



   The heretofore separate offices of City Clerk and City Tax Collector
are hereby combined and consolidated into the office designated City Clerk
and Tax Collector.



(2000 Code, § 2-101)



§ 33.02  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The Mayor is authorized to contract with qualified, licensed attorneys
for legal services as the city may require.



(2000 Code, § 2-102)



§ 33.03  MAYOR PRO-TEM.



   (A)   The position known as "Mayor Pro-Tem" is hereby created. The
Mayor Pro-Tem shall be selected as follows: the Council member receiving the
highest number of votes in the most recent City Council election shall serve
as Mayor Pro-Tem.



   (B)   If the Council member declines acceptance, then the Council
member receiving the next highest number of votes, and so on, shall be deemed
Mayor Pro-Tem. In the event of a tie, then the Mayor Pro-Tem shall be
determined in accordance with state law for the breaking of ties in an
election.



   (C)   The duties and responsibilities of the Mayor Pro-Tem shall be
in compliance with Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   (D)   The Mayor Pro-Tem shall preside over meetings of the Council
in the Mayor's absence and shall not be deemed by this section to have been
delegated any function of the Mayor which is an executive or administrative
power, duty or responsibility.



(Ord. 03-03, passed 7-7-2003)



§ 33.04  NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS.



   The election of city officers shall be under nonpartisan city election
laws as provided in KRS 83A.045, 83A.050, 83A.165, 83A.170 and 83A.175.



(2000 Code, § 2-141)



§ 33.05  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Self-insured medical insurance program adopted.



      (1)   There is hereby adopted and created by the City Council
a city self-insured medical insurance program for the employees of the city,
including the employees of the municipal water and sewer commission.



      (2)   The self-insured program shall continue from year to
year until changed or modified by ordinance of the City Council, provided the
City Council may, from time to time, change the third party administrator,
and/or the reinsuring insurance company.



(2000 Code, § 9-51)



   (B)   Special account.



      (1)   There is hereby created a special segregated bank
account, within the accounts of the city, which account shall be known as the
Self Insurance Fund Account, and which account shall receive the payments of
the city and the Municipal Water and Sewer Commission to fund the self
insurance program. Checks drawn upon this account shall be drawn upon the
signatures of the City Treasurer, and the Mayor and the funds therein
contained shall not be expended for any reason other than the payment of the
medical claims of the employees covered by this self insurance program, and
or the service fees to the third party administrator for maintaining the
claims service for the city.



      (2)   Each year, the city shall fund for the maximum liability
as projected by the third party administrator. Should the fund, over a period
of time, contain funds sufficient to meet the projected worst case liability
of the city, the city shall be relieved of making payments into the fund
until a time that the fund shall drop below the maximum liability point.



(2000 Code, § 9-52)



   (C)   Maintenance of records. The City Clerk shall maintain a file
of contracts as may be negotiated by the Council or the Mayor with the third
party administrator and the reinsurance company. The City Clerk shall
maintain copies of the medical insurance benefits provided by the city to the
employees and shall have available copies of the benefits for any employee
requesting a copy thereof.



(2000 Code, § 9-53)



   (D)   Amendment, termination. The City Council may, from time to
time, amend, modify or supplement the self-insured program by resolution of
the City Council. This program may only be terminated by ordinance duly
adopted by the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 9-54)



   (E)   Remittance by water, sewer system. The municipal water and
sewer system shall remit to the city, to the order of the city's self-
insured medical fund, its proportionate share of the monies necessary to fund
the self-insured medical account.



(2000 Code, § 9-55)



§ 33.06  OLD-AGE AND SURVIVOR'S INSURANCE.



   The old-age and survivors' insurance system established by Title II of
the Social Security Act being 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq., for employees of the
city is hereby adopted.



(2000 Code, § 9-36)



§ 33.07  POLICY AND PROCEDURES; ADOPTION.



   The policies and procedures for all city employees are hereby adopted
by reference, and incorporated in this chapter as fully as if set out at
length herein.



(Ord. 06-06, passed 8-21-2006)



CODE OF ETHICS



§ 33.20  TITLE; FINDINGS.



   (A)   Title. This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"City of Campbellsville Code of Ethics".



(2000 Code, § 2-161)



   (B)   Findings. The legislative body of the city finds and declares
that:



      (1)   Public office and employment with the city are public
trusts;



      (2)   The vitality and stability of the government of this
city depends upon the public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and
appointed officers and employees. Whenever the public perceives a conflict
between the private interests and public duties of a city officer or
employee, that confidence is imperiled; and



      (3)   The government of this city has a duty to provide its
citizens with standards by which they may determine whether public duties are
being faithfully performed, and to make its officers and employees aware of
the standards which the citizenry rightfully expects them to comply with
while conducting their public duties.



(2000 Code, § 2-162)



§ 33.21  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide a method of
assuring that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure
requirements for officers and employees of the city shall be clearly
established, uniform in their application and enforceable, and to provide the
officers and employees of the city with advice and information concerning
potential conflicts of interest which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.



   (B)   It is the further purpose of this subchapter to meet the
requirements of KRS Chapter 65, as enacted by the 1994 Kentucky General
Assembly.



   (C)   This subchapter is enacted under the power vested in the city
by KRS 82.082 and pursuant to requirements of KRS Chapter 65.



(2000 Code, § 2-163)



§ 33.22  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD OF ETHICS.  The City of Campbellsville Board of Ethics which is
created and vested by this subchapter with the responsibility of enforcing
the requirements of the city's code of ethics.



   BUSINESS.  Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional
service corporation or any legal entity through which business is conducted
for profit.



   CANDIDATE.  Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city
office. An individual is a CANDIDATE when the individual files a notification
and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or Secretary
of State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files a
declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County Clerk or
Secretary of State.



   CITY.  The City of Campbellsville, Kentucky.



   CITY AGENCY.  Any board, commission, authority, non-stock corporation
or other entity created, either individually or jointly, by this city.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether
paid or unpaid, who is employed by or provides service to the city. The term
EMPLOYEE shall not include any contractor or subcontractor or any of their
employees.



   FAMILY MEMBER.  A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or
grandchild.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER.  A spouse, an unemancipated child residing in
the officer's or employee's household, or a person claimed by the officer or
employee, or the officer's or employee's spouse, as a dependent for tax
purposes.



   OFFICER.  Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid
or unpaid, who is one of the following:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   A legislative body member;



      (3)   The City Clerk;



      (4)   The City Manager;



      (5)   The City Administrator;



      (6)   Any person who occupies a non-elected office created
under KRS 83A.080; or



      (7)   A member of the governing body of any city agency who
has been appointed to the governing body of the agency by the city.



(2000 Code, § 2-164)



§ 33.23  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; GENERAL AND IN CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Conflicts of interest in general. Every officer and employee
of the city and every city agency shall comply with the following standards
of conduct.



      (1)   No officer or employee or any immediate family member of
any officer or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in
any business, transaction or activity, which is in substantial conflict with
the proper discharge of the officer's or employee's public duties.



      (2)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or
attempt to use his or her official position with the city to secure
unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or herself or others.



      (3)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take or
refrain from taking any discretionary action, or agree to take or refrain
from taking any discretionary action, or induce or attempt to induce any
other officer or employee to take or refrain from taking any discretionary
action, on any matter before the city in order to obtain a financial benefit
for any of the following:



         (a)   The officer or employee;



         (b)   A family member;



         (c)   An outside employer;



         (d)   Any business in which the officer or employee, or
any family member has a financial interest; or



         (e)   Any business with which the officer or employee or
any family member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other
business or professional relationship.



      (4)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of
any provision in this section if, by reason of the officer's or employee's
participation, vote, decision, action or inaction, no financial benefit
accrues to the officer or employee, a family member, an outside employer or a
business as defined in divisions (A)(3)(d) and (e) above, as a member of any
business, occupation, profession or other group, to any greater extent than
any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of the
business, occupation, profession or other group.



      (5)   Every officer or employee who has a prohibited financial
interest which the officer or employee believes or has reason to believe may
be affected by his or her participation, vote, decision or other action taken
within the scope of his or her public duties shall disclose the precise
nature and value of the interest, in writing, to the governing body of the
city or city agency served by the officer or employee, and the disclosure
shall be entered on the official record of the proceedings of the governing
body. The officer or employee shall refrain from taking any action with
respect to the matter that is the subject of the disclosure.



(2000 Code, § 2-165)



   (B)   Conflicts of interest in contracts.



      (1)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency
shall directly or through others undertake, execute, hold or enjoy, in whole
or in part, and contract made, entered into, awarded or granted by the city
or a city agency, except as follows.



         (a)   The prohibition in division (B)(1) above shall not
apply to contracts entered into before an elected officer filed as a
candidate for city office, before an appointed officer was appointed to a
city or city agency office, or before an employee was hired by the city or a
city agency. However, if any contract entered into by a city or city agency
officer or employee before he or she became a candidate, was appointed to
office, or was hired as an employee, is renewable after he or she becomes a
candidate, assumes the appointed office, or is hired as an employee, then the
prohibition in division (B)(1) above shall apply to the renewal of the
contract.



         (b)   The prohibition in division (B)(1) above shall not
apply if the contract is awarded after public notice and competitive bidding,
unless the officer or employee is authorized to participate in establishing
the contract specifications, awarding the contract, or managing contract
performance after the contract is awarded. If the officer or employee has any
of the authorities set forth in the preceding sentence, then the officer or
employee shall have no interest in the contract, unless the requirements set
forth in division (B)(1)(c) below are satisfied.



         (c)   The prohibition in division (B)(1) above shall not
apply in any case where the following requirements are satisfied:



            1.   The specific nature of the contract
transaction and the nature of the officer's or employee's interest in the
contract are publicly disclosed at a meeting of the governing body of the
city or city agency;



            2.   The disclosure is made a part of the official
record of the governing body of the city or city agency before the contract
is executed;



            3.   A finding is made by the governing body of
the city or city agency that the contract with the officer or employee is in
the best interests of the public and the city or city agency because of
price, limited supply or other specific reasons; and



            4.   The finding is made a part of the official
record of the governing body of the city or city agency before the contract
is executed.



      (2)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered
into in violation of this section. Additionally, a violation of this section
shall be grounds for removal from office or employment with the city in
accordance with any applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules
or regulations of the city.



(2000 Code, § 2-166)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.24  RECEIPT OF GIFTS.



   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly,
or indirectly through any other person or business, solicit or accept any
gift having a fair market value of more than $100, whether in the form of
money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise,
or any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be
inferred that the gift was intended to influence, or could reasonably be
expected to influence the officer or employee in the performance of his or
her public duties.



(2000 Code, § 2-167)



§ 33.25  USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.



   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of any
city time, funds, personnel, equipment or other personal or real property for
the private use of any person, unless:



   (A)   The use is specifically authorized by a stated city policy;
and/or



   (B)   The use is available to the general public, and then only to
the extent and upon the terms that the use is available to the general public.



(2000 Code, § 2-168)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.26  REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
represent any person or business, other than the city, in connection with any
cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before the city or any
city agency.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from
representing another employee or employees where the representation is within
the context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee
from representing himself or herself in matters concerning his or her own
interests.



   (D)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from
making any inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no
compensation, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to, or
accepted by the officer, whether directly or indirectly, in return for the
inquiry.



(2000 Code, § 2-169)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.27  MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
intentionally use or disclose information acquired in the course or his or
her official duties, if the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to
further his or her personal financial interest or that of another person or
business. Information shall be deemed confidential, if it is not subject to
disclosure pursuant to the Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.872 to 61.884,
at the time of its use or disclosure.



(2000 Code, § 2-170)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.28  POST-EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTION.



   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall appear or
practice before the city or any city agency with respect to any matter on
which the officer or employee personally worked while in the service of the
city or city agency for a period of one year after the termination of the
officer's or employee's service with the city or city agency.



(2000 Code, § 2-171)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.29  HONORARIA.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall
accept any compensation, honorarium or gift with a fair market value greater
than $100 in consideration of an appearance, speech or article unless the
appearance, speech or article is both related to the officer's or employee's
activities outside of municipal service and is unrelated to the officer's or
employee's service with the city.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer or employee
of the city or any city agency from receiving and retaining from the city or
on behalf of the city actual and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred
by the officer or employee in connection with an appearance, speech or
article, provided that the officer or employee can show by clear and
convincing evidence that the expenses were incurred or received on behalf of
the city or city agency and primarily for the benefit of the city or city
agency and not primarily for the benefit of the officer or employee or any
other person.



(2000 Code, § 2-172)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.30  WHO MUST FILE.



   The following classes of officers and employees of the city and city
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the Board
of Ethics:



   (A)   Elected city officials;



   (B)   Candidates for elected city office; and



   (C)   Non-elected officers and employees of the city or any city
agency who are authorized to make purchases of materials or services, or
award contracts, leases or agreements involving the expenditure of more than
$1,000.



(2000 Code, § 2-173)



§ 33.31  WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.



   (A)   The initial statement of financial interests required by this
subchapter shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated as the custodian of its records by the Board of Ethics,
no later than 5:00 p.m. April 15, 1995. All subsequent statements of
financial interest shall be filed no later than 5:00 p.m. on April 15 each
year, provided that:



      (1)   An officer or employee newly appointed to fill an office
or position of employment with the city or a city agency shall file his or
her initial statement no later than 30 days after the date of the
appointment; and



      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file his or her
initial statement no later than 30 days after the date on which the person
becomes a candidate for elected city office.



   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time
for filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.



   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information
contained in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board, the
officer or employee shall, no later than 30 days after becoming aware of the
material change, file an amended statement with the Board.



(2000 Code, § 2-174)



§ 33.32  FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official designated
by the Board of Ethics. The Board, or the designated administrative official,
shall deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee required to
file the statement, by first class mail or hand delivery, no later than March
15 of each year. The failure of the Board, or the designated administrative
official, to deliver a copy of the form to any officer or employee shall not
relieve the officer or employee of the obligation to file the statement.



(2000 Code, § 2-175)



§ 33.33  CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall be the "official custodian" of the
statements of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance
of the statements of financial interests. The statements of financial
interests shall be maintained by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics as the "custodian", as public
documents, available for public inspection immediately upon filing.



   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the
Board, or the designated administrative official, for a period of five years
after filing, provided that:



      (1)   Upon the expiration of three years after a person ceases
to be an officer or employee of the city or a city agency, the Board shall
cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of
those statements filed by the person; and



      (2)   Upon the expiration of three years after any election at
which a candidate for elected city office was not elected or nominated, the
Board shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or
copies of those statements filed by the person.



(2000 Code, § 2-176)



§ 33.34  CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.



   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall include the
following information for the preceding calendar year:



      (1)   The name, current business address, business telephone
number and home address of the filer;



      (2)   The title of the filer's office, office sought or
position of employment;



      (3)   The occupation of the filer and the filer's spouse;



      (4)   Information that identifies each source of income of the
filer and the filer's immediate family members exceeding $5,000 during the
preceding calendar year, and the nature of the income (e.g., salary,
commission, dividends, retirement fund distribution and the like);



      (5)   The name and address of any business located within the
state in which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family had at
any time during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 at fair
market value or 5% ownership interest or more;



      (6)   The name and address of any business located outside of
the state, if the business has engaged in any business transactions with the
city during the past three years, or which is anticipated to engage in any
business transactions with the city, in which the filer or any member of the
filer's immediate family had at any time during the preceding calendar year
an interest of $10,000 at fair market value or 5% ownership interest or more;



      (7)   A designation as commercial, residential or rural, and
the location of all real property within the county, other than the filer's
primary residence, in which the filer or any member or the filer's immediate
family had during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 or more;



      (8)   Each source by name and address of gifts or honoraria
having an aggregate fair market value of $100 or more from any single source,
excluding gifts received from family members, received by the filer or any
member of the filer's immediate family during the preceding calendar year; and



      (9)   The name and address of any creditor owed more than
$10,000, except debts arising from the purchase of a primary residence or the
purchase of consumer goods which are bought or used primarily for person,
family or household purposes.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
officer or employee to disclose any specific dollar amount nor the names of
individual clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.



(2000 Code, § 2-177)



§ 33.35  NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative
official, shall notify by certified mail each person required to file a
statement of financial interests who fails to file the statement by the due
date, files an incomplete statement or files a statement in a form other than
that prescribed by the Board. The notice shall specify the type of failure or
delinquency, shall establish a date by which the failure or delinquency shall
be remedied and shall advise the person of the penalties for a violation.



   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who
fails or refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the
notice under division (A) above within the time period established in the
notice shall be guilty of a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil
fine imposed by the Board in an amount not to exceed $25 per day, up to a
maximum total civil fine of $500. Any civil fine imposed by the Board under
this section may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of
debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay the penalty within a prescribed
period of time.



   (C)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial
interests which he or she knows to contain false information or intentionally
omits required information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



(2000 Code, § 2-178)



§ 33.36  CERTAIN PRACTICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Family members may be employed by the city subject to the
following limitations: no officer or employee of the city or a city agency
shall advocate, recommend or cause the: employment; appointment; promotion;
transfer; or advancement; of a family member to an office or position of
employment with the city or a city agency.



   (B)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall
supervise or manage the work of a family member.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall participate in any action
relating to the employment or discipline of a family member, except that this
prohibition shall not prevent an elected or appointed official from voting on
or participating in the development of a budget which includes compensation
for a family member, provided that the family member is included only as a
member of a class of persons or a group, and the family member benefits to no
greater extent than any other similarly situated member of the class or group.



   (D)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any
relationship or situation that would violate the prohibition, but which
existed prior to October 3, 1994.



(2000 Code, § 2-179)



§ 33.37  BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties and responsibilities as set forth in this section to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of five members who shall be
appointed by the executive authority of the city, subject to the approval of
the legislative body (if different from the executive authority). The initial
members of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed within 60 days of the
effective date of this subchapter. No member of the Board of Ethics shall
hold any elected or appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position
of employment with the city or any city agency. The member shall serve for a
term of three years; except that with respect to the members initially
appointed, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members
shall be appointed for a term of two years, and two members shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be
for a term of three years. No more than three of the members shall be of the
same political party. Each member of the Board of Ethics shall have been a
resident of the city for at least one year prior to the date of the
appointment and shall reside in the city throughout the term in office. The
members of the Board of Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their known and
consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government
affairs. The members may be re-appointed for any number of consecutive terms.



   (C)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the
executive authority, subject to the approval of the legislative body (if
different from the executive authority) for misconduct, inability or willful
neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of Ethics is removed from
office under this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a
hearing before the executive authority and the legislative body (if different
from the executive authority).



   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60
days by the executive authority, subject to the approval of the legislative
body (if different from the executive authority). If a vacancy is not filled
by the executive authority within 60 days, the remaining members of the Board
of Ethics shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without
compensation, unless otherwise approved by the legislative body, but shall be
reimbursed for all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.



   (F)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members, and annually thereafter, elect a Chairperson from among the
membership. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.



   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary,
upon the call of the Chairperson or at the written request of a majority of
the members.



   (H)   The presence of three or more members shall constitute a
quorum and the affirmative vote of three or more members shall be necessary
for any official action to be taken. Any member of the Board of Ethics who
has a conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the
Board shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself or
herself from voting on the matter, and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.



   (I)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of
Ethics and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be
recorded in the minutes.



(2000 Code, § 2-180)



§ 33.38  ALTERNATE MEMBERS.



   The executive authority of the city, with the approval of the
legislative body (if different from the executive authority) may appoint two
alternate members of the Board of Ethics who may be called upon to serve when
any regular member of the Board is unable to discharge his or her duties. An
alternate member shall be appointed for a term of one year. Alternate members
shall meet all qualifications and be subject to all of the requirements of
this subchapter that apply to regular members.



(2000 Code, § 2-181)



§ 33.39  FACILITIES AND STAFF.



   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the legislative body in
the annual budget, the city shall provide the Board of Ethics, either
directly or by contract or agreement, with the facilities, materials,
supplies and staff needed for the conduct of its business.



(2000 Code, § 2-182)



§ 33.40  POWER AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.



   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To initiate on its own motion, receive and investigate
complaints, hold hearings and make findings of fact and determinations with
regard to alleged violations of the provisions of this subchapter;



   (B)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and
hearings requiring persons to submit in writing and under oath reports and
answers to questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order
testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual designated by the
Board who has the power to administer oaths;



   (C)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary
evidence relating to an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board;



   (D)   To refer any information concerning violations of this
subchapter to the executive authority of the city, the city legislative body,
the governing body of any city agency, the county attorney, or other
appropriate person or body, as necessary;



   (E)   To render advisory opinions to city and city agency officers
and employees regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of this subchapter;



   (F)   To enforce the provisions of this subchapter with regard to
all officers and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to
its terms by issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by
this subchapter;



   (G)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests
that are required to be filed by this subchapter and to ensure that the
statements are available for public inspection in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter and the State Open Records Act being KRS
61.870 to 61.884;



   (H)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority or legislative body
of the city; and



   (I)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this subchapter, provided that the
rules, regulations and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of
this subchapter or any state or federal law.



(2000 Code, § 2-183)



§ 33.41  FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of
this subchapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics, or the
administrative official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints
shall be in writing, signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other
requirements established by the Board of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall
acknowledge receipt of a complaint to the complainant within ten working days
from the date of receipt. The Board shall forward within ten working days to
each officer or employee of the city or city agency who is the subject of the
complaint a copy of the complaint and a general statement of the applicable
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the Board
of Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the allegations
contained in the complaint. The Board shall afford a person who is the
subject of the complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the
complaint. The person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to
appear and be heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response to the
allegations.



   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry
being conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board, except:



      (1)   The Board may turn over to the commonwealth's attorney
or county attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings; and



      (2)   If the complainant or alleged violator publicly disclose
the existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board may publicly confirm the
existence of the inquiry, and, at its discretion, make public any documents
which were issued to either party.



   (D)   The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary
inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if so, whether
it alleges a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of this
subchapter. If the Board concludes that the complaint is outside of its
jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, the Board shall immediately
terminate the inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing, and transmit a copy
of its decision to the complainant and to all officers or employees against
whom the complaint was filed.



   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary
inquiry, that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains
allegations sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a
violation, the Board shall notify the officer or employee who is the subject
of the complaint and may:



      (1)   Due to mitigating circumstances such as, lack of
significant economic advantage or gain by the officer or employee, lack of
economic loss to the city and its taxpayers, or lack of significant impact on
public confidence in city government issue, in writing, a confidential
reprimand to the officer or employee concerning the alleged violation and
provide a copy of the confidential reprimand to the executive authority and
governing body of the city or city agency; and/or



      (2)   Initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a
violation.



   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false
complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this subchapter by an
officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall be guilty of a Class
A misdemeanor.



(2000 Code, § 2-184)



§ 33.42  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding
allegations contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an
order setting the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date the order
is issued, unless the alleged violator petitions for and the Board consents
to a later date.



   (B)   The order setting the matter for hearing, along with a copy of
any pertinent regulations of the Board relating to the hearing shall be sent
to the alleged violator within 24 hours of the time the order setting a
hearing is issued.



(2000 Code, § 2-185)



§ 33.43  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules
of Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics;
however, the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and
in accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board
so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights required by
the nature of the proceedings.



   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged
violator, or his or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity
to examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the Board in
connection with the matter to be heard. The Board shall inform the alleged
violator, or his or her representative, of any exculpatory evidence in its
possession.



   (C)   All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right to
call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine
witnesses, to submit evidence, and to be represented by counsel. All
witnesses shall have the right to be represented by counsel.



   (D)   Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who
may be adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the Board,
with or without counsel, to give a statement regarding the adverse mention,
or may file a written statement regarding the adverse mention for
incorporation into the record of the proceeding.



   (E)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless
the members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.



   (F)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics
shall, as soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for
the purpose of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination
whether a violation of this ordinance has been proven. Within 30 days after
completion of the hearing, the Board shall issue a written report of its
findings and conclusions.



   (G)   If the Board concludes in its report that no violation of this
subchapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint
and to the party who filed the complaint.



   (H)   If the Board concludes in its report that in consideration of
the evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and convincing proof of a
violation of this subchapter, the Board may:



      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and
desist the violation;



      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the
violations and provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and
governing body (if different than the executive authority) of the city or
city agency with which the violator serves;



      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the
governing body (if different than the executive authority) that the violator
be sanctioned as recommended by the Board, which may include a recommendation
for discipline or dismissal, or removal from office;



      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000; and/or



      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this subchapter
or state laws to the County Attorney or commonwealth's attorney of the
jurisdiction for prosecution.



(2000 Code, § 2-186)



§ 33.44  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision
of this subchapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the
circuit court of the county within 30 days after the date of the final action
by the Board of Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board.



   (B)   The Board shall transmit to the clerk of the court all
evidence considered by the Board at the public hearing.



(2000 Code, § 2-187)



§ 33.45  LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.



   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state
law, an action for a violation of this subchapter must be brought within one
year after the violation is discovered.



(2000 Code, § 2-188)



§ 33.46  ADVISORY OPINIONS.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning
matters under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative, or when requested by any officer or
employee of the city or a city agency who is covered by this subchapter.



   (B)   An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall
state relevant facts and ask specific questions. The request for an advisory
opinion shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived, in
writing, by the requestor.



   (C)   The Board may adopt regulations, consistent with the State
Open Records Law being KRS 61.870 to 61.884, to establish criteria under
which it will issue confidential advisory opinions. All other advisory
opinions shall be public documents, except that before an advisory opinion is
made public, it shall be modified so that the identity of any person
associated with the opinion shall not be revealed.



   (D)   The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived
either:



      (1)   In writing by the person who requested the opinion; or



      (2)   By majority vote of the members of the Board, if a
person makes or purports to make public the substance or any portion of an
advisory opinion requested by or on behalf of the person. The Board may vote
to make public the advisory opinion request and related materials.



   (E)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be
binding on the Board in any subsequent proceeding concerning the facts and
circumstances of the particular case if no intervening facts or circumstances
arise which would change the opinion of the Board if they had existed at the
time the opinion was rendered. However, if any fact determined by the Board
to be material was omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion, the
Board shall not be bound by the opinion.



   (F)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be
admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for
violations of this subchapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.



(2000 Code, § 2-189)



§ 33.47  REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
subject to reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any
official authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to
discourage, restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce or discriminate
against any person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges or
otherwise brings to the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency
or official of the city or the commonwealth any facts or information relative
to an actual or suspected violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting
disciplinary or punitive action if an officer or employee of the city or any
city agency discloses information which he or she knows:



      (1)   To be false or which he or she discloses with reckless
disregard for its truth or falsity;



      (2)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the
provisions of the State Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 to 61.884; and/or



      (3)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.



(2000 Code, § 2-190)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth
in this subchapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency
who is found by the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of §§
33.20 through 33.47 shall be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be
subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board of Ethics not to exceed $1,000,
which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender fails to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.



      (2)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed
under §§ 33.20 through 33.47, any officer or employee of the city or any
city agency who is found by the Board of Ethics to have violated any
provision of §§ 33.20 through 33.47 shall forfeit to the city or the city
agency an amount equal to the economic benefit or gain which the officer or
employee is determined by the Board to have realized as a result of the
violation. The amount of any forfeiture may be recovered by the city in a
civil action in the nature of debt, if the offender fails to pay the amount
of the forfeiture within a prescribed period of time.



      (3)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed
under §§ 33.20 through 33.47, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an
officer or employee of the city or any city agency is guilty of a violation
of §§ 33.20 through 33.47 shall be sufficient cause for removal,
suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action by the executive authority
of the city or city agency, or by any other officer or agency having the
power of removal or discipline. Any action to remove or discipline any
officer or employee for a violation of §§ 33.20 through 33.47 shall be
taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the
city and all applicable laws of the commonwealth.



(2000 Code, § 2-191)



CHAPTER 34:  TAX AND FINANCE



Section



   34.01   Fire-run fees



   34.02   Abandoned urban property; tax rate



§ 34.01  FIRE-RUN FEES.



   (A)   The City Council hereby sets forth the following standard fees
to be assessed for responses made by the Fire Department and all volunteer
aspects thereof:



 

Type of Response
 
Fee Imposed




Structure fire
 
$500


Vehicle fire (in absence of hydrant and/or tanker)
 
$250


Vehicle fire (with hydrant and/or tanker)
 
$500


Fire investigation with report/photos for insurance/court
 
$250


Dumpster fire (in absence of hydrant and/or tanker)
 
$250


Dumpster fire (with hydrant and/or tanker)
 
$500


Vehicle accident containment of spill (for first 5 bags of absorbent and $100
for each 5 bags or portion thereof beyond 5 bags)
 
$250


Grass fire (under 2,000 square feet)
 
$250


Grass fire (2,000 square feet and over)
 
$500


Malicious, mischievous false alarms
 
$500




 



   (B)   For the benefit of determining the applicable fee, the
following definitions shall be used to assist. These shall not be exclusive
of other defining applications.



      CONTAINMENT.  Damming, diking or using absorbing material to
minimize spread.



      DUMPSTER FIRE.  A fire in a metal container or trash bin.



      FLUID SPILL.  Anything that may contaminate water, soil or the
surface.



      MALICIOUS/MISCHIEVOUS FALSE ALARM.  Any act of calling or
reporting of false alarm or any act of causing a false alarm to be
transmitted to the Fire Department.



      STRUCTURE.  Any fixed structure not mobile at the time, such as
a traditional home or mobile home attached to a utility.



      STRUCTURE FIRE.  A fire inside or outside of a structure,
whether or not the structure is damaged.



      VEHICLE/MOBILE FIRE.  Cars, boats, travel trailers.



   (C)   An invoice for the above-referenced responses/services shall
be delivered to the property owner after the response/service is provided.
The property owner may request the invoice to be tendered to the owner's
insurance carrier.



(Ord. 05-07, passed 10-19-2005)



§ 34.02  ABANDONED URBAN PROPERTY; TAX RATE.



   Pursuant to the provisions of KRS Chapter 92, the City Council does
hereby adopt the following provisions with respect to abandoned urban
properties.



   (A)   Abandoned urban property is established as a separate
classification of real property for the purpose of ad valorem taxation. As
used in this section, ABANDONED URBAN PROPERTY means any vacant structure or
vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in the limits of the city which
has been vacant or unimproved for a period of at least one year and at least
one of the following:



      (1)   Because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin
infested or otherwise dangerous to the safety of persons, is unfit for its
intended use as zoned;



      (2)   By reason of neglect or lack of maintenance has become a
place for the accumulation of trash and debris, or has become infested with
rodents or other vermin; or



      (3)   Has been ad valorem tax delinquent to the city under
this or any other ordinance for a period of at least three years.



   (B)   An ad valorem tax rate of $1 per $100 in assessed value is
hereby established for an abandoned urban property.



   (C)   (1)   Abandoned urban property shall be assessed in the
same manner and at the same time as all other real estate in the city which
is subject to ad valorem taxation.



      (2)   The issuance of bills for the collection of taxes on
abandoned urban property shall correspond with the dates of issuance of the
city's other ad valorem tax bills and due dates, delinquency dates, penalties
and interest shall correspond with provisions applicable to the city's other
ad valorem tax bills.



   (D)   (1)   The Building Inspector and/or other employee or
person (the "Enforcement Official") designated by the Mayor shall, on or
before June 1 of each year, beginning June 1, 2005, compile a list of all
abandoned urban properties in the city. No later than July 1 of each year,
the Enforcement Official shall notify the owner of each parcel of abandoned
urban property by certified mail that the subject property has been
determined to be abandoned urban property and may thus be subject to taxation
at a higher rate.



      (2)   Any owner, to whom a notice is provided, shall have 60
days thereafter in which to appeal the city's determination. All the appeals
shall be in writing and shall be directed to the enforcement officials.



      (3)   All appeals shall be heard by the City Council at a
regular or a special called meeting. Appellants and the city shall have the
right to present evidence and the right to counsel at the hearing. Following
the hearing, the Council shall, by majority decision of Council members in
attendance, declare whether or not the parcel in question constitutes
abandoned urban property and the reasons therefor.



      (4)   If a property classified as abandoned urban property is
repaired, rehabilitated or otherwise returned to productive use, the owner
shall notify the city which shall, if it finds the property no longer
abandoned urban property, notify the Property Valuation Administrator to
strike the property from the list of abandoned urban properties.



      (5)   The Enforcement Official shall deliver to the County
Property Valuation Administrator a list of all abandoned urban properties
within the city.



(Ord. 05-11, passed 9-12-2005)



CHAPTER 35:  PERSONNEL PROVISIONS



Section



   35.01   Adoption by reference



§ 35.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The police personnel policy and procedures manual is hereby
incorporated herein by reference and is on file in the City Clerk's office.



(2000 Code, § 10-56)



   (B)   The "City of Campbellsville, Kentucky, Affirmative Action Plan
for Equal Employment Opportunity" is hereby incorporated herein by reference
and is on file in the City Clerk's office.



(2000 Code, § 9-76)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         51.   SOLID WASTE; REFUSE





         52.   GENERAL WATER PROVISIONS





         53.   SEWER USE PROVISIONS





         54.   EROSION PREVENTION; SEDIMENT CONTROL




CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Rates, Charges and Billing Procedure



   50.01   Consumer sewer rates



   50.02   Waterworks and sewer connection charges



   50.03   All customers metered; no free service



   50.04   Meters read monthly



   50.05   Meter deposits



   50.06   Multiple users



   50.07   Revision of rates



   50.08   Special rates



   50.09   Billing; disconnection/reconnection



   50.10   Deposit no excuse for delinquency



   50.11   Records and audits



RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE



§ 50.01  CONSUMER SEWER RATES.



   The sewer rates imposed as the rates to be charged to customers of the
water and sewer systems are adopted by ordinance and on file in the City
Clerk's office.



(2000 Code, § 13-156)



§ 50.02  WATERWORKS AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES.



   The water and sewer connection charges shall be in the amount adopted
by ordinance and which is on file in the City Clerk's office.



(2000 Code, § 13-157)



§ 50.03  ALL CUSTOMERS METERED; NO FREE SERVICE.



   It shall be mandatory for all customers of the combined and
consolidated municipal water and sewer system to be metered. No one shall
receive or be entitled to free water or sewer service or to any like service
without paying the full rates herein specified.



(2000 Code, § 13-158)



§ 50.04  METERS READ MONTHLY.



   (A)   Water meters shall be read monthly commencing on the fifteenth
day of each calendar month or as soon thereafter as weather and other
conditions and circumstances may reasonably permit, and the readings shall
continue as expeditiously as possible until all of the meters have been read.



   (B)   If, upon the occasion of a monthly meter reading, it is found
that the meter of a customer is defective or non-operative, the water and/or
sewer bill shall be computed on the basis of the average monthly water
consumption of the customer shown by the three preceding monthly meter
readings, provided that if no readings are then available, the applicable
water and/or sewer bill may be computed on the basis of an estimate of water
consumption, estimated by the Superintendent of the waterworks system,
subject to adjustment upward or downward according to the average of the next
three succeeding monthly meter readings.



(2000 Code, § 13-159)



§ 50.05  METER DEPOSITS.



   A reasonable meter deposit may be required in addition to the
connection charges required by this subchapter. The meter deposit will be
made by the customer with the city before the customer shall be entitled to
service and shall be in an amount and under terms and conditions as shall be
on file in the City Clerk's office. The deposit, less any unpaid charges,
shall be refunded to the customer, his or her heirs or assigns, whenever the
customer notifies the city legally to disconnect or terminate the service to
the customer. No separate deposits shall be required for the sewer service.



(2000 Code, § 13-160)



§ 50.06  MULTIPLE USERS.



   Where two or more tenants or occupants of different rental units of
property are served by a single water meter, the water and sewer usage
charges shall be the personal obligation, collectible by law, of the person
who applied for the service, and where applicable, made the required deposit.



(2000 Code, § 13-161)



§ 50.07  REVISION OF RATES.



   The schedule of rates and charges shall be revised from time to time,
and whenever required, shall be increased so as to produce income and
revenues from the combined and consolidated municipal waterworks and sewer
system, adequate to comply with the covenants and agreements as may be made
by the city in connection with the financing of the construction of the
extensions, additions and improvements to the system.



(2000 Code, § 13-162)



§ 50.08  SPECIAL RATES.



   In the event that the sewage, water or other liquid wastes being
discharged into the municipal sewer system from any premises shall contain
unduly high concentrates of any substances which add to the operating costs
of the municipal sewer system, special rates, rentals or charges may be
established, charged and collected as to the buildings or premises, or the
owner or other interested party may be required to specially treat the
sewage, water or other liquid wastes before it is discharged into the
municipal sewer system.



(2000 Code, § 13-163)



§ 50.09  BILLING; DISCONNECTION/RECONNECTION.



   (A)   The rates or charges provided in this subchapter shall be
billed monthly on or about the first of each month. All bills for the service
shall be considered due and payable ten days after rendition. Unpaid bills
shall be subject to penalties as provided by the Water and Sewer Commission,
which shall also adopt reasonable provisions providing for the disconnection
of water service and for the reconnection of the service.



(2000 Code, § 13-164)



   (B)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city's form for application
for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:



      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the bill; and



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or
in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of
utility billing.  This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a
final determination of the customer's complaint.



   (C)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



   (D)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a
turn-on charge in the sum of $20.



§ 50.10  DEPOSIT NO EXCUSE FOR DELINQUENCY.



   The penalty provisions of this subchapter for late or nonpayment of
bills are intended to and shall apply regardless of the availability of any
initial meter deposit.



(2000 Code, § 13-165)



§ 50.11  RECORDS AND AUDITS.



   (A)   The rates, rentals and charges for the use of the services
rendered by the combined and consolidated municipal water and sewer system
shall be billed and collected by the city.



   (B)   The full amount of the proceeds for the service shall be
deposited as received and set aside into the designated water and sewer
revenue fund, in a manner as the Superintendent of the system may require,
but subject to any different designation which may be made in any ordinance
relating to the issuance of revenue bonds.



   (C)   The records of the city with respect to charging, billing,
collecting and accounting for water and sewer service shall be audited at
least once each 12 months by an independent certified public accountant, and
a report thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk, or the report shall be
filed in a manner and at some other time or times as may be provided in any
ordinance relating to the issuance of revenue bonds. The cost of the audit
shall be classified and paid as an expense of operation and maintenance of
the system.



(2000 Code, § 13-166)



CHAPTER 51:  SOLID WASTE; REFUSE



Section



Generally



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Collection and disposal compulsory



   51.03   Prohibited disposal practices



   51.04   Containers



   51.05   Preparation of garbage for collection



   51.06   Weekly disposal required; matter not collectable by city



   51.07   Collection from residences



   51.08   Commercial or industrial establishments



   51.09   Rubbish and trash removal



   51.10   Vehicles used for garbage or waste collection



   51.11   Vehicles transporting garbage to be covered; how



   51.12   Private garbage collection prohibited



Businesses Collecting Garbage and Refuse



   51.25   License required; proof of existing agreement



   51.26   Vehicles required to carry copy of license



Rates and Charges



   51.40   Fees for collection of garbage from residences



   51.41   Collection of garbage from commercial buildings and
industrial sites



   51.42   Billing



   51.43   Removal of service fees from vacant residences and the like



   51.44   Application of money collected



   51.45   Use of approved landfill



Weeds; Accumulation of Rubbish



   51.55   Duty of property owner



   51.56   Notice to remedy situation; liens



 



   51.99   Penalty



GENERALLY



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BAGS.  Plastic sacks designed for refuse with sufficient wall strength
to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top or scavenged by small
animals (dogs, cats, raccoons and the like); securely tied at the top for
collection, with a capacity not to exceed 30 gallons and a loaded weight not
to exceed 50 pounds.



   BULKY WASTE.  A large appliance, piece of furniture or waste material
from a residential source other than construction debris or hazardous waste,
with a weight or volume greater than that allowed for containers or bundles
yet small and lightweight enough that two men can load it into a truck.



   BUNDLE.  Yard and garden trimmings or newspapers and magazines
securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding 40
inches in length, 30 inches in diameter or 50 pounds in weight.



   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE.  All types of solid waste generated by stores,
offices, restaurants, warehouses and other service and non-manufacturing
activities, excluding household and industrial solid waste. For the purposes
of this contract, asbestos and petroleum contaminated soils are excluded from
the definition of COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. Construction and demolition debris
waste and solid waste generated by institutions such as schools, churches,
universities and hospitals are included in the definition of COMMERCIAL SOLID
WASTE. The city reserves the right to classify apartments of three or more
units as COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE sources whereby the contractor would be
responsible for the collection and disposal of their commercial solid waste
as per the terms of this contract.



   GARBAGE, OFFAL or OTHER REFUSE MATTER.  Every accumulation of animal,
vegetable and other matter that attends or is incident to the preparation,
consumption, decay or dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds,
fruits, vegetables and all other forms of food, and includes WET GARBAGE, but
does not include WASTE MATTER as herein defined.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE and HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Hazardous waste and/or
materials as defined by the state and/or federal department of natural
resources and environmental protection or other governmental agency vested
with responsibility of environmental protection.



   HOUSEHOLD (RESIDENTIAL) SOLID WASTE.  Solid waste including garbage
and trash generated by single- and multiple-family residences.



   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE.  All types of solid waste generated by
manufacturing activities, excluding household and commercial solid waste.



   OFFAL.  See GARBAGE, OFFAL OR OTHER REFUSE MATTER.



   REFUSE MATTER.  See GARBAGE, OFFAL AND OTHER REFUSE MATTER.



   RUBBISH and TRASH.  Leaves, grass cuttings, wood chips, shavings,
sawdust, woodenware, paper, cardboard, straw, discarded clothing and all
other combustible matter not included in this chapter under the terms
GARBAGE, OFFAL AND OTHER REFUSE MATTER.



   WASTE MATTER.  Natural soil, earth, sand, clay, gravel, manure,
stones, bricks, brickbats, plaster, Portland cement, crockery, greenware,
glass, glassware, ashes, cinders, shells, metals and all other noncombustible
materials.



   WET GARBAGE.  Kitchen and table refuse and offal, swill and every
accumulation of animal, vegetable and other matter that attends or is
incident to the preparation, consumption, decay or dealing in storage of
meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, vegetables or other food.



(2000 Code, § 11-1)



§ 51.02  COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL COMPULSORY.



   The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, offal, refuse,
rubbish, waste matter and commercial or industrial garbage or waste is hereby
declared to be compulsory and universal within the corporate limits of the
city and shall be regulated by the terms of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 11-26)



§ 51.03  PROHIBITED DISPOSAL PRACTICES.



   (A)   The following practices are hereby prohibited and violators
shall on conviction, be punishable as provided in § 51.99. Each violation
shall continue shall be considered a separate offense.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to do any of the following:



      (1)   Throw or deposit any garbage, rubbish or waste matter,
or to cause the same to be thrown or deposited, on or in any street, alley,
vacant lot or yard;



      (2)   Keep, place or deposit garbage or waste on any private
grounds or premises whatsoever, except in cans or receptacles as designated
in this chapter;



      (3)   Store or keep any garbage, rubbish or waste matter where
rodents, flies or insects can have access thereto or feed thereon;



      (4)   Sell or dispose of wet garbage. All wet garbage must be
delivered to the city, its agents or contractors, for removal and disposal;



      (5)   Bury any such garbage or waste matter at any place
within the corporate limits of the city, except as specifically authorized by
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky or the public health officer;



      (6)   Deposit any rubbish or waste matter in or on any vacant
lot, yard, street, alley, gutter, highway, park or other public place within
the city, except building materials and related supplies in use for
construction by virtue of an authorized current building permit;



      (7)   Burn any garbage or refuse, waste paper, boxes, rubbish
or debris except that the materials may be burned in a furnace or private
incinerator, or pursuant to a permit issued by and under the supervision of
the Chief of the Fire Department, nor shall any person collect, remove or
dispose of same except as provided in this chapter;



      (8)   Deposit or cause to be deposited in any manner garbage
or rubbish or any other waste matter into the sewer system of the city;



      (9)   The owner or operator of any truck or other vehicle
carrying manure, swill, garbage, offal, rubbish or other noxious, offensive
or dangerous substance or the contents of any privy vault, cesspool or sink
to allow the scattering, spilling or leakage of the contents thereof on any
street or other public way; or in any yard, driveway or within any premises,
whether public or private; or to allow the vehicle to stand or remain near
any building, place of business or residence; or to unreasonably delay the
time of loading or unloading or in passing along any street or through any
inhabited place; or connection therewith to be kept in an unsanitary or
unwholesome condition or to be stored in any place where needless offense is
caused to any person;



      (10)   Engage in the collection, hauling or transportation of
any garbage or other similar waste or refuse for hire, except by the city or
its authorized agent. This is not intended to preclude the hauling for hire
of commercial garbage or waste or of any private or commercial rubbish or
waste matter or hazardous waste or materials, as defined in § 51.01 above,
or of cesspool or privy contents, or of any waste building or construction
materials left over from construction or demolition of any building, which is
the specific duty of the owner, operator, contractor or his or her agent;
and/or



      (11)   Keep or allow to accumulate for more than one week any
kind of putrescible garbage or waste material.



(2000 Code, § 11-27)



§ 51.04  CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant of any private dwelling, boarding house, apartment house or other
building or structure; and of every other person generating or having
garbage, to provide, without expense to the city, appropriate and sufficient
water tight containers or receptacles with appropriate bails or handles and
tight fitting covers, for the purpose of receiving and holding, without
leakage or escape of odors, all the garbage which shall ordinarily accumulate
on the premises in one week. The receptacles shall have a capacity of not
less than 20 gallons nor more than 30 gallons, or to be a dolly type
container approved by the city or its agent.



   (B)   Residential garbage containers may be placed for collection on
the curb in front of the residence house not more than 18 hours before the
time prescribed by the city for collection in the respective neighborhoods.
Containers for residential collection may be left on the curb overnight but
must be removed as soon as possible after collection. In no event shall
containers be left in a path or route regularly traveled by pedestrians or
vehicles including mail carriers.



   (C)   Commercial and/or industrial garbage containers shall be
"dumpsters" or like containers (to be approved by the city or its agent) and
shall be provided without expense to the city by the customer.



   (D)   Commercial and/or industrial users of the service shall place
the garbage receptacle or receptacles at locations on the user's property
with easy access to the garbage vehicles. The city or its agent shall have
the approval right of the site selected.



(2000 Code, § 11-28)



§ 51.05  PREPARATION OF GARBAGE FOR COLLECTION.



   Garbage shall be drained and deposited in bags before being placed in
the container in order that the garbage shall neither emit nor give off
offensive odors in warm weather nor freeze and adhere to the can in cold
weather.



(2000 Code, § 11-29)



§ 51.06  WEEKLY DISPOSAL REQUIRED; MATTER NOT COLLECTABLE BY CITY.



   All householders, firms and corporations producing garbage, offal,
refuse or any form or kind of putrescible waste, are required to remove the
waste from their premises and make legal disposition of the waste at least
once each week in order that the materials may not be permitted to accumulate
and provide a menace to public health. It shall be the responsibility of the
householder to remove and have hauled away all discarded items and waste
matter not provided for removal by this chapter, including, but not limited
to, building materials, hazardous waste and hazardous materials.



(2000 Code, § 11-30)



§ 51.07  COLLECTION FROM RESIDENCES.



   The city, or its designated agent, shall collect from households at
least once each week and at any other and additional times as designated by
the City Clerk, or his or her designee, as the necessity of each particular
case shall require garbage, offal and refuse, as defined in § 51.01 above,
and as provided in other sections of this chapter relating to containers,
preparation and the like.



(2000 Code, § 11-31)



§ 51.08  COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.



   Garbage, offal, refuse, rubbish, trash or any other and all commercial
garbage or waste, as defined in § 51.01 above, shall be collected by the
city or its agent at a negotiated interval, not less than weekly, at
negotiated rates for hauling and disposal.



(2000 Code, § 11-32)



§ 51.09  RUBBISH AND TRASH REMOVAL.



   (A)   The city, or its agent, shall provide a pickup service for the
removal of trash and rubbish, as defined in § 51.01 above, from households,
on the regularly scheduled collection day.



   (B)   Items to be collected must be placed in boxes or containers
sturdy enough to be handled by the collector, the total loaded weight of each
container not to exceed 50 pounds per carton.



   (C)   Tree limbs, not exceeding three feet in length and one inch in
diameter, must be tied in bundles which can be readily handled and loaded by
one person.



   (D)   The city reserves the right to handle only those items that
conform to this chapter or that may be allowed for disposal in a permitted
landfill. Any material that does not conform to these regulations shall
become the responsibility of residents to properly dispose of as authorized
herein.



(2000 Code, § 11-33)



§ 51.10  VEHICLES USED FOR GARBAGE OR WASTE COLLECTION.



   (A)   All trucks or other conveyances used and employed in the
collection and transportation of garbage, offal and any and all other refuse
and waste matter, whether from households, businesses or industrial
establishments, shall be of the latest design for that purpose, with
automatic dump, watertight and the bodies thereof shall be composed entirely
of iron or steel, with tight covers or lids of the same material, so as to
effectively prevent the scattering, spilling or leakage of the contents.



   (B)   Each vehicle shall bear a number plainly and visibly painted
on both sides thereof.



      (1)   The vehicles shall not be filled or loaded above the
level of the upper edge or top of the vehicle and the vehicles shall be kept
securely covered while in transit.



      (2)   The vehicles shall be daily washed, cleaned and
deodorized by the owner, its or his or her agents and employees, and shall at
all times be subject to inspection and approval of the public health officer.



   (C)   (1)   No truck or other vehicle used for carrying manure,
swill, garbage, offal, rubbish or any other noxious, offensive or dangerous
substances or the contents of any privy vault, cesspool or sink shall,
without necessity therefor, be allowed to stand or remain near any building,
place of business, residence or other premises where any person or persons
may be or reside.



      (2)   No truck or vehicle shall be permitted to unreasonably
delay the time of loading or unloading or in passing along any street or
through any inhabited place or grounds.



   (D)   All trucks or vehicles, and all implements used in connection
therewith, must be kept in a wholesome and sanitary condition and, when not
in use, shall be stored and kept in a place where no needless offense shall
be given to any person.



(2000 Code, § 11-34)



§ 51.11  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING GARBAGE TO BE COVERED; HOW.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every self-propelled vehicle which is designed
for use upon a highway including trailers designed for use with those
vehicles, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained
from overhead wires but not operated upon rails.



   (B)   Any motor vehicle operated within the corporate limits of the
city to transport garbage, swill, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, trees or
parts thereof, brush, coal, slag, silt, sand, gravel, coke, rock, trash,
litter, debris or refuse of any kind whatsoever shall be fully enclosed or
covered by a tarpaulin or other suitable material so as to prevent the
materials being transported from being deposited, in the course of
transporting, upon the streets, sidewalks, passways or upon any public or
private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof,
or in or upon any private property which the public is admitted by easement
or license, or upon any private property, or in or upon any public park or
other public property.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require or to
place any owner or operator of a motor vehicle in a position of danger; and,
therefore, any motor vehicle carrying materials, which are combustible and
present a clear and present danger of inflaming the cover required by this
section, are hereby exempt from the provisions contained herein.



(2000 Code, § 11-35)



§ 51.12  PRIVATE GARBAGE COLLECTION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation, other than the city or its agents,
shall engage in the collection, transportation and disposal of garbage and
other solid waste materials within the corporate boundaries of the city.



(2000 Code, § 11-36)  Penalty, see § 51.99



BUSINESSES COLLECTING GARBAGE AND REFUSE



§ 51.25  LICENSE REQUIRED; PROOF OF EXISTING AGREEMENT.



   (A)   At the time a business engaged in collection of garbage,
refuse and solid waste (including septic tank waste) within the city applies
for a business privilege license with the city that business must provide
proof of an existing agreement with a licensed solid waste landfill
permitting the waste, refuse or garbage collection within the city can be
disposed at the landfill.



   (B)   At any time the City Clerk, license administrator or police
officer may require a representative or employee of those businesses to
produce the proof of existence of the authority to dispose of waste. Failure
to produce the proof of authority within three days shall result in a
misdemeanor offense.



(2000 Code, § 11-51)



§ 51.26  VEHICLES REQUIRED TO CARRY COPY OF LICENSE.



   A valid copy of the city business privilege license shall be carried in
all vehicles engaged in the collection of garbage, refuse and solid waste
(including septic tank waste) and shall be shown on demand when made by the
City Clerk, license administrator or police officer.



(2000 Code, § 11-52)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.40  FEES FOR COLLECTION OF GARBAGE FROM RESIDENCES.



   (A)   The City Council shall have exclusive right to determine rates
for garbage collection service.



   (B)   The rates may be changed, altered or modified from time to
time and at any time depending upon the city's overall expense in maintaining
the garbage collection service, its obligations in closure of the existing
landfill operation and the general governmental requirements of the city.



   (C)   The minimum residential rates shall be as follows:



      (1)   Weekly pickup, limit four 20- to 30-gallon containers:
$12 per month; and



      (2)   Each additional container: $2.



(2000 Code, § 11-76)  (Ord. 15-05, passed - -)



§ 51.41  COLLECTION OF GARBAGE FROM COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS AND INDUSTRIAL
SITES.



   The monthly garbage collection service fee applicable to commercial
buildings and industrial sites shall be as follows:



   (A)   Weekly pickup, limit four 20- to 30-gallon containers: $25 per
month;



   (B)   Each additional container: $2;



   (C)   Front-loader type containers (two cubic yard dumpsters):



      (1)   Per pickup, per dumpster: $7.50, plus $5 per pickup of
one or more dumpsters; and



      (2)   Any business using less than four 20- to 30-gallon
containers per week and not more than one pick-up per week and not using
dumpsters and on city water shall be billed through the water bill on the
same terms and at the same rates as residential customers.



(2000 Code, § 11-77)  (Ord. 15-05, passed - -)



§ 51.42  BILLING.



   (A)   (1)   The applicable fee for garbage collection service
shall be billed as a separate item on the regular billing for water/sewer
service by the city municipal water and sewer system.



      (2)   The charge shall be payable at the collections office of
the city municipal water and sewer system in the same manner and within the
same penalty-free period as required for payment of charges for water and
sewer service.



   (B)   The utilities customer in whose name the water meter account
is carried shall be held responsible for payment of the full amount of the
garbage collection service charges billed.



   (C)   In instances where it is not feasible or possible to utilize
the utility bills for notifying garbage service customers of service charges
payable, separate bills may be issued and shall be payable within ten days
after the date of rendering.



(2000 Code, § 11-78)



§ 51.43  REMOVAL OF SERVICE FEES FROM VACANT RESIDENCES AND THE LIKE.



   The City Clerk or his or her designee shall be responsible for removing
garbage service fees from vacant residences or those billed by mistake.



(2000 Code, § 11-79)



§ 51.44  APPLICATION OF MONEY COLLECTED.



   All monies derived from the administration and enforcement of this
chapter shall be used by the city for providing the garbage collection
service, meeting its obligations in the closure of the city's landfill
operation and general governmental operations.



(2000 Code, § 11-80)



§ 51.45  USE OF APPROVED LANDFILL.



   The city or its agent shall use the disposal facilities of HSI pursuant
to a contract between the city and HSI dated June 15, 1992; the obligation to
HSI shall terminate in accordance with the contract.



(2000 Code, § 11-81)



WEEDS; ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH



§ 51.55  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person having
control or management of any land within the city to permit a public
nuisance, health hazard or source of filth to develop on the land through the
accumulation of rubbish or the excessive growth thereon of weeds, like
vegetation or grass.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person having
control or management of any land within the city and the persons are
required to maintain the land so as to prevent the accumulation of rubbish
and to cut or otherwise remove the growth of weeds, like vegetation or so
that the public nuisance, health hazard or source of filth shall not exist.



(2000 Code, § 11-100)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.56  NOTICE TO REMEDY SITUATION; LIENS.



   (A)   Should it be discovered that, by reason of accumulation of
rubbish or the excessive growth on land within the city of weeds, like
vegetation or grass, that a public nuisance, health hazard or source of filth
has developed on the land, the City Clerk or his or her designee shall give
five days' written notice to the owner, occupant or person having control to
remedy the situation.



   (B)   If the city intends to claim a lien against the property, the
notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner of the property
as the address appears on the current tax assessment roll of the city. On the
failure of the owner, occupant or person having control of the land to
comply, the City Clerk or his or her designee is authorized to send employees
of the city on the property to remedy the situation.



   (C)   The city shall have a lien against the property for the
reasonable value of labor and materials used in remedying the situation. The
affidavit of the City Clerk or his or her designee shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of the
proceedings pursuant to this subchapter and shall be recorded in the office
of the County Court Clerk in the county where that property is located. The
lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, shall
bear interest at 6% per annum from the time of recording until paid, and may
be foreclosed by appropriate action in the circuit court of the county in
which the property is located.



(2000 Code, § 11-101)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $300, or by imprisonment, in the discretion of the court or jury
trying the case.



   (B)   Any person, association or corporation found to be in
violation of § 51.12 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less
than $25 nor more than $300.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of §§
51.25 and 51.26 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
by a fine in any sum not less than $25 nor more than$100 per violation in the
discretion of the court or jury trying the case. Each day shall be considered
a separate violation.



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of § 51.56 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine in any sum not less than $25 nor more than $100, in the
discretion of the court or jury trying the case. Each day's violation, after
the effective date of the written notice, shall be deemed a separate offense.



(2000 Code, § 11-2)



CHAPTER 52:  GENERAL WATER PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   52.01   Addition of fluoride



   52.02   Installation of water flow detection devices required;
sprinkler systems



Cross-Connections



   52.15   Title



   52.16   Purpose and authority



   52.17   Definitions



   52.18   Requirements



Water Shortage Response



   52.30   Purpose



   52.31   Definitions



   52.32   Declaration of water shortage advisory



   52.33   Declaration of a water shortage alert



   52.34   Declaration of a water shortage emergency



   52.35   Shortage water rates



   52.36   Regulations



   52.37   Effective period



 



   52.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  ADDITION OF FLUORIDE.



   The Water and Sewer Commission shall have permission to add fluoride to
the water supply of the city, subject to the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health.



(2000 Code, § 13-66)



§ 52.02  INSTALLATION OF WATER FLOW DETECTION DEVICES REQUIRED; SPRINKLER
SYSTEMS.



   Water flow detection devices shall be placed on all residential or
commercial sprinkler systems within the corporate limits of the city, which
are installed on or after the date of the adoption of this section. The
device shall be equipped with an alarm which is either water motor-operated
or electronically operated.



(Ord. 05-08, passed 9-19-2005)



CROSS-CONNECTIONS



§ 52.15  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Cross-Connection Ordinance".



(2000 Code, § 13-68)



§ 52.16  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to establish a program to
assure that the public water supply is protected from contamination due to
backflow or cross-connections. The city recognizes that contamination of the
public water supply presents an imminent health hazard to the residential and
nonresidential users of the public water system; the threat of significant
economic loss due to disrupted water service to the residential and
nonresidential water users and the potential liability to the city.



   (B)   It is the further purpose of this subchapter to meet the
requirements of 401 KAR 8:020 as enacted by the State Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Cabinet.



   (C)   This subchapter is enacted under the power vested in the city
by KRS 82.082 and pursuant to requirements of KRS 65.03.



(2000 Code, § 13-69)



§ 52.17  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR GAP.  The measured vertical distance from the lowest end of a
potable water outlet to the flood rim or line of the fixture or receptacle
into which it discharges. The minimum required AIR GAP shall be twice the
effective opening of the potable water outlet.



   APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY.  Any device that may be approved by the
cabinet in lieu of proper air gap separation.



   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY.  Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the city's public water supply. These auxiliary waters
may include water from any natural source such as a well, spring, river,
stream or body of water or any water or other substance of unknown or
questionable quality that may present a health or system hazard to the
potable public water supply.



   BACK PRESSURE.  The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water
supply system from any source other than the original water source.



   BACK SIPHONAGE.  The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from
any source other than the original water source, caused by the reduction of
pressure in the potable water supply system.



   BACKFLOW.  The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either
back pressure or back siphonage.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.  An assembly or means designed to
prevent backflow. A listing of acceptable backflow prevention assemblies and
degree of hazard is available in the State Plumbing Law, Regulations and Code.



   CONTAMINATION.  An impairment of the quality of the potable water
supply by any waste product, fluid, substance, compound or other material to
a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health
through poisoning or through the spread of disease.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.  Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems one of which contains
potable water and the other nonpotable water or substance of questionable
quality, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the
potable water system.



   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROLLED.  A connection between a potable water
system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention
assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously
afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.



   THERMAL EXPANSION TANK.  A device installed on the cold water supply
line near a water heater to compensate for the expansion of water within a
water system when the water is heated.



(2000 Code, § 13-70)



§ 52.18  REQUIREMENTS.



   The city shall provide protection to the public water system against
backflow by implementing the following requirements.



   (A)   Residential. Buildings used for habitation or occupancy shall
be considered as residential buildings. No water service connection to any
premises shall be installed or allowed to be installed by the city unless the
service connection is protected by a backflow prevention assembly.
Residential service connections shall be considered as low hazard
applications and all the connections shall have at a minimum a dual check
valve backflow preventer installed between the water meter and the residence.
The city may require additional or alternate backflow prevention assemblies
if the degree of hazard constitutes a higher level of protection for the
public water system.



   (B)   Nonresidential. No water service connection to any
nonresidential facility shall be installed or allowed to be installed by the
city unless the water service connection is protected by a backflow
prevention assembly. The type of protective device required shall be
determined at the time of installation of the service connection and shall be
commensurate with the degree of hazard at the point of the service
connection. At a minimum the service connection shall be installed with a
dual check valve backflow preventer. In the event activities occur within a
nonresidential facility change and create a higher degree of hazard, then the
backflow prevention assembly shall be replaced with an assembly which
provides acceptable protection.



   (C)   Inspections. The customer's water system shall be open for
inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city
to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary
hazards, including violation of this subchapter, exist. When such a condition
becomes known, the city shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the
premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer
has corrected the condition in conformance with the state and city statutes
relating to plumbing, water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuantly
thereto. Water service to any premises shall be discontinued if it is found
that a backflow prevention assembly required by this subchapter has been
removed, bypassed or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the
premises. Service will not be restored until the conditions or defects are
corrected.



   (D)   Existing service connections. All existing water service
connections which do not have backflow prevention assemblies or existing
water service connections which have less than the minimum required backflow
prevention assemblies, shall, except for the inspection requirements, be
excluded from the requirements of this subchapter so long as the city is
assured that the public water system is satisfactorily protected. Whenever
the existing service connection is moved or requires more than minimum
maintenance or when the city determines that a hazard to health exists, then
a backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this subchapter
shall be installed on the existing service connection. Periodically, the city
shall install or require to be installed backflow prevention assemblies on
existing unprotected water service connections until a time that all water
service connections within the public water system are equipped with backflow
prevention assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed
on existing service connections until after the property owner of the
residential or commercial property has been informed of the actual and
potential hazards that may be created as a result of the backflow assembly
installation. Notices provided to the property owners shall include the
following language as adopted in 815 KAR 20:120 § 2, item (6): When cross
connection control devices are properly installed, they create a closed water
system. A properly sized thermal expansion tank shall be installed in the
cold water supply located as near the water heater as possible.



(2000 Code, § 13-71)



WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE



§ 52.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the declaration of
official phases of water supply shortage situations and for the
implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures
throughout the city's water service area in the event a shortage is declared.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with common law
riparian or statutory water rights.



(2000 Code, § 13-72)



§ 52.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person using water from the city's water distribution
system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the case of bulk
sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.



   OTHER SOURCES OF WATER.  Water that has not been introduced by the
city into its water distribution system.



   RAW WATER SUPPLIES.  All water potentially available to persons in the
city and its service area.



   TREATED WATER.  Water that has been introduced by the city into its
water distribution system, including water offered for sale. Uses of TREATED
WATER are classified as follows:



      (1)   ESSENTIAL WATER USES (CLASS 1).  The following uses of
water, listed by site or user type, are essential:



         (a)   Domestic: water necessary to sustain human life
and the lives of domestic pets, and to maintain minimum standards of hygiene
and sanitation;



         (b)   Health care facilities: patient care and
rehabilitation, including related filling and operation of swimming pools;



         (c)   Water hauling: sales for domestic use where not
reasonably available elsewhere; and



         (d)   Public use: fighting fires, health and public
protection purposes, if specifically approved by health officials and the
appropriate municipal governing body.



      (2)   SOCIALLY OR ECONOMICALLY IMPORTANT USES OF WATER (CLASS
2). The following uses of water, listed by site or user type, are socially or
economically important:



         (a)   Domestic: personal, in-house water use including
kitchen, bathroom and laundry;



         (b)   Water-hauling: nondomestic, where other sources
are not reasonably available;



         (c)   Commercial and civic use: commercial car and truck
washes, laundromats, restaurants, clubs and eating places, schools, churches,
motels/hotels and similar commercial establishments;



         (d)   Outdoor noncommercial watering:



            1.   Minimal watering of vegetable gardens; and



            2.   Minimal watering of trees where necessary to
preserve them.



         (e)   Outdoor commercial or public watering: (using
conservation methods and when other sources of water are not available or
feasible to use):



            1.   Agricultural irrigation for the production of
food and fiber or the maintenance of livestock;



            2.   Watering by arboretums and public gardens of
national, state, regional or community significance where necessary to
preserve specimens;



            3.   Watering by commercial nurseries at a minimum
level necessary to maintain stock;



            4.   Watering at a minimum rate necessary to
establish or maintain vegetation or landscape plantings required pursuant to
law or regulation;



            5.   Watering of woody plants where necessary to
preserve them; and



            6.   Minimal watering of golf course greens.



         (f)   Recreational: operation of municipal swimming
pools and residential pools serving more than 25 dwelling units; and



         (g)   Air conditioning:



            1.   Refilling for startup at the beginning of the
cooling season;



            2.   Makeup of water during the cooling season; and



            3.   Refilling specifically approved by health
officials and the municipal governing body, where the system has been drained
for health protection or repair services.



      (3)   NON-ESSENTIAL USES OF WATER (CLASS 3). Any waste of
water, as defined herein, is non-essential. In addition, the following uses
of water, listed by site or user type, are non-essential:



         (a)   Public use:



            1.   Use of fire hydrants (excluding Class 1 and
Class 2 uses), including use of sprinkler caps, testing fire apparatus and
fire department drills; and



            2.   Flushing of sewers and hydrants except as
needed to ensure public health and safety as approved by health officials and
the municipal governing body.



         (b)   Commercial and civic use:



            1.   Serving water in restaurants, clubs or eating
places, except by customer request;



            2.   Failure to repair a controllable leak due to
defective plumbing; and



            3.   Increasing water levels in scenic and
recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required for
sustaining fish and wildlife.



         (c)   Ornamental purposes: fountains, reflecting pools
and artificial waterfalls;



         (d)   Outdoor watering:



            1.   Use of water for dirt control or compaction;



            2.   Watering of annual or non-woody plants,
lawns, parks, golf course fairways, playing fields and other recreational
areas, washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or
other hard-surface areas;



            3.   Washing down buildings or structures for
purposes other than immediate fire protection; and



            4.   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run
or accumulate in any gutter or street.



         (e)   Outdoor commercial or public watering:



            1.   Expanding nursery facilities, placing new
irrigated agricultural land in production, or planting of landscaping except
when required by a site design review process;



            2.   Use of water for dirt control or compaction;



            3.   Watering of lawns, parks, golf course
fairways, playing fields and other recreational areas;



            4.   Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surface areas;



            5.   Washing down buildings or structures for
purposes other than immediate fire protection; and



            6.   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run
or accumulate in any gutter or street.



         (f)   Recreational uses other than those specified as
Class 2: noncommercial washing of motor and other vehicles; and



         (g)   Air conditioning (see also Class 2 purposes):
refilling cooling towers after draining.



   WASTE OF WATER.  Includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch or other
surface drain; or



      (2)   Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to
defective plumbing.



   WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PHASES:



      (1)   ADVISORY.  Conditions exist which indicate the
potential of serious water supply shortages.



      (2)   ALERT.  Raw water supplies are consistently below
seasonal averages, and if they continue to decline, may not be adequate to
meet normal needs. If demands are higher than normal for a constant period of
time, supplies may not be adequate to meet normal needs.



      (3)   EMERGENCY.  Water supplies are below the level
necessary to meet normal needs and that serious shortages exist in the area.



(2000 Code, § 13-73)



§ 52.32  DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE ADVISORY.



   Whenever the Board of Commissioners of the city water system finds that
a potential shortage of raw water supplies is indicated, it shall be
empowered to declare by resolution that a water shortage advisory exists. The
General Manager or his or her designee shall, on a daily basis, monitor the
supply and demands upon that supply. In addition, the Mayor or his or her
designee is authorized to call upon all water customers in the city's service
area to employ voluntary water conservation measures to limit non-essential
(Class 3) water use and eliminate the waste of water. This resolution shall
be published in the local newspaper and may be publicized through the general
news media or any other appropriate method for making the resolutions public.



(2000 Code, § 13-74)



§ 52.33  DECLARATION OF A WATER SHORTAGE ALERT.



   Whenever the Board of Commissioners of the city water system finds raw
water supplies to be consistently below seasonal averages, and if they
continue to decline and may not be adequate to meet normal needs, it shall be
empowered to declare by resolution that a water shortage alert exists. The
city shall continue to encourage voluntary water conservation measures
defined under the advisory declaration, and further shall impose a ban on all
non-essential (Class 3) water uses for the duration of the shortage until it
is declared to have ended by resolution of the governing body. Declaration of
these resolutions shall follow the guidelines in § 52.32 above.



(2000 Code, § 13-75)



§ 52.34  DECLARATION OF A WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Board of Commissioners of the city water system finds that
raw water supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and
that serious shortages exist, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution
that a water shortage emergency exists. Essential uses (Class 1) shall be
identified, in specific, as targets for voluntary conservation initiatives.
Also, all socially or economically important uses (Class 2) shall be
restricted, and non-essential uses (Class 3) shall be banned. These
restrictions shall be considered ongoing until the emergency is ended by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Declaration of these resolutions
shall follow the guidelines in § 52.32 above.



(2000 Code, § 13-76)



§ 52.35  SHORTAGE WATER RATES.



   Upon the declaration of a water shortage as provided in §§ 52.32
through 52.34, the City Council shall have the power to adopt shortage water
rates, by ordinance, designed to conserve water supplies. Rates may provide
for, but not be limited to:



   (A)   Higher charges per unit for increasing usage (increasing block
rates);



   (B)   Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit
rate);



   (C)   Extra charges for use in excess of a specified level (excess
demand surcharge); or



   (D)   Discounts for conserving water beyond specified levels.



(2000 Code, § 13-77)



§ 52.36  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   During the effective period of any water supply shortage as
provided for in §§ 52.32 through 52.34, the Mayor is empowered to
promulgate regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
this subchapter, any water supply shortage resolution, or water shortage rate
ordinance.



   (B)   These regulations shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council at its next regular or emergency meeting.



(2000 Code, § 13-78)



§ 52.37  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   This subchapter will remain in effect until terminated by action of the
City Council.



(2000 Code, § 13-80)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 52.30 through
52.37, who fails to carry out the duties and responsibilities imposed by §§
52.30 through 52.37, or who impedes or interferes with any action undertaken
or ordered pursuant to §§ 52.30 through 52.37, shall be subject to the
following penalties.



      (1)   If the Mayor or other city official or officials charged
with implementation and enforcement of §§ 52.30 through 52.37 or a water
supply shortage resolution learns of any violation of §§ 52.30 through
52.37, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property
where the violation occurred. Notice shall also be sent by certified mail to
the customer of record and to any other person known to the city who is
responsible for the violation or its correction. The notice shall describe
the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately or
within a specified time as the city determines is reasonable under the
circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the city water system may
terminate water service to the customer subject to the following procedures:



         (a)   The city water system shall give the customer
notice by certified mail that, due to the violation, water services will be
discontinued within a specified time and that the customer will have the
opportunity to appeal the termination by requesting a hearing scheduled
before the Board of Commissioners or a city official designated as a hearing
officer by the Board;



         (b)   If a hearing is requested by the customer charged
with the violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard
before termination is ordered; and



         (c)   The Board of Commissioners or hearing officer
shall make findings of fact and order whether service should continue or be
terminated.



      (2)   A fee of $50 shall be paid to the city's municipal water
and sewer system for the reconnection of any water service terminated
pursuant to division (B)(1)(a) above. In the event of subsequent violations,
the reconnection fee shall be $200 for the second violation and $300 for each
additional violation.



      (3)   Any customer may also be charged with violation of §§
52.30 through 52.37 and prosecuted in Taylor County Circuit Court. Any person
so charged and found guilty in circuit court of violating the provisions of
§§ 52.30 through 52.37 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(2000 Code, § 13-79)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWER USE PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   53.001   Purpose and policy



   53.002   Definitions



   53.003   Abbreviations




Use of Public Sewers




   53.015   Mandatory sewer connection



   53.016   Previously developed areas and undeveloped areas within the
201 Planning Area



   53.017   Unlawful discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets



   53.018   Compliance with local, state, and Federal laws



   53.019   Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewer




Private Wastewater Disposal




   53.030   Public sewer not available



   53.031   Requirements for installation




Building Sewers and Connections




   53.045   Permits



   53.046   Prohibited connections



   53.047   Design and installations



   53.048   Inspection




Pollutant Discharge Limits




   53.060   General conditions - prohibited discharges



   53.061   Specific prohibited discharge standards



   53.062   General conditions - restricted discharges



   53.063   Restricted discharge standards



   53.064   Local limits



   53.065   Dilution of wastewater discharge



   53.066   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors



   53.067   Special industrial pretreatment requirements




Pretreatment Program Administration




   53.080   Wastewater discharges



   53.081   Industrial user discharge permits



   53.082   Permit modifications



   53.083   Permit conditions



   53.084   Alternative discharge limits



   53.085   Permit duration



   53.086   Permit transfer



   53.087   Permit appeals



   53.088   Compliance data reporting



   53.089   Periodic compliance reports



   53.090   Permit violations



   53.091   Monitoring



   53.092   Inspection and sampling



   53.093   Pretreatment



   53.094   Annual publication



   53.095   Significant non-compliance



   53.096   Confidential information



   53.097   Signatory requirements




Fees




   53.110   Purpose



   53.111   Charges and fees




Powers and Authority of Inspectors




   53.125   Right to enter premises



   53.126   Right to obtain information regarding discharge



   53.127   Access to easements



   53.128   Safety




Enforcement




   53.140   General



   53.141   Notification of violation



   53.142   Administrative orders



   53.143   Administrative fines



   53.144   Emergency suspensions



   53.145   Additional enforcement remedies



   53.146   Amnesty programs



   53.147   Mandatory inspections




Penalties




   53.160   Written notice



   53.161   Revocation of permit



   53.162   Liability



   53.163   Misrepresentation and/or falsifying of documents



   53.164   Destruction of POTW and legal action



   53.165   Legal action



   53.166   Injunctive relief



   53.167   Civil penalties



   53.168   Criminal prosecution



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City
of Campbellsville and enables the city to comply with all applicable state
and Federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general
pretreatment regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system inadequately
treated, into any waters of the commonwealth or otherwise be incompatible
with the system;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of all wastewater and
sludges from the municipal system;



      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the municipal wastewater system
among users;



      (5)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its KPDES
or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge permit conditions, including use
and disposal requirements and any other Federal or state environmental laws
to which the municipal wastewater system is subject.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contribution to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the Campbellsville
municipal wastewater system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW
Director/General Manager, or designee shall administer, implement and enforce
the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the
POTW Director/General Manager may be delegated by the POTW Director/General
Manager to other city personnel. By discharging wastewater into the municipal
wastewater system, all users located outside the city limits agree to comply
with the terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as any
permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.002  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following
terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:



   ACT or “THE ACT.” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Secretary of the Kentucky Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Cabinet or an authorized representative thereof.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. An authorized representative of a user may
be:



      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of
vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation;



      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;



      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. An
authorized representative of the city may be any person designated by the
city to act on its behalf.



   BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR). A report submitted by categorical
industrial users within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
standard which indicates the compliance status of the user with the
applicable categorical standard.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20° Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration in
milligrams per liter (mg/L).



   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the sanitary and/or industrial waste discharge from
inside the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet
outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called “house connection.”



   BUILDING SEWER PERMIT. As set forth in "Building Sewers and
Connections" (see § 53.045 et seq.).



   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.



   CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD). With chemical inhibition
of nitrification, the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at
20° Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration in milligrams per
liter (mg/L).



   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards which have been promulgated by EPA.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of
industrial users.



   CITY. The City of Campbellsville, Kentucky.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). Also known as the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, enacted by Pub. L. 92-500. October 18, 1972. 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.: as amended by Pub. L. 95-217. December 28,1977, Pub. L. 97-117,
December 29, 1981; Pub. L. 97-440, January 8, 1983, and Pub. L. 100-04,
February 4, 1987.



   COMBINED SEWER. Any conduit designed to carry both sanitary sewage and
storm water or surface water.



   COMBINED WASTESTREAM FORMULA (CWF). Procedure for calculating
alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities where a regulated
wastestream is combined with other non-regulated wastestreams prior to
treatment.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified
in the POTW’s NPDES/KPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such
pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants so as to ensure
compliance with the POTW’s NPDES/KPDES permit.



   CONCENTRATION-BASED LIMIT. A limit based on the relative strength of a
pollutant in a wastestream, usually expressed in mg/L.



   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The term CONTROL AUTHORITY shall refer to the city,
acting through the POTW Director/General Manager or designee.



   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   DAILY MAXIMUM. The maximum allowable value for any single observation
in a given day.



   DILUTE WASTESTREAM. Boiler blowdown, sanitary wastewater, noncontact
cooling water and certain process wastestreams that have been excluded from
regulation in categorical pretreatment standards because they contain none or
only trace amounts of the regulated pollutant.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   DISCHARGER. Any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a
public sewer.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water-carried wastes produced from
non-commercial or non-industrial activities and which result from normal
human living processes.



   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.



   EFFLUENT. The liquid overflow or discharge of any facility designed to
treat, convey or retain wastewater.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.



   EQUIPMENT. All movable, non-fixed items necessary to the wastewater
treatment process.



   FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
proportional to the flow of the wastestream at the time of sampling.



   FLOW WEIGHTED AVERAGING FORMULA (FWA). A procedure used to calculate
alternative limits for a categorical pretreatment standard where regulated
and nonregulated wastestreams combine after treatment, but prior to the
monitoring point



   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.



   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of
time not to exceed 15 minutes.



   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. All pollutants other than compatible pollutants
as defined herein.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act,
(33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into
the system).



   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU). A source of indirect discharge.



   INDUSTRIAL USER DISCHARGE PERMIT (IUDP). A permit issued to industrial
users which authorizes discharges to the public sewer as set forth in the
administration regulations found in §§ 53.045 et seq.  of this chapter.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial or commercial
processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.



   INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed so as to separate and
retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal wastes which
permits normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the sewer or
drainage system by gravity. Interceptor as defined herein is commonly
referred to as a grease, oil, or sand trap.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources.



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and



      (2)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTW’s NPDES/KPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder or under more stringent state or
local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the Solid
Waste Disposal Act as amended(SWDA), including the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), and including any administrative regulations contained
in a sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA as
amended, the Clean Air Act as amended, and the Toxic Substances Control Act
as amended.



   MAY. This is permissive (see “shall”).



   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.



   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The maximum allowable value for the average of all
observations obtained during one month.



   MULTI-UNIT SEWER CUSTOMER. A location served where there are two or
more residential units or apartments, two or more businesses in the same
building or complex or where there is any combination of business and
residence in the same building or complex.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act which applies
to a specific category of industrial users.



   NATIONAL (OR KENTUCKY) POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES/KPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33
U.S.C. 1332), or a permit issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky under this
authority and referred to as KPDES.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards which will
be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source shall be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of (B) or (C) above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.



   NINETY (90) DAY COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report submitted by a categorical
industrial user, within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical standards that documents and certifies the compliance
status of the user as described in 40 CFR 403.12(d) (1996).



   ORDINANCE. This chapter, unless otherwise specified.



   PASS THROUGH. A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated
adequately by the POTW, and therefore exits into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW NPDES/KPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).



   PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report on compliance status submitted by
significant industrial users to the control authority at least semiannually
as described in 40 CFR 403.12(e) (1996).



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estates, governmental
entity of any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context. This definition includes
all Federal, state, and local government entities.



   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions,
in grams, per liter of solution.



   pH VIOLATION. For any users that utilize a continuous pH monitoring
system to determine compliance with the pH limitations established under this
chapter, a violation of the pH limitations will be deemed to have occurred
where a continuous individual excursion from the range of pH limitations
exceeds 15 minutes, provided that the total time during which the pH values
are outside the required range of pH limitations does not exceed seven hours
and 26 minutes in any calendar month. For users that do not utilize a
continuous pH monitoring system to determine compliance with the pH
limitations established under this chapter, a violation of the pH limitations
will be deemed to have occurred where a grab sample of the final effluent
stream indicates that the pH of the wastewater sample was outside the pH
limitation range established under this chapter.



   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, medical wastes, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color CBOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



   POLLUTION. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.



   POTW DIRECTOR/GENERAL MANAGER. The person/persons designated by the
city to supervise the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this article or his duly authorized
representative.



   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.



   PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process change(s), or other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d).



   PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
city in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority
in accordance with 401 KAR 5:057.



   PRETREATMENT PROGRAM COORDINATOR. City personnel designated by POTW
Director/General Manager to implement and enforce the city’s approved
pretreatment program.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards and local limits.



   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production of
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product,
by-product, or waste product.



   PRODUCTION-BASED STANDARD. A discharge limitation expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant mass discharge rate per unit of production and is applied
directly to an industrial user’s manufacturing process.



   PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the
authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.(5), (1996).



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than half of an inch in
any dimension.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by
the City of Campbellsville. This definition includes any sewers that convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purpose of this chapter, POTW
shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city,
users of the city’s POTW.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or
public utility. In general, the public sewer shall include the main sewer in
the street and the service branch to the curb or property line, or a main
sewer on private property and the service branch to the extent of ownership
by public authority.



   REGULATED WASTESTREAM. An industrial process wastestream regulated by a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.



   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. Domestic or sanitary waste
shall mean the liquid or water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, and institutions as distinct from industrial sewage. The terms
SEWAGE and WASTEWATER are used interchangeably.



   SEWERAGE. Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying,
pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.



   SEWER USER CHARGES. A system of charges levied on users of a POTW for
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement of such works.



   SEWER SYSTEM OR WORKS. All facilities for collecting, transporting,
pumping, treatment and disposing of sewage and sludge, namely the sewerage
system and the POTW.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



   SHALL. Is mandatory (see “may”).



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).



      (1)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards;



      (2)   Any other industrial user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown water;



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the control authority on
the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW operation or for violating a pretreatment standard or
requirement



   SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or non-customary batch
discharge or any discharge of water or wastewater in which the concentration
of any given constituent or quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24 hour
concentration or flow rate during normal operation which adversely affects
the POTW.



   SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant (including biochemical oxygen demand) released
in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration which will cause interference
with the operation of the treatment works or which exceeds limits set forth
in the industry's discharge permit and which includes accidental spills.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). Definition set forth in
“Standard Industrial Classification Manual,” 1987, published by the
Executive Office of the President and the Office of Management Budget.



   SPILL PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN. Apian prepared by an industrial user
to minimize the likelihood of a spill and to expedite control and cleanup
activities should a spill occur.



   SPLIT SAMPLE. Portion of a collected sample given to the industry or to
another agency to verify or compare laboratory results.



   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the recent editions of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater,” published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, as specified at 40 CFR 136, (1996).



   STATE. Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED “STORM SEWER”). A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, surface water, or unpolluted water from any
source.



   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic sewer user
and debt service charges, for those users whose contributions contain
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5), Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(CBOD5), Total Suspended Solids (TSS), or Ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) in
concentrations which exceed limits specified herein for such pollutants.
Where authorized by this chapter, payment of a surcharge will authorize the
discharge of the referenced pollutants so long as the discharge does not
cause pass through or interference.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in standard
methods.



   TIME PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
with fixed volumes taken at specific time intervals.



   TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN. Written plan submitted by industrial
users as an alternative to TTO monitoring, which specifies the toxic organic
compounds used, the method of disposal used and procedures for assuring that
toxic organics do not routinely spill or leak into wastewater discharged to
the POTW.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of EPA under the
provisions of the Clean Water Act 307(a) or any amendments thereto.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the
treatment works effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.



   UNREGULATED WASTESTREAM. A wastestream that is not regulated by
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.



   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.



   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources,
treatment facilities and institutions, togetherwith any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed into the POTW.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, treat domestic and industrial wastes, and
dispose of the effluent.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment
plant” or “water pollution control plant” or “sewage treatment
plant.”



   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuous or intermittent.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and ail other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:



   ADMI.  American Dye Manufacturers Institute.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BMP.  Best management practices.



   BOD.  Biochemical oxygen demand.



   BPJ.  Best professional judgment.



   C.F.R.  Code of Federal Regulations.



   CBOD.  Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand.



   CIU.  Categorical industrial user.



   COD.  Chemical oxygen demand.



   CWA.  Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).



   CWF.  Combined wastestream formula.



   EPA.  Environmental Protection Agency.



   FWA.  Flow weighted average.



   FR.  Federal Register.



   gpd.  Gallons per day.



   IU.  Industrial user.



   IUDP.  Industrial user discharge permit.



   L.  Liter.



   mg.  Milligrams.



   mg/l.  Milligrams per liter.



   NPDES.  National pollutant discharge elimination system.



   KPDES.  Kentucky pollutant discharge elimination system.



   O&M.  Operation and maintenance.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works.



   RCRA.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



   SIC.  Standard Industrial Classification.



   SIU.  Significant industrial user.



   S.U.  Standard units.



   SWDA.  Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.



   TSS.  Total suspended solids.



   TTO.  Total toxic organics.



   USC.  United States Code.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 53.015  MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTION.



   (A)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within
the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the
city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after
date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within
100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater where public sanitary sewer service is available, as
defined in § 53.002, except as provided for in “Private Wastewater
Disposal” (see §§ 53.030 et seq.).



   (C)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made, at the property owner's expense, to the public system within 60 days in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with suitable material or salvaged and removed.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.016  PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED AREAS AND UNDEVELOPED AREAS WITHIN THE 201
PLANNING AREA.



   Properties located inside the 201 planning area are required to be
annexed to the City of Campbellsville in order to receive sewer service. In
addition, the city shall review plans submitted by the applicant to determine
potential impacts to the city’s existing collection system as well as the
most appropriate appurtenances needed to convey the discharge to the city’s
system before granting approval to accept the discharge. In addition, plans
for sewer lines and other appurtenances necessary to convey the discharge to
the point of connection to city service shall be made in accordance with §§
53.045 et seq. of this chapter and other appropriate written specifications,
and approved by the POTW Director/General Manager/City Engineer prior to
construction. Installations shall be inspected in accordance with §§ 53.045
et seq. of this chapter. All construction and maintenance costs associated
with conveying the discharge to the point of connection with city service
shall be borne by the contractor/developer/property owner. Properties located
outside the city limit which receive sewer service shall enter into an
extrajurisdictional agreement with the city before the service is connected.
All properties considered for annexation shall have approved sewer lines in
place or an enforceable commitment from the contractor/developer/property
owner to install such sewer lines on a schedule acceptable to the POTW
director/General Manager/City Engineer.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.017  UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWERS OR NATURAL OUTLETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited any pollutant in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the City of Campbellsville, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said City of Campbellsville except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or
storm sewer within the City of Campbellsville or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said city, any sanitary wastewater or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment or management has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this chapter. No provision of this chapter
shall be construed to relieve the owner of a discharge to any natural outlet
of the responsibility for complying with applicable state and Federal
regulations governing such discharge.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.018  COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL, STATE, AND FEDERAL LAWS.



   The discharge of any wastewater into the public sewer system by any
person is unlawful except in compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance, and any more stringent State or Federal standards promulgated
pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, the
Clean Water Act of 1977, and subsequent amendments, and 40 CFR 403.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.019  DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS INTO SEWER.



   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged,
through any leak, defect, or connection any unpolluted waters such as storm
water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any sanitary sewer,
building sewer, building drain or building plumbing. The POTW Director or his
representative shall have the right, at any time, to inspect the inside or
outside of buildings or smoke test for connections, leaks, or defects to
building sewers and require disconnection or repair of any pipes carrying
such water to the building sewer. No sanitary drain sump or sump pump
discharge by manual switch-over of discharge connection shall have a dual use
for removal of such water.



   (B)   The owners of any building sewers having such connections,
leaks, or defects shall bear all costs incidental to removal of such sources.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



§ 53.030  PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of “Use of Public Sewer” (§ 53.015 et seq.), the building
sewer shall be connected, until the public sewer is available, to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of Taylor County
Health Department and all applicable local and state regulations.



   (B)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.



   (C)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by applicable
local or state regulations.



   (D)   Holders of NPDES/KPDES permits may be excepted. Industries
with current NPDES/KPDES permits may discharge at permitted discharge points
provided they are in compliance with the issuing authority.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.031  REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all local or state regulations.



   (B)   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
local and state authorities.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 53.045  PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits
required:



         (a)   For residential; and



         (b)   For service to commercial and industrial
establishments.



      (2)   In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. Applicants for service
to commercial and industrial establishments shall be required to furnish
information about all waste producing activities, wastewater characteristics
and constituents. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the POTW Director/General Manager. Details regarding commercial and
industrial permits include, but are not limited to those required by this
chapter. Permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed.



   (B)   Users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
POTW. The POTW Director/General Manager may deny or condition the new
introduction or change in discharge based on the information submitted in the
notification or additional information as may be requested.



   (C)   No person(s) shall uncover, plug or make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining permission from the POTW Director/General
Manager.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.046  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement wall
seepage or floor seepage, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or
other surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
Any such connections which already exist on the effective date of this
chapter shall be completely and permanently disconnected within 60 days of
the effective date of this chapter. The owner(s) of any building sewers
having such connections, leaks or defects shall bear all costs incidental to
removal of such sources. Pipes, sumps, and pumps for such sources of ground
and surface water shall be separate from wastewater facilities. Removal of
such sources of water without presence of separate facilities shall be
evidence of drainage to public sanitary sewer. Connections shall be subject
to inspection by POTW Director/General Manager to determine compliance.
Inspections may be performed periodically at the discretion of the POTW
Director/General Manager or at time of connection/reconnection.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.047  DESIGN AND INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. The
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting
from any such single connection aforementioned.



   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. Permit and
inspection fees for new buildings using existing building sewers shall be the
same as for new building sewers. If additional sewer customers are added to
the old building sewers, additional sewer tap fees shall be charged
accordingly even though no new sewer tap is actually made into the city
system.



   (C)   Extension of customer service lines from any point on the
customer’s side of the tap for delivery of waste from any location other
than that of the customer in whose name the tap is registered shall not be
permitted.



   (D)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM A-74,
latest revision, PVC (polyvinyl-chloride) sewer pipe, ASTM D-3034, latest
revision, or ductile iron pipe, AWWA specification C-151 cement lined, and
shall meet requirements of state plumbing code. Joints shall be as set out
hereinafter. Any part of the building sewer that is located within five feet
of a water service pipe shall be constructed with cast iron soil pipe or
ductile iron pipe, unless the building sewer is at least one foot deeper in
the ground than the water service line. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron
pipe may be required by the city where the building sewer is exposed to
damage or stoppage by tree roots. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe
shall be used in filled or unstable ground, in areas where the cover over the
building sewer is less than three feet, or in areas where the sewer is
subject to vehicular or other external loads.



   (E)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the local and state building and plumbing codes and other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. Manholes are required at
commercial and industrial connections to the Campbellsville municipal sewer
system. The owner of the facility shall be responsible for all costs
associated with installation of the manhole(s). Specifications for manholes
may be obtained by contacting the POTW Director/General Manager.



   (F)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection to the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s)
shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Fees for
connection shall be as established by the city.



   (G)   The owner shall ensure that all excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the city.



   (H)   In all buildings in which any sanitary facility drain is too
low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by
such drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the same
building sewer. Drain pipe and sump for collection of such sanitary drainage
shall be above basement floor or in separately watertight or drained sump or
channel and must be inspected and approved by the POTW Director/General
Manager prior to connection to the system.



   (I)   The building sewer shall be connected into the public sewer at
the easement or property line. Where no property located service branch is
available, an authorized agent of the city shall cut a neat hole into the
main line of the public sewer and a suitable wye or tee saddle installed to
receive the building sewer. The invert of the building sewer at such point of
connection with a saddle shall be in the upper quadrant to the main line of
the public sewer. A neat workmanlike connection, not extending past the inner
surface of the public sewer, shall be made and the saddle made secure and
watertight by encasement in epoxy cement specially prepared for this purpose.
A wye and H bend fitting shall be installed at the property line between the
public sewer and the building sewer. This fitting shall serve the purpose of
a clean out and for applying the smoke test during inspection of the line.
After testing, a cast iron or ductile iron riser will be inserted in this
fitting and brought flush with the ground surface. A stopper or plug,
outfitted with a type joint applicable to the pipe used, shall seal this
riser against the intrusion of ground or surface water.



   (J)   All building sanitary sewer lines will be installed so as to
meet or exceed the most current revision of the State Plumbing Code.



   (K)   This section shall not affect sewers installed or approved in
accordance with the provisions of the prior version of the city’s sewer use
ordinance, which was originally adopted on October 5, 1983.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.048  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
POTW Director/General Manager when the building sewer is ready for connection
to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the POTW Director/General Manager or his representative. The connections
shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing.



   (B)   All building sewers shall be smoke tested through the wye
branch at the public sewer connection, with public sewer tightly plugged off,
after connections at both ends are made and after all pipe is properly bedded
and backfilled to top of pipe. At time of test, any openings into the
building drain inside the building shall be water trapped or plugged. Any
leakage of smoke from building sewer or building drain and plumbing shall be
located at test and repaired to stand repetition of smoke test without
leakage. Tests shall be performed at the expense of owner/contractor in the
presence of the POTW Director/General manager or their designee. When smoke
testing is completed, the temporary flow line plug shall be removed and a
permanent watertight plug shall be placed in branch of test wye-branch and
carefully backfilled by hand and tamped to at least six inches above the top
of the branch.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



POLLUTANT DISCHARGE LIMITS



§ 53.060  GENERAL CONDITIONS - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW,
directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes interference
or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the
POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.061  SPECIFIC PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   A user shall not contribute the following substances to the
POTW:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall the
wastewater exhibit a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C using
the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.



      (2)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0  S.U.
or higher than 11.0  S.U. or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the POTW.



      (3)   Any slug load of pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or concentration, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, that will cause interference
with the normal operation of the POTW.



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities (i.e.,
wood, glass, ashes, sand, cinders, unshredded garbage, paper products such as
cups, dishes, napkins and milk containers, etc.), but in no case solids
greater than one half inch in any dimension.



      (5)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.



      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the
POTW that will result in a treatment plant influent temperature which exceeds
40°C (104°F).



      (7)   Any pollutant(s) which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.



      (8)   Any substance which may cause the POTW effluent or any
other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scum, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no
case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.



      (9)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES/KPDES permit and/or sludge disposal system permit.



      (10)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through at the POTW.



      (11)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge
points designated by the POTW.



      (12)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed to KPDES permit limits by the treatment process, including, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently
imparts color to the treatment plant’s effluent.



      (13)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director/General Manager
in compliance with applicable state or Federal regulations.



      (14)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water,
noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the POTW Director/General Manager.



      (15)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the POTW Director/ General Manager in a wastewater discharge permit.



      (16)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as
may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director/General Manager.



      (17)   Wastewater identified as causing, alone or in
conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant effluent to fail a
toxicity test.



      (18)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.



      (19)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which will cause excessive foaming in the
municipal wastewater system.



      (20)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



   (B)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited
by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they
would be discharged to the municipal wastewater system in the event of a
spill or release. All floor drains located in process or materials storage
areas must be removed or discharged to the (industrial) user’s pretreatment
facility before connecting with the system. When the POTW Director/General
Manager determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW, any of the
above enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause or contribute to
interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW Director/General
Manager shall:



      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 53.088; and



      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§ 53.080
and 53.081 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass
through.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.062  GENERAL CONDITIONS - RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



   The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentration or quantities
which: will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will maintain and protect water quality in the receiving stream,
and will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. The POTW Director/General Manager may set additional limitations or
limitations more stringent than those established in the provisions below if
in his opinion more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of a discharge,
the POTW Director/General Manager shall give consideration to such factors as
the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment
process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.063  RESTRICTED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter (25
mg/L) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral
oil origin.



   (B)   Wastewater containing floatable oils, fat, or grease, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter (100 mg/L) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures 32
to 150°F (0 to 65°C).



   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to one half
inch in any dimension. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, motels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the
preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the
premises or when served by caterers.



   (D)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants which: injure
or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, causes the city to violate the terms of its KPDES permit,
prevents the use of acceptable sludge disposal methods, or exceed a
limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard.



   (E)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed to
the extent required by the city’s NPDES/KPDES permit.



   (F)   Any waste(s) or wastewater(s) classified as a hazardous waste
by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) without a 60 day prior
notification of such discharge to the POTW Director/General Manager. This
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous
waste number, type of discharge, volume/mass of discharge and time of
occurrence(s). The POTW Director/General Manager may prohibit or condition
the discharge(s) at any time.



   (G)   Any water or wastes which have characteristics based on a 24
hour composite sample, grab or a shorter period composite sample, if more
representative, that exceed the following normal maximum domestic wastewater
parameter concentrations:



      (1)   Parameter Max.         Allowable Monthly
Concentration Without Surcharges



         CBOD                        300 mg/L



         TSS                        300 mg/L



         NH3-N                        30 mg/L



      (2)   Any person discharging wastewater exceeding the maximum
allowable concentration as noted above, will be subject to a surcharge fee
for each pound loading over and above the set limit. Any other amenable
constituents requiring the addition of specific chemicals for proper
treatment will also be subject to surcharge as noted on the wastewater
discharge permit. Exceedance of the effluent limits specified above shall not
be deemed to constitute a violation of a permit condition or this chapter if
the appropriated surcharge fee is paid and the discharge does not cause
interference or pass through of the POTW.



   (H)   National categorical pretreatment standards. Users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable
standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N (1996) and
incorporated herein.



      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed
only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the POTW Director/General Manager may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c), (1996).



      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
POTW Director/General Manager shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e), (1996).



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.064  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   To implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions
listed in this chapter, industrial user local limits will be developed
ensuring that the POTW maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded
for particular pollutants of concern for each industrial user. All
significant industrial users must comply with the following daily maximum
limitations where they are more stringent than applicable state and/or
Federal regulations:



 


Parameter

 

Maximum Daily Concentration mg/L





Arsenic
 

0.10



Cadmium
 

0.0045



Chromium
 

1.35



Copper
 

0.140



Cyanide
 

0.040



Lead
 

0.024



Mercury
 

0.0005



Nickel
 

0.073



Silver
 

0.032



Zinc
 

1.27





 



   (B)   Industrial user local limits for appropriate pollutants of
concern shall be included in wastewater permits and are considered
pretreatment standards. The POTW Director/General Manager may impose mass
limits in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limits above.



      (1)   The City of Campbellsville reserves the right to
establish limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those
required by either state or Federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply
with the objectives presented in § 53.001 of this chapter or the general and
specific prohibitions in §§ 53.060 - 53.063.



      (2)   The city has received authority through the U.S. EPA and
state statutes to enforce the requirements of 40 CFR Subchapter N (1996), 40
CFR 403 (1996), and 40 CFR Part 35 (1996). All users shall comply with the
requirements of those regulations.



      (3)   Upon the promulgation of Federal categorical
pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the Federal
standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for
sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under this chapter.



      (4)   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall
apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal requirements and
limitations or those in this chapter.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.065  DILUTION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the Federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any pollutant specific
limitation developed by the city or state.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.066  GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner(s)
when, in the opinion of the POTW Director/General Manager, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptor shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the POTW Director/General Manager and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. A copy of
written specifications may be obtained by contacting the POTW
Director/General Manager. In the maintaining of these interceptors the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates, and means of disposal. The city may require that hauling of the
collected materials not performed by owner(s) personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms. Interceptors shall also comply with
applicable regulations of the County Health Department.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.067  SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided
or required for any waters or wastes, the industry shall be solely
responsible forthe continued maintenance in satisfactory and effective
operation of such facilities at their own expense.



   (B)   Any person who transports septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool
contents, liquid industrial waste or other batch liquid waste and wishes to
discharge such waste to the public sewer system shall first have a valid
discharge permit. Applications for waste hauler discharge permits may be
obtained from the POTW Director/General Manager. All applicants for a
discharge permit shall complete the application form, pay the appropriate
fee, and receive a copy of the city’s regulations governing discharge to
sewers of liquid wastes from trucks. All persons receiving such permits shall
agree, in writing, to abide by all applicable provisions of this chapter, and
any other special provisions that may be established by the city as necessary
for the proper operation and maintenance of the sewerage system.



   (C)   In addition any person holding a valid permit and wishing to
discharge to the wastewater treatment plant must submit to the POTW Director
or other POTW personnel a sample of each load prior to discharge. POTW
personnel may require proof of origin(s) of the hauled waste and analysis of
sample prior to discharge. Fee and payment schedule shall be established in
the permit to cover cost of the required analysis.



   (D)   It shall be illegal to discharge any batch liquid waste into
any manhole or other part of the public sewer system, or any building sewer
or other facility that discharges to the public sewer system, except at
designated points of discharge specified by the city for such purpose.



   (E)   Any liquid waste hauler illegally discharging to the public
sewer system or discharging wastewater not authorized in the permit shall be
subject to immediate revocation of discharge privileges and further subject
to the penalties and enforcement actions prescribed in §§ 53.160 et seq.
including fines and imprisonment.



   (F)   Waste haulers who have been granted permission to discharge to
the public sewer system shall pay fees for such discharge in accordance with
a fee schedule established by the POTW Director/General Manager and approved
by the city.



   (G)   Nothing in this chapter shall relieve waste haulers of the
responsibility for compliance with County Health Department, state, or
Federal regulations.



   (H)   Protection from accidental and slug discharges.



      (1)   (a)   Each significant industrial user shall provide
protection from accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials or
other substances regulated by this chapter which adversely affects the POTW.
Facilities to prevent accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost
and expense. Once every two years, the POTW Director/General Manager will
determine whether each industrial user needs to develop or update a plan to
control slug discharges. If the POTW Director/General Manager determines that
a slug control plan or revision is necessary, the plan shall contain the
following:



            1.   Description of discharge practices.



            2.   Description of stored chemicals.



            3.   Procedures for notifying the POTW.



            4.   Prevention procedures for spills.



         (b)   In the case of all possible or actual accidental
and/or slug discharges, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.



      (2)   Written notice. Within five days following an accidental
discharge, the user shall submit to the POTW Director/General Manager a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to betaken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish
kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may
be imposed by this subchapter, the enforcement response plan or other
applicable law.



      (3)   Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently
posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall
insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge
to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION



§ 53.080  WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any wastewater
except as authorized by the city in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Any agency, non-domestic user, and/or industry outside the
jurisdiction of the city that desires to contribute wastewater to the POTW
must execute (through an authorized representative) an
extra/inter-jurisdictional agreement, whereby the agency and/or industry
agrees to be regulated by all provisions of this ordinance and state and
Federal regulations. An industrial user discharge permit may then be issued
by the POTW Director/General Manager in accordance with § 53.081.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.081  INDUSTRIAL USER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect
to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain an industrial user discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW.



   (B)   Permit application. Users required to obtain an industrial
user discharge permit shall complete and file with the city, an application
in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by a permit fee. New
users snail apply at least 120 days prior to connecting to or contributing to
the POTW. Existing permit holder shall apply no later than 90 days prior to
expiration of permit. In support of the application, the user shall submit,
in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, and location of facility if different
from the address;



      (2)   Applicable SIC number(s) according to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, United States Bureau of the Budget, 1987;



      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as
determined by an analytical laboratory acceptable to the city; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136
(1996);



      (4)   Time and duration of contribution;



      (5)   Average daily and 30 minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation;



      (7)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
discharged;



      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by the city, state or Federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;



      (9)   If additional pretreatment will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest



schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standards;



      (10)   The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:



         (a)   The schedule must be acceptable to the city.



         (b)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress
in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards.



         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the POTW Director/General Manager including, as a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and,
if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress and the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return the construction to the schedule established.



      (11)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and the rate of production;



      (12)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (13)   Number of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;



      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed by the city to
be necessary to evaluate the permit application;



      (15)   A copy of the industry’s written environmental
control program, comparable document, or policy.



   (C)   Issuance. The city shall evaluate the data furnished by the
user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance
of the data furnished, the Pretreatment Program Coordinator or his designee
may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and
conditions provided herein.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.082  PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.



   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standards, the industrial wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standards within the time frame prescribed by such standards. Where a user,
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, has not previously
submitted an application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit as
required, the user shall apply for an industrial wastewater discharge permit
within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standards. In addition, the user with an existing industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall submit, to the Pretreatment Program
Coordinator within 90 days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal
categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by this chapter.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.083  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to
all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following:



   (A)   The unit surcharges or schedule of other charges and fees for
the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;



   (B)   Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics;



   (C)   Limits on average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



   (D)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities;



   (E)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling location; frequency of sampling; number, type and standards for
tests; and reporting schedule;



   (F)   Compliance schedules;



   (G)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;



   (H)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining, for a minimum of
three years, all plant records relating to pretreatment and/or wastewater
discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto;



   (I)   Requirements for notification of the city or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;



   (J)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;



   (K)   The permit may require the user to reimburse the city for all
expenses related to monitoring, sampling and testing performed at the
direction of the POTW Director/General Manager or designee and deemed
necessary by the city to verify that the user is in compliance with the said
permit; and



   (L)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.084  ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMITS.



   (A)   Where an effluent from a categorical industrial process(es) is
mixed priorto treatment with wastewater other than that generated by the
regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived for the
discharge permit by the Pretreatment Program Coordinator. These alternative
limits shall be applied to the mixed effluent and shall be calculated using
the combined wastestream formula and/or flow-weighted average formula as
defined in §§ 53.001 et seq.



   (B)   Where the effluent limits in a categorical pretreatment
standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutants per unit of
production (production-based standard), the Pretreatment Program Coordinator
may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or of effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent permit limitations applicable to the permittee. The
permittee shall be subject to all permit limits calculated in this manner and
must fully comply with these alternative limits.



   (C)   All categorical users subject to production-based standards
must report production rates annually so that alternative permit limits can
be calculated if necessary. The categorical user must notify the Pretreatment
Program Coordinator 30 days in advance of any major change in production
levels that will affect the limits for the discharge permit.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.085  PERMIT DURATION.



   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated
to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit.
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the
city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in §§ 53.060 et seq. are modified or other just cause exists.
The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in their permit at least
30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions
in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.086  PERMIT TRANSFER.



   Industrial user discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. An industrial user discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without a 30 day prior notification
to the Pretreatment Program Coordinator and provision of a copy of the
existing permit to the new owner. The Pretreatment Program Coordinator may
deny the transfer of the permit if it is deemed necessary.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.087  PERMIT APPEALS.



   The permittee may petition to appeal the terms of the industrial user
discharge permit within 30 days of the notice. Procedures for submittal of
such a written petition are outlined in the industrial user discharge permit.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.088  COMPLIANCE DATA REPORTING.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new user, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to Federal categorical pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit, to the Pretreatment Program Coordinator, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the
regulated process which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units
in the user’s facility which are limited by such categorical standards and
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, what additional pretreatment and time schedule is necessary to
bring the user into compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.089  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall submit, to the
Pretreatment Program Coordinator, every six months (on dates specified in the
industrial user discharge permit) unless required more frequently by the
permit, a report indicating, at a minimum, the nature and concentration, of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards
or discharge permit, in addition, this report shall include a record of all
daily flows which exceeded the average daily flow during the reporting
period. At the discretion of the Pretreatment Program Coordinator and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays,
budget cycles, etc., the Pretreatment Program Coordinator may agree to alter
the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.



   (B)   All analyses shall be performed by a laboratory acceptable to
the city. Analytical procedures shall be in accordance with procedures
established by the U.S. EPA Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the
Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 (1996) and 40 CFR 261 or with any other
test procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the U.S. EPA
Administrator.



   (C)   Where 40 CFR Part 136 (1996) does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant(s) in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication “Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants,” April 1977, or with any other sampling
and analytical procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator.



   (D)   A baseline monitoring report (BMR) must be submitted to the
Pretreatment Program Coordinator by all categorical industrial users at least
90 days prior to initiation of discharge to the sanitary sewer. A BMR may
also be required of non-categorical industrial users at the discretion of the
Pretreatment Program Coordinator where such information is beneficial to
establish appropriate permit conditions. The BMR must contain, at a minimum,
the following:



      (1)   Production data: a process description, SIC code number,
raw materials used, chemicals used, final product, pretreatment industrial
category (if applicable), and a schematic which indicates points of discharge
to the sewer system.



      (2)   Identifying information to include name, address of
facility, owner(s), contact person and any other permits held by the facility.



      (3)   Wastewater characteristics: total plant flow, types of
discharges, average and maximum flows from each process.



      (4)   Nature/concentration of pollutants: analytical results
for all pollutants regulated by this ordinance and/or any applicable federal
pretreatment standard and sample type and location. All analyses must conform
with 40 CFR, Part 136 (1996).



      (5)   Information concerning any pretreatment equipment used
to treat the facility's discharge.



   (E)   New sources shall give estimates of the information requested
in division (C) and (D) above, but at no time shall a new source commence
discharge(s) to the public sewer of substances that do not meet provisions of
this chapter. All new sources must be in compliance with all provisions of
this ordinance, state and Federal pretreatment regulations prior to
commencement of discharge to the public sewer.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.090  PERMIT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users must notify the POTW
Director/Pretreatment Program Coordinator within 24 hours of first becoming
aware of a permit violation. This notification shall include the date of
violation, the parameter violated and the amount in exceedance.



   (B)   The user shall immediately repeat the sampling and analysis of
the parameters) in question and submit the results to the Pretreatment
Program Coordinator within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
Exception to this regulation is only if the city performs the sampling within
the same time period for the same parameter(s) in question.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.091  MONITORING.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall require significant users to provide
and operate, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities and equipment
necessary to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building
sewer and/or internal drainage system. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the city may, when such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the
facility to be constructed in a public right-of-way. The Pretreatment Program
Coordinator shall review and approve the location, plans, and specifications
for such monitoring facilities and may require them to be constructed to
provide for the separate monitoring and sampling of industrial waste and
sanitary sewage flows.



      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility shall be designed and maintained in a manner such that
the safety of city and industrial personnel shall be foremost. The facility,
sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
approval of the location, plans and specifications.



   (B)   All sampling analyses done in accordance with approved Federal
EPA procedures by the industrial user during a reporting period shall be
submitted to the Pretreatment Program Coordinator regardless of whether or
not that analysis was required by the industrial user’s discharge permit.



   (C)   The industrial user must receive the approval of the
Pretreatment Program Coordinator before changing the sampling point and/or
monitoring facilities to be used in ail required sampling.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.092  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, copying records, records examination or in the
performance of any of their duties.



   (B)   The city, approval authority, and EPA shall have the right to
set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where
a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry onto their premises, the user shall
make the necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city. Approval
Authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes
of performing their specific responsibilities.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.093  PRETREATMENT.



   All significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this chapter and achieve compliance with
any applicable Federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time
limitations as specified by the Federal pretreatment regulations. The city
may require the development of a compliance schedule for installation of
pretreatment technology and/or equipment by any industrial user that cannot
meet discharge limits required by this chapter. Any facilities required to
pretreat wastewater to a level required by this chapter shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of
the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent that complies with the provisions of this
chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the
user's initiation of the changes.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.094  ANNUAL PUBLICATION.



   (A)   The city shall annually publish in its largest local newspaper
a list of significant users which were in significant noncompliance with any
pretreatment requirements or standards. The notification shall also summarize
any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months.



   (B)   All records relating to the city's pretreatment program shall
be made available to officials of the EPA or Approval Authority upon request.
All records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.095  SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.



   A user is defined as being in significant noncompliance when it commits
one or more of the following conditions:



   (A)   Causes imminent endangerment to human health or the
environment or results in the exercise of emergency authority;



   (B)   Involves failure to report noncompliance accurately. 



   (C)   Results in a chronic violation defined here as 66% or more of
all measurements taken during a six month period that exceed (by any
magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the monthly average limit for the same
pollutant parameter;



   (D)   Results in a technical review criteria (TRC) violation defined
here as 33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken
during a six month period that equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC =
1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, and oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);



   (E)   Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the
control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through or has endangered the health of the
POTW personnel or the public;



   (F)   Any discharge causing imminent endangerment to human
health/welfare or to the environment or resulting in the POTW use of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;



   (G)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, failure to
comply with schedule milestones for starting or completing construction or
attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date;



   (H)   Failure to provide required reports within 30 days of the due
date;



   (I)   Any violation or group of violations which the Control
Authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.096  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests in writing and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to
all governmental agencies for uses related to this ordinance, the NPDES/KPDES
permit, sludge disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs upon
request. Such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or
any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to
the public without restriction.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.097  SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.



   All applications, reports or information submitted to the city shall be
signed and certified.



   (A)   All permit applications shall be signed:



      (1)   For a corporation:



         (a)   By a responsible corporate officer such as a
president, vice president, secretary or treasurer or individuals who perform
a similar policy\decision making role for the corporation; or



         (b)   By the manager of a manufacturing, production or
operating facility employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million (in second quarter 1980 dollars)
if authority to sign documents has been delegated to this manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.



      (2)   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: by a general
partner or the proprietor, respectively.



   (B)   All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports
shall be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized
representative of that person. A person is a duly authorized representative
only if:



      (1)   The authorization is made in writing by a person
described above; and



      (2)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the o overall operation of the regulated
facility or activity, such as the position of Plant Manager, Superintendent
or position of equivalent responsibility.



   (C)   Certification. Any person signing a document under this
section shall make the following certification:



      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



FEES



§ 53.110  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter provides for the recovery of costs from users of the
POTW for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the city’s schedule of charges and
fees.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.111  CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   The city may adopt charges and fees which may include:



      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the city’s pretreatment program;



      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance
procedures;



      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;



      (4)   Fees for permit applications;



      (5)   Fees for filing appeals;



      (6)   Fees for consistent removal by the POTW of excessive
strength conventional pollutants;



      (7)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.



   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS



§ 53.125  RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.



   The POTW Director/General Manager and other duly promulgated employees
and representatives of the city and authorized representatives of applicable
Federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to
discharges to the public sewer system in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.126  RIGHT TO OBTAIN INFORMATION REGARDING DISCHARGE.



   The POTW Director/General Manager and other duly authorized employees
of the city and authorized representatives of applicable Federal and state
regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and identification are
authorized to obtain information including but not limited to copying of
records concerning character, strength and quantity of industrial wastes
which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
wastewater collection system.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.127  ACCESS TO EASEMENTS.



   Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purpose of, but not limited to, construction, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portions of the
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.128  SAFETY.



   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 53.127 above, all duly authorized employees of the city shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The
company shall be held blameless for injury or death to city employees. The
city shall secure the company against loss or damage to its property by city
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 53.140  GENERAL.



   The city, through the POTW Director/General Manager or his designee, to
insure compliance with this ordinance, and as permitted through 40 CFR
Subchapter N, and 401 KAR 5:057 (1995), may take the following enforcement
steps against users in noncompliance with the chapter. The remedies available
to the POTW include injunctive relief, civil and criminal penalties,
immediate discontinuance of discharges and/or water service and the
publishing of the list of significant violators annually. The enforcement
authority shall be vested in the POTW Director/General Manager or their
designee. The full scale of enforcement actions will be as detailed in the
enforcement response plan.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.141  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever the POTW Director/General Manager finds that any user has
violated or is violating this chapter, or a wastewater permit or order issued
hereunder, the POTW Director/General Manager or his agent may serve upon said
user written notice of the violation. Within ten days of the receipt date of
this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted to the POTW Director/General Manager. Submission of this
plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.142  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.



   (A)   Consent order. The POTW Director/General Manager is hereby
empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance,
or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user
responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action
to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and
effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to § 53.144, below.



   (B)   Show cause hearing. The POTW Director/General Manager may
order any user which causes or contributes to violation of this chapter or
wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show
cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of
the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any principal executive, general partner or corporate
officer. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate
enforcement action may be pursued.



   (C)   Compliance order. When the POTW Director/General Manager finds
that a user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or
order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer
service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices,
or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated.
Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably
necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and
management practices.



   (D)   Cease and desist order. When the POTW Director/General Manager
finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, the POTW Director/General Manager may issue
an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to:



      (1)   Comply forthwith; and



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and terminating the discharge.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.143  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   Nothwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user who is
found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or permits and orders
issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per
violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to
the user’s next scheduled sewer service charge and the POTW
Director/General Manager shall have such other collection remedies as he has
to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall
constitute a lien against the individual user’s property. Users desiring to
dispute such fines must file a written request for the POTW Director/General
Manager to reconsider the fine within ten days of being notified of the fine.
Where the POTW Director/General Manager believes, a request has merit, he
shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request
from the user.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.144  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The POTW Director/General Manager may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or an industrial user discharge permit when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate
any condition of its NPDES/KPDES permit.



   (B)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the industrial user discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as
deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The city shall reinstate the industrial user discharge Permit
and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days
of the date of occurrence.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.145  ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Performance bonds. The POTW Director/General Manager may
decline to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder
unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the
POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the POTW Director/General
Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.



   (B)   Liability insurance. The POTW Director/General Manager may
decline to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder,
unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances
sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.146  AMNESTY PROGRAMS.



   (A)   The POTW Director/General Manager may. from time to time,
notify the public of an amnesty program which shall be designed to discourage
users from continued violations of this chapter and which shall relieve any
offender from any penalties provided for herein if said offender discloses a
violation within the amnesty period and has it remedied.



   (B)   The POTW Director/General Manager may. as an incentive of
compliance with this chapter, offer to all users a credit of up to $200 to be
applied to the user’s sewer service charge if a user demonstrates that at
least that amount was expended by user to remedy any violation under this
chapter. In the case of a hardship of any user, the credit may be increased
up to a total of $500.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.147  MANDATORY INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon the transfer of property receiving service under this
chapter, the user shall have an inspector who has been approved by the POTW
Director/General Manager certify in writing that the property being
transferred has no connections which are in violation of this chapter. In the
event that no inspection is being required, the POTW Director/General Manager
shall cause said property to be inspected to determine whether the user is in
compliance with this chapter. Any Inspector who willfully fails to accurately
report a violation of this chapter may be subjected to a fine not to exceed
$500.



   (B)   In the event there is a change of user at any property, the
POTW Director/General Manager shall cause the property to be inspected by its
representative to insure compliance with this chapter; provided however, that
a property which has been inspected within six months would not be subject to
this requirement.



   (C)   In the event that a licensed plumber becomes aware of any
violation of this chapter, said plumber shall notify the POTW
Director/General Manager or its designee of such violation. Any plumber who
willfully fails to report a violation of this chapter may be subjected to a
fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



PENALTIES



§ 53.160  WRITTEN NOTICE.



   (A)   Any user found to be violating any provision of this chapter
or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, shall be served by the POTW
Director/General Manager or their designee with written notice stating the
nature of the violation. The offender shall permanently remedy all violations
upon receipt of this notice.



   (B)   As contained in §§ 53.140 et seq., the notice may be of
several forms. Also as contained in §§ 53.140 et seq., penalties of various
forms may be levied against users for violations of this chapter. The
penalties, if levied, shall range from publication of violators in the local
newspaper to administrative fines of up to $10,000 per day per violation.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.161  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter or a
wastewater permit order issued hereunder, may be subject to termination of
its authority to discharge sewage into the municipal sewer system. Such
termination may be immediate if necessary for the protection of the POTW.
Said user may also have water service terminated.



   (B)   Any user who violates the following conditions of this
chapter, or applicable state or Federal regulations, is subject to having his
permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this chapter.



      (1)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;



      (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.162  LIABILITY.



   Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter, discharge
permit or other order issued hereunder shall become liable to the City of
Campbellsville for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by
reason of such violation. This civil liability is as provided by state and
Federal regulations.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.163  MISREPRESENTATION AND/OR FALSIFYING OF DOCUMENTS.



   Any user who knowingly and/or negligently makes any false statements,
representations or certification of any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required pursuant to this chapter or industrial user
discharge permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly and/or
negligently renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter, shall be punished by a fine of at least $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 12 months or by both.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.164  DESTRUCTION OF POTW AND LEGAL ACTION.



   No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance
or equipment which is part of the POTW. Any person(s) violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. It shall be noted that the Clean Water Act does not require proof of
specific intent to obtain conviction.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.165  LEGAL ACTION.



   If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into
the city’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, Federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of the city,
the city may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
in the appropriate court of this jurisdiction.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.166  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the POTW Director/General
Manager, through counsel may petition the court for the issuance of a
preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which
restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.167  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any user who has significantly violated or continues to
violate this ordinance or any order or permit issued hereunder, may be liable
to the POTW Director/General Manager for a civil penalty of not more than
$10,000 per day plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per
day for as long as the violation continues. Each day in which such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the above
described penalty and damages, the POTW Director/General Manager may recover
reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other
expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.



   (B)   The POTW Director/General Manager may petition the court to
impose, assess and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the
court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 53.168  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   Violations - General.



   (A)   Any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision
of this chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed
$5,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or
both.



   (B)   In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000 per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than three years or both.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 11-21-2016)



CHAPTER 54:  EROSION PREVENTION; SEDIMENT CONTROL



Section




General Provisions




   54.001   Introduction



   54.002   Purpose



   54.003   Applicability



   54.004   Definitions



   54.005   Chapter adoption




Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control for Construction Activities




   54.020   Permitting requirements for site development



   54.021   Erosion prevention and sediment control (EPSC) plan



   54.022   Design requirements for erosion prevention and sediment
control



   54.023   Best management practices requirements for erosion
prevention and sediment control



   54.024   Protection requirements for waterways and public storm
drains



   54.025   City inspections for sediment and erosion control



   54.026   Permittee inspections for sediment and erosion control




Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination (IDDE)




   54.040   Prohibitions



   54.041   Allowable discharges



   54.042   Documentation of approved connections



   54.043   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   54.044   Monitoring of industrial/construction activity discharges



   54.045   Industrial BMPs required for stormwater discharges



   54.046   Accidental discharges




Post-Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan Requirements




   54.060   Necessity



   54.061   Post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan
requirements



   54.062   Post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan
design/performance criteria



   54.063   Exemptions for plan requirements



   54.064   Private ownership responsibilities and easement requirements



   54.065   Public ownership and regional facilities management



   54.066   Requirements for long-term operation and maintenance
agreements



   54.067   Maintenance bonds for post-construction facilities



   54.068   As-built requirements



   54.069   Qualified professional requirement




Enforcement




   54.080   Violations



   54.081   Notice of violation



   54.082   Appeal of notice of violation



   54.083   Stop work order



   54.084   Permit suspension or revocation



   54.085   Abatement costs



   54.086   Remedies not exclusive



 



   54.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.001  INTRODUCTION.



   The Clean Water Act, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the
Kentucky Division of Water established Phase II Stormwater regulations that
mandate local enforcement mechanisms be enacted to comply with those
requirements. Three areas are specified for local control.



   (A)   The control of erosion and sediment at construction sites is
required. During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing
water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers, ditches,
sinkholes and drywells. Streets and roads with sediment deposits are slick
and hazardous to the public. In addition, clearing and grading during
construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial
and aquatic habitat. Therefore, this chapter will establish procedures to
address stormwater control at land disturbance and construction sites.



   (B)   Second, a prohibition of non-stormwater discharges to the
storm drainage system is required. This chapter will establish procedures to
regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) from stormwater discharges by any user, prohibit illicit
connections and discharges to the MS4, and establish legal authority to carry
out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (C)   Finally, land development projects and associated increases in
impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel
erosion, and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants which can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development sites. Therefore, this chapter will establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to be achieved through post-construction
practices.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.002  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city and prevent damage to the
environment through the regulation of stormwater runoff at construction
sites, the control of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system and
the management of stormwater discharges from new development and
redevelopment projects.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.003  APPLICABILITY.



   The laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall apply to this chapter.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of
the city unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. This
chapter is applicable to all new development and redevelopment activities
resulting in the disturbance of 3,400 square feet or more of land including
disturbance of less than 3,400 square feet if development is part of a larger
common plan.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.  A discharge of spills and dumping or any
disposal of materials other than stormwater into the system.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) PLAN.  A plan required by stormwater
regulations or permits that includes site maps, an identification of
construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants to be carried
away from the site by stormwater, and a description of measures or practices
to control those pollutants.



   BLUE LINE STREAMS.  Streams that are represented on the United States
Department of the Interior Geological Survey 1:24,000 quadrangle maps.



   CHANNEL.  A natural or constructed/manmade watercourse with definite
bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing
water. Channel flow is that water which is flowing within the limits of the
defined CHANNEL.



   CITY.  The City of Campbellsville Government.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA).  The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CLEARING.  Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   CRITICAL AREA.  A site that is difficult to stabilize due to exposed
topsoil, steep slope, extent of exposure, or other conditions.



   DETENTION.  The temporary delay of storm runoff prior to discharge
into receiving waters.



   DETENTION BASIN.  A drainage facility constructed to restrict the
runoff of stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate and to detain for a
specific period of time the excess waters which accumulate upstream from the
outlet structure.



   DEVELOPER.  Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, or trust involved in commencing proceedings to affect
development of land for themselves or others.



   DISCHARGE.  Unless indicated otherwise, refers to discharges from the
MS4, subject to Section 402 of the CWA.



   DRAINAGE BASIN.  Land that provides surface water runoff into a
stormwater management system, which consists of a surface stream or a body of
impounded surface water together with all tributary surface streams and
bodies of impounded surface water.



   DRAINAGE WAY.  Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the
site.



   DRAINAGE/DRY WELL.  A bored, drilled, driven, dug, or naturally
occurring shaft or hole with a depth greater than the largest surface
dimension; used to drain surface fluid, primarily stormwater runoff, into a
subsurface formation.



   ENGINEER.  A person licensed as a professional engineer in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky in accordance with KRS Chapter 322.



   EPHEMERAL STREAM.  A stream or part of a stream that flows only in
direct response to precipitation or snowmelt. Its channel is above the water
table at all times.



   EROSION.  The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind,
water, gravity, ice, or any combination of those forces.



   EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (EPSC) PLAN.  A set of plans
prepared by or under the direction of a qualified professional in the State
of Kentucky indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to
control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after
construction.



   EXCAVATION.  Any portion of land surface or area from which earth has
been removed or will be removed; the depth below original ground surface to
remaining surface.



   EXISTING GRADE.  The slope or elevation of existing ground surface
prior to cutting or filling.



   FILL.  A portion of land surface or area to which soil, rock, or other
materials have been or will be added; height above original ground surface
after the material has been or will be added.



   FINISHED GRADE.  The final slope or elevation of the ground surface
after cutting or filling.



   FLOODPLAIN.  The relatively flat or lowland area adjoining a river,
stream, watercourse, lake, or other body of standing water which has been or
may be covered temporarily by floodwater. For purposes of this chapter, the
floodplain is defined as the 100-year floodplain having a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES (KYR10 PERMIT).  An
agreement between the regulating authority (Kentucky Division of Water
(KYDOW)) and the permittee which specifies conservation practices that shall
be implemented in the construction of activities specified in the terms and
conditions of the general permit.



   GRADING.  Any stripping, cutting, filling, or stockpiling of earth or
land, including the land in its cut or filled condition, to establish new
grades.



   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE.  An adaptable term used to describe an array of
products, technologies, and practices that use natural systems - or
engineered systems that mimic natural processes - to enhance overall
environmental quality and provide utility services. As a general principal,
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE techniques use soils and vegetation to infiltrate,
evapotranspirate, and/or recycle stormwater runoff. When used as components
of a stormwater management system, GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE practices such as
green roofs, porous pavement, rain gardens, and vegetated swales can produce
a variety of environmental benefits. In addition to effectively retaining and
infiltrating rainfall, these technologies can simultaneously help filter air
pollutants, reduce energy demands, mitigate urban heat islands, and sequester
carbon while also providing communities with aesthetic and natural resource
benefits.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION.  Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a KPDES
permit (other than the KPDES permit for discharges from the municipal
separate storm sewer and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities
or other de minimis activities allowable under the MS4 regulations) and other
discharges referenced in 40 C.F.R. 122.26(d)(2)( iv)(B)(l).



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  A term applied to any ground or structural
surface that water cannot penetrate, or through which water penetrates with
great difficulty.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to KPDES Industrial Permits
as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).



   LAND DISTURBANCE.  The purposeful act of clearing, grubbing,
excavating, or grading; disrupting ground surface by or for construction
activities, including construction/access roads, staging, and storage sites
producing significant areas of exposed soil and soil piles.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).  A conveyance, or system
of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains)
owned or operated by a state, city, town, county, district, association, or
other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction
over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater or other wastes,
including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood
control district or drainage district, or similar entity that discharges to
the waters of the Commonwealth; designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater; which is not a combined sewer; and which is not part of Publicly
Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.2



   MS4 REPRESENTATIVE OR THEIR DESIGNEE.  A person designated by the City
of Campbellsville to implement provisions of this chapter, as well as other
applicable permits issued by the KYDOW or the City of Campbellsville for the
control of stormwater.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMITS.  Part
of EPA’s program to control the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States. NPDES is a part of the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA), which
requires point and non-point source dischargers to obtain NPDES permits.



   NON-POINT SOURCE.  Diffuse pollution sources (i.e. without a single
point of origin or not introduced into a receiving stream from a specific
outlet). The pollutants are generally carried off the land by stormwater.



   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI).  A formal application of notice to the KYDOW
that a construction project seeking coverage under a KYR10 General Permit is
about to begin.



   NOTICE OF TERMINATION.  A formal notice to KYDOW that a construction
project is complete and seeking release for the EPSC Plan and the KYR10
General Permit.



   PERIMETER CONTROL.  A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.



   PERMIT PHASING.  The practice of clearing a parcel of land in distinct
phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of
the next.



   PERMITTEE.  The person who is responsible for the land disturbing
activity, i.e. the permit holder.



   PERMITTING AGENCY.  Issues permits in conformance with this chapter.
The City of Campbellsville will issue site development permits, level 1-3 as
set forth herein.



   PERSON.  Except to the extent exempted by this chapter, refers to any
individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private
corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution,
utility, cooperative, city, county, or other political subdivision of the
state, any interstate body, or any other legal body.



   POINT SOURCE.  A stationary location or fixed facility such as an
industry or municipality that discharges pollutants directly into the waters
of the Commonwealth.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; discarded or abandoned objects; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform, and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals;
animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building
or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.



   PUBLIC STORM DRAIN.  The drainage system provided and maintained by
the City of Campbellsville, designed to help maintain stormwater runoff and
inlets for water to travel to holding areas installed to remove excessive
water from streets and other areas.



   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL.  An individual who is trained and experienced
in stormwater treatment techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated
by state registration, professional certification, experience, or completion
of coursework, as accepted according to this chapter which enables the
individual to make sound professional judgments regarding stormwater control
or treatment and monitoring, pollution fate and transport, and drainage
planning.



   RETENTION BASIN.  A drainage facility constructed to contain the
runoff of stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate/volume to pass into the
groundwater system without discharging the retained volume to surface waters
except through an emergency bypass under conditions beyond the designed
capacity.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.



   SEDIMENT CONTROL.  Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving
the site.



   SITE.  A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof; where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation subject to erosion or
sedimentation as a result of cutting, filling, grading, or other disturbance
of the soil.



   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  A permit issued by the City of
Campbellsville for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and
structures required for the control of erosion and runoff as defined by this
chapter.



   SITE INSPECTOR.  A person who has received specialized training in
measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a
development site and is qualified to inspect, document and maintain erosion
and sediment control practices. The MS4 coordinator or their designee shall
be the City of Campbellsville’s site inspector.



   SITE WASTE CONTROL.  Refers to requirements set forth in this chapter
to control or eliminate wastes from the construction site that may cause
adverse impacts to water quality.



   STABILIZATION.  The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and
filling.



   STOP WORK ORDER.  An order by the city directing a permittee to
suspend all construction and/or operations except for work related to
remediation of the violation.



   STORMWATER POLLUTANT PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).  A site-specific,
written document that identifies potential sources of stormwater pollution at
the construction site; describes practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater
discharges from the construction site; and identifies procedures the operator
will implement to comply with the terms and conditions of a construction
general permit (KYR10).



   STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN.  The written plan that details the
Stormwater Quality Management Program. The Plan is considered a single
document, even though it actually consists of separate programs. Programs
include but are not limited to: EPSC, P-SWPPP.



   STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWQMP).  A comprehensive
program to manage the quality of stormwater discharged from the municipal
separate storm sewer system.



   TEMPORARY PROTECTION.  Short-term stabilization of erosive or sediment
producing areas.



   TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL).  The sum of the individual wasteload
allocations for point sources and load allocations for nonpoint sources and
natural background. If a receiving water has only one point source
discharger, the TMDL is the sum of that point source wasteload allocation
plus the load allocations for any nonpoint source pollution and natural
background sources, tributaries, or adjacent segments. TMDLs can be expressed
in terms of mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure.



   VEGETATIVE PROTECTION.  The stabilization of erosive or sediment
producing areas by covering the soil with appropriate plant materials,
including permanent seeding for long-term vegetative cover, short-term
seeding for temporary vegetative cover, sodding, producing areas covered with
a turf of perennial sod-forming grass, tree planting, or other planting.



   WATER or WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.  As defined in KRS 224.1-010(33)
means and includes any and all rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, marshes, and all other bodies of
surface or underground water, natural or artificial, situated wholly or
partly within or bordering upon the Commonwealth or within its jurisdiction.



   WATERCOURSE.  Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, rivers, and streams designated as part of the stormwater conveyance
system.



   WATERWAY.  A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or
to the public storm drain.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.005  CHAPTER ADOPTION.



   (A)   Separability. The provisions and sections of this chapter
shall be deemed to be separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this
chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder.



   (B)   Ordinance in force. All ordinances of the City of
Campbellsville and any parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict only, are hereby repealed. This chapter shall be in
full force and effect from and after its adoption, re-adoption, and
publication, as required by law.



   (C)   Reference of stormwater manual.



      (1)   Details concerning P-SWPPP design/performance criteria
and acceptable design options shall be referenced from a city Stormwater
Manual which shall be constantly updated without affecting this chapter due
to constantly changing technological advances in the field or empirical
studies by the city yielding improved methods.



      (2)   The MS4 representative or their designee shall retain
the right to identify the contents of the manual as they so deem appropriate
based upon their professional opinion. The MS4 representative may also refer
to other manuals in used by comparable MS4s.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES



§ 54.020  PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to disturb land or commence construction
activity must submit an appropriate application and receive an approved
permit from the city before the project can commence. Design requirements and
EPSC plans shall be prepared in accordance with §§ 54.021 through 54.024 of
this chapter. Each permit application shall include a statement that any land
clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall
be in accordance with an approved plan and that a qualified
contractor/developer, permittee or their designee shall be responsible for
implementing and maintaining all aspects of the approved plan. Incomplete
applications shall be remanded back to the property owner for corrections and
resubmittal.



   (B)   Site development permits issued by the city are required for
all site construction projects and/or land disturbances. Depending on the
amount of land disturbance and other site characteristics, various levels of
permits (level 1-3) will be issued. In addition, the permittee or property
owner shall coordinate with the KYDOW and the US Army Corp of Engineers to
determine whether permits are required from those agencies before
construction begins. Criteria for city permit levels and application
requirements are as follows:



      (1)   Level 1 permit.



         (a)   Criteria for level 1 site development.



            1.   Site construction disturbs less than one acre
of soil and is not a part of a larger development;



            2.   Increased impervious area is less than 3,400
square feet;



            3.   Ground slopes are less than 6%;



         (b)   Application requirements for level 1 site
development.



            1.   Submit a completed level 1 site development
permit application accompanied by a plot plan that shows appropriate erosion
protection and sediment control notations and practices;



            2.   Non-refundable permit fee of $50 with
completed application.



      (2)   Level 2 permit.



         (a)   Criteria for level 2 site development.



            1.   Site construction disturbs less than one acre
of soil and is not part of a larger development;



            2.   Increased impervious area is greater than
3,400 square feet;



            3.   Ground slopes are less than 6%.



         (b)   Application requirements for level 2 site
development.



            1.   Submit a completed level 2 site development
permit application accompanied by a plot plan that shows appropriate erosion
protection and sediment control notations and practices;



            2.   Non-refundable permit fee of $100 with
completed application.



      (3)   Level 3 permit.



         (a)   Criteria for level 3 site development. Site
construction disturbs more than one acre of soil or is part of a larger
development.



         (b)   Application requirements for level 3 site
development.



            1.   Submit a completed level 3 site development
permit application accompanied by NOI; access to plans and other documents
required by a KYR10 permit;



            2.   Non-refundable permit fee of $150.00 with
completed application.



      (4)   Site development application review. The City of
Campbellsville’s MS4 representative or their designee will review each
permit application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. Acceptance indicates that minimum requirements or intent are met and
does not imply a guarantee of performance. The MS4 representative or their
designee reserves the right to inspect the site prior to any construction
activities in furtherance of the review process. Based on review of the
permit application, the city may:



         (a)   Accept the permit application as submitted;



         (b)   Accept the permit application subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to meet the requirements/intent of
the objectives of this chapter;



         (c)   Deny the permit application, indicating the
reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or any
additional information required.



      (5)   Pre-construction inspection and permit issuance.



         (a)   Following acceptance of the permit application,
the applicant will be authorized to install the EPSC measures included in the
application. Upon completion of these installations, the applicant shall
contact the MS4 representative or their designee to schedule a
pre-construction inspection. Upon completion of the pre-construction
inspection and approval of EPSC measures installed, the site development
permit will be issued and site construction may commence.



         (b)   The city will not issue a building permit until
the required site development permit application is accepted and the
appropriate site development permit issued.



      (6)   Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall
be valid from the date of issuance through the date the city notifies the
permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final
inspection required under permit conditions and/or a notice of termination
has been filed with the KYDOW.



      (7)   Permit exemptions. The following activities are exempted
from permit coverage under this chapter:



         (a)   Any emergency activity that is immediately
necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources; and



         (b)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations
including family gardens conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.021  EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (EPSC) PLAN.



   (A)   The designer and/or engineer is ultimately responsible for the
details of design of any EPSC plan required, with the property
owner/developer being responsible for implementation and performance of the
design as installed. The EPSC plan shall include the following:



      (1)   EPSC plan requirements for a level 1 or level 2 site
development permit. A plot plan that shows general erosion protection and
sediment control notations and practices.



      (2)   EPSC plan requirements for a level 3 site development
permit.



         (a)   A natural resources map that includes features of
concern such as topography, streams or soil types of a scale equivalent to
balance of other plan details.



         (b)   A schedule of events for the construction of the
development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading,
construction of utilities, infrastructure, final grading and landscaping.
Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the
estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing,
installation of temporary EPSC measures, and establishment of permanent
vegetation.



         (c)   All EPSC measures necessary shall be shown on the
plan by location and referred to by a legend for all phases of construction.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate
plans may be required at the close of each season. Multiple EPSC plan sheets
may be necessary to best convey requirements for each phase.



         (d)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method
of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and type and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures.



         (e)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities,
including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.



         (f)   The proposed plan to control site waste, including
a delineation of contractor staging areas for equipment and fuel storage,
site materials and temporary facilities.



   (B)   Modifications to the EPSC plan shall be processed and accepted
or denied in the manner described in § 54.020 of this chapter and may be
authorized by the MS4 representative or their designee through written
notification to the permittee.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.022  DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.



   (A)   Any permitted land disturbance operation shall meet the design
criteria set forth in the most recent edition of the Kentucky EPSC Field
Guide, and shall be adequate to prevent erosion and control sediment from the
site to the satisfaction of the MS4 representative or their designee. Cut and
fill slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by the MS4
representative or their designee to meet other community or environmental
objectives.



   (B)   Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, and other natural features of concern, shall not be permitted,
except when in compliance with all sections of this chapter, as well as any
regional, state and federal regulation. Clearing techniques that retain
natural vegetation, drainage patterns, and buffers along streams as described
by the Kentucky EPSC Field Guide, shall be used to the satisfaction of the
city.



   (C)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been
installed, stabilized and approved by the MS4 representative or their
designee at the pre-construction inspection.



   (D)   Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than
50 acres, and may be required on sites disturbing less than 50 acres, with
the size of each phase to be established at plan review and included in the
EPSC plan.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.023  BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION PREVENTION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL.



   (A)   Best management practices for erosion prevention.



      (1)   Soil stabilization shall be completed within 14 days of
final grade work. If an area is left inactive for 21 days or more the area
shall have temporary stabilization as addressed in Kentucky EPSC Field Guide,
Section 4.



      (2)   If seeding or other vegetative erosion prevention
methods are used, vegetation shall become established within three weeks. If
a satisfactory stand of vegetation is not established, the MS4 representative
or their designee may require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative
option employed.



      (3)   Special techniques such as rip rap, turf reinforcement,
armoring and other methods that meet the design criteria outlined in Kentucky
EPSC Field Guide, Section 6, shall be used to ensure stabilization on steep
slopes or in drainage ways.



      (4)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered and/or
have sediment control measures in place to control sediment movement.
Stockpiles shall have temporary vegetation established if left undisturbed
for 21 days or more.



      (5)   At the close of the construction season, the entire site
must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or other methods that do not
require germination to control sediment and prevent erosion.



      (6)   Minimize clearing and grading to the smallest possible
area. Preserve existing vegetation and trees to the maximum extent possible.



      (7)   Areas to be left undisturbed during construction shall
be clearly noted and delineated on the plans.



      (8)   Vegetative buffer strips in combination with other
perimeter controls as listed in Kentucky EPSC Field Guide, Section 9, shall
be used for the protection of adjacent properties, watercourses, and
rights-of-way.



      (9)   Measures discussed in Kentucky EPSC Field Guide, Section
5, shall be implemented to control sedimentation deposits into drainage
structures and features, receiving water bodies, natural karst features,
roads, rights-of-way, and adjacent properties.



   (B)   Best management practices for sediment control.



      (1)   Dust control techniques shall be employed to prevent the
blowing of dust by air movements during land disturbance, demolition, and
other construction activities.



      (2)   Diversion of upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall
be implemented when necessary.



      (3)   Settling basins, sediment traps, tanks, and/or perimeter
controls shall be implemented as required by the Kentucky EPSC Field Guide to
control sediment.



      (4)   Effective debris and trash management shall be required.
At a minimum the following shall be met:



         (a)   Implement waste management practices and disposal
of wastes, including a designated waste collection area on site that does not
drain directly to a waterway, lidded storage containers, regularly scheduled
waste collection to prevent overfilling, immediate cleanup of spills and
disposal of construction site waste at authorized landfills or disposal
areas. Concrete trucks must wash out on the job site and the runoff be
controlled to prevent drainage onto public streets or into the stormwater
collection system; and



         (b)   Control and disposal plan for hazardous materials
utilized or hazardous wastes generated during construction in accordance with
local and state solid waste regulatory agencies.



      (5)   Construction site access requirements designed to
minimize the deposit of sediment or other materials on public streets and
rights-of-way shall include:



         (a)   Continuous access via a stabilized rock entrance,
constructed in accordance with Kentucky EPSC Field Guide;



         (b)   A tire wash rack may also be required by the city.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.024  PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR WATERWAYS AND PUBLIC STORM DRAINS.



   Waterway, watercourse, ephemeral stream, and public storm drain
protection requirements shall include the following:



   (A)   If a watercourse will be crossed regularly during
construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be installed as approved by
the KYDOW and the MS4 representative or their designee;



   (B)   Stabilization of the watercourse channel shall be made before,
during, and after any in-channel work; and



   (C)   Stabilization shall be made to adequately prevent erosion at
the inlets and outlets of all pipes and paved channels.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.025  CITY INSPECTIONS FOR SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL.



   (A)   Plans and permits accepted and issued by the city for site
development shall be maintained on site throughout the duration of the
project. The city’s MS4 representative or their designee shall make site
inspections as deemed necessary to ensure the EPSC measures are being
properly implemented and maintained during construction.



   (B)   In addition, the MS4 representative or their designee shall
enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular
inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under § 54.026 of
this chapter. If minimum requirements of the EPSC Plan are not met, the
permittee shall be notified and appropriate enforcement action shall be taken.



   (C)   The city’s MS4 representative or their designee shall
conduct a final inspection to insure compliance with all permit conditions
prior to termination of the permit at the completion of the project.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.026  PERMITTEE INSPECTIONS FOR SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL.



   The permittee or his or her agent shall make regular inspections of all
control measures to determine the overall effectiveness of the EPSC plan and
the need for additional control measures.



   (A)   Inspections shall be conducted every seven calendar days and
after storm events of one half-inch or more of precipitation.



   (B)   Inspections shall be documented in written/electronic form and
kept on the construction site.



   (C)   Completed inspection forms shall be available for the MS4
representative or their designee or KYDOW inspectors to review upon request
during a site inspection.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION (IDDE)



§ 54.040  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.



      (1)   Pursuant to the Kentucky Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (KPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Program, illicit
discharges to the MS4 are defined as illegal. Except as hereinafter provided,
all non-stormwater discharges into the MS4 are prohibited and declared to be
unlawful.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge waters from
residential construction activities that are not complying with the Standard
of Practice for Residential Construction Stormwater Management as approved
and advertised by the city.



   (B)   Prohibition of illegal connections. It is unlawful for any
person to connect any pipe, open channel, or any other conveyance system that
discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water, which is approved
by the city, based on exemptions listed as allowable discharges below, to the
storm sewer system.



   (C)   Prohibition of illegal dumping and disposal of materials. In
addition to illicit discharges, the discharge of spills and the dumping
and/or disposal of materials other than stormwater, including, but not
limited to, unpermitted (KPDES) industrial and commercial wastes, commercial
car wash wastes, sanitary sewage, garbage, yard waste, trash, petroleum
products, including used motor vehicle fluids, as well as leaf litter, grass
clippings, and animal wastes into the storm sewer, whether directly or
indirectly, are prohibited.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.041  ALLOWABLE DISCHARGES.



   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: discharges from emergency fire-fighting
activities; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters; uncontaminated
groundwater infiltration to separate storm sewer systems (as defined by 40
C.F.R. § 35.2005(20); uncontaminated pumped ground water; discharges from
potable water sources as required for system maintenance; drinking water line
flushing dechlorinated through city accepted BMPs; air conditioning
condensate; uncontaminated landscape irrigation; lawn watering;
uncontaminated springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;
uncontaminated water from footing drains and pumps; individual residential
car washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; swimming pool
discharges dechlorinated through city accepted BMPs; controlled flushing of
stormwater conveyances contained and treated by appropriate BMPs; dye
testing, providing that a verbal notification to the MS4 representative or
their designee is given prior to the time of the test; discharges within the
constraints of a KPDES permit from the Kentucky Division of Water; and
discharges specified in writing by the MS4 representative or their designee
as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.042  DOCUMENTATION OF APPROVED CONNECTIONS.



   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location
of the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or
other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm
sewer system, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified.
Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the MS4
representative or their designee and/or other relevant city departments.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.043  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity KPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.044  MONITORING OF INDUSTRIAL/CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.



   (A)   The city’s MS4 representative or their designee shall be
permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.



   (B)   Facility operators shall allow the city’s MS4 representative
or their designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of a KPDES permit to discharge stormwater.



   (C)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as deemed necessary to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge.



   (D)   The city may require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be calibrated and maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.045  INDUSTRIAL BMPS REQUIRED FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES.



   The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of structural and non-structural
BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or
may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at
said person’s expense, additional BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
KPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with
industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance
with the terms of this section.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.046  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Reporting responsibilities for accidental discharges from
industrial activities.



      (1)   In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance
in amounts that could cause a threat to public drinking supplies, a spill
having a significant impact as defined by the USEPA and Kentucky State Law,
or any other discharge that could constitute a threat to human health or the
environment, as may be asserted by the city, the owner or operator of the
facility shall give notice to the city and the KYDOW as soon as practicable,
but in no event more than four hours after discovery of the accidental
discharge or the discharger becomes aware of the spill or discharge.



      (2)   If an emergency response by governmental agencies is
needed, the owner or operator should call 911 immediately to report the
discharge. A written report containing the following information must be
provided to the MS4 representative or their designee within five days of the
time the discharger becomes aware of the spill or discharge:



         (a)   A description of the discharge including volumes
and concentrations;



         (b)   The exact date and times of the discharge; and



         (c)   Steps taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of
the discharge.



   (B)   Remedial actions for accidental discharges from industrial
activities. The industrial discharger shall take all reasonable steps to
minimize any adverse impact to the MS4 or waters of the Commonwealth,
including accelerated or additional monitoring necessary to determine the
nature and impact of the discharge. It shall not be a defense for the
discharger in an enforcement action to claim that it would have been
necessary to halt or reduce the business or activity of the facility in order
to maintain stormwater quality and minimize any adverse impact that the
discharge may cause.



   (C)   Reporting responsibilities for accidental discharges from
non-industrial activities. In the event of any discharge of a hazardous
substance in amounts that could cause a threat to public drinking supplies, a
spill having a significant impact as defined by the USEPA and Kentucky State
Law, or any other discharge that could constitute a threat to human health or
the environment, as may be asserted by the city, the owner, operator, or
reporter of the facility shall give notice to the city and the KYDOW as soon
as practicable, but in no event more than four hours after discovery of the
accidental discharge or the discharger becomes aware of the spill or
discharge.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS



§ 54.060  NECESSITY.



   Post-construction stormwater management facilities in areas undergoing
new development or redevelopment are necessary because runoff from these
areas has been shown to significantly affect receiving water bodies by the
type and quantity of water delivered to the water body during storms.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.061  POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
REQUIREMENTS.



   Applications for level 3 site development permits shall include a
post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (P-SWPPP) to be
completed, sealed, and signed by a licensed professional engineer and
submitted to the MS4 representative or their designee. Applications for level
2 site development permits may be required to submit a P-SWPPP at the
discretion of the MS4 representative or their designee. The P-SWPPP shall
include the following:



   (A)   A description of the proposed land use including amount of
additional impervious area to be developed, directly connected impervious
area, and nature of the development;



   (B)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, including
waterway buffers where appropriate, and construction details of all
post-construction stormwater quality BMPs as defined in the city guidance
documents;



   (C)   A sequence describing when each post-construction stormwater
quality BMP will be installed; and



   (D)   A long-term operation and maintenance agreement containing
maintenance guidelines for all post-construction stormwater quality measures
to facilitate their proper long-term function. This agreement shall be
recorded as a restricted covenant on the property and thereby made available
to future parties, including property owners, who will assume responsibility
for the operation and maintenance of post-construction stormwater quality
measures. See requirements in § 54.066 of this chapter.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.062  POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
DESIGN/PERFORMANCE CRITERIA.



   (A)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for stormwater quality
BMPs that are designed to achieve the following design/performance objectives:



      (1)   Remove 80% of the average annual post development total
suspended solids (TSS) from the first flush as defined by land use
characteristics and contributing area; or capture and treatment of at least
one-half (0.5) inch precipitation applied over the contributing area. Formula
for water quality volume: WQv = (A*d) / (43560ft.^2 * 12in)



         Where, WQv = Ac-ft



            A = impervious area (ft^2)



            D = 0.745 (in)



      (2)   Reduce or buffer increases in stormwater runoff
temperatures caused by contact with impervious surfaces.



      (3)   Reduce or buffer increases in stormwater runoff volume
and flow rate caused by increases in directly connected impervious area and
overall impervious area.



      (4)   Stormwater detention/retention facilities shall be
designed to address the rate at which flow is released over the entire runoff
discharge period and the volume of discharge over the critical-design storm
period if defined by city stormwater master plans. The outlet structure shall
be designed as a v-notch weir or other multiple stage configurations capable
of controlling the discharge rates for the first flush, 2-, 10-, 25-, and
100-year design storm events.



   (B)   Soil bioengineering, “green” and other “soft” slope
and stream bank stabilization methods shall receive preference over rip rap,
concrete and other hard armoring techniques. Examples are rain gardens and
permeable materials.



   (C)   Supportive data must be submitted to justify the type of
facility selected. The facility may be designed to infiltrate runoff to
groundwater rather than transmit it downstream under conditions up to a
10-year storm event. It must be able to bypass all other storms including
100-year events with a discharge rate equivalent to or less than
pre-development conditions without negatively impacting the 100-year
floodplain above or below the site. If data indicates that the facility
cannot retain a significant portion (95%) of the runoff, then the facility
must be designed to detain runoff.



   (D)   The city reserves the right to require superseding or
additional treatment criteria or objectives for specific pollutants as
necessary to meet overall stormwater quality management program objectives or
directives under a watershed improvement or total maximum daily load (TMDL)
program as administered by the USEPA or KYDOW.



   (E)   The design shall include and/or address the following elements:



      (1)   Area vicinity map showing current zoning, adjoining
property owners, and street lines within 100 feet of the project boundaries
all drawn at a scale not greater than 1 inch=2,000 feet;



      (2)   North arrow and its basis;



      (3)   Legend explaining symbols and abbreviations used on the
plan;



      (4)   "Do Not Disturb Limits" for construction activity
indicated by a heavy dashed line and labeled as such;



      (5)   Boundary of site defined by bearings and distances and
indicated by a heavy solid line;



      (6)   Drawing(s) at a scale not greater than 1 inch=100 feet.
In the case of an unusually large development, a scale of 1inch = 200 feet
maybe acceptable;



      (7)   Acreage of the total site and acreage of the project
site (if different);



      (8)   Soil classifications;



      (9)   Existing and proposed runoff coefficients;



      (10)   Impervious areas as measured in square feet;



      (11)   Benchmark location(s), description(s) and elevation(s)
at sea level;



      (12)   Basis of elevation datum;



      (13)   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner,
developer, permittee, and project qualified professional;



      (14)   Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour
intervals;



      (15)   Mapping accuracy shall conform to National Standards of
Mapping;



      (16)   Location of conservation zones, sinkholes, streams,
steep slopes, known springs, and watercourses;



      (17)   Location of any existing buildings or structures;



      (18)   Location of any pertinent utilities, sanitary sewers,
water and stormwater facilities on the property within 50 feet of the site;



      (19)   Elevations, dimensions, locations, and the extent of
all planned grading indicated with proposed contours;



      (20)   A grading plan for borrow pits, quarries, and
material-processing facilities based on the findings of soil site
investigations;



      (21)   Design details of temporary and permanent structural
controls;



      (22)   Approximate location of the 100-year floodplain or a
statement by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor that the
site is not located in an area subject to flooding. The basis for this
determination shall be shown;



      (23)   A detailed cost estimate for installation and
maintenance of all stormwater management control measures;



      (24)   Identification of perimeter controls at outfalls and
areas where construction site drainage leaves the property boundary or
disturbed area(s);



      (25)   Arrows indicating drainage flow patterns;



      (26)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and
construction details of all temporary and permanent stormwater quality
measures;



      (27)   Temporary stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation including seeding mixture, method of seedbed preparation, and
kind and quality of mulching;



      (28)   Permanent stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching;



      (29)   A sequence of construction of the development site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and construction of buildings, final grading, and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date each activity will
occur and the expected duration of each. A description should be given
describing the relationship between implementation of stormwater quality
measures and phases of construction activities. Phasing of construction
should be performed to limit disturbed areas to 20 acres;



      (30)   Anticipated inspection and maintenance requirements for
permanent and temporary measures. This shall include the expected frequency
of routine inspections and maintenance activities such as removal of sediment
and waste concrete;



      (31)   Name of receiving waters;



      (32)   Management practices or other controls to address the
following:



         (a)   Waste concrete management;



         (b)   Material delivery, handling and storage;



         (c)   Sanitary/septic waste management;



         (d)   Solid waste/trash and debris management;



         (e)   Vehicle and equipment cleaning, fueling, and
maintenance;



         (f)   Sensitive and vegetated area preservation;



         (g)   Pit and channel dewatering operations;



         (h)   Contaminated soil management as defined and
approved by the Kentucky Divisions of Water and Waste Management;



         (i)   Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizer use;



         (j)   Long-term stormwater quality treatment; and



         (k)   Blowing of dust or sediment from the site.



      (33)   Plan for stabilizing the entire site at the end of the
construction season. If vegetation cannot be established, the site shall have
a heavy mulch layer (straw or wood chips) applied to control erosion.



   (F)   The permittee shall notify the city in writing of any
substantial field changes made to the approved stormwater quality management
plan. Changes made to the plan must be approved by the MS4 coordinator or
their designee.



   (G)   The city shall review the P-SWPPP within a reasonable time
frame, typically 30 calendar days from the date of submission and issue or
deny the requested permit. Failure to do so will allow the Person to proceed
with land-disturbing activities in accordance with BMPs and the submitted
P-SWPPP. However, the city reserves the right to review and require changes
it determines appropriate.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.063  EXEMPTIONS FOR PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   Exemptions may be granted so long as erosion prevention and sediment
control, water quality and cut-fill policies are adequately addressed.
Exemptions may be granted for roads and utilities crossing waterways, and
pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to waterways.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.064  PRIVATE OWNERSHIP RESPONSIBILITIES AND EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services the
following categories of property shall be privately owned:



      (1)   Single entity property;



      (2)   Individual residential subdivisions in which the
facility or BMP is within designated open areas or serves as an amenity with
an established homeowners association; and/or



      (3)   Commercial and industrial development.



   (B)   A single entity shall be defined as an association, public or
private corporation, partnership, firm, trust, estate, or any other legal
entity allowed to own real estate including an individual lot owner. The
terms for management of these properties shall be in writing, shall be
recorded and shall, in addition to any other terms deemed necessary by the
city, contain a provision permitting the city’s inspection at any
reasonable time of all facilities deemed critical to the public welfare. When
a stormwater quality BMP serves more than one parcel, a home or property
owners’ association or binding contract for the purpose of operation and
maintenance is required.



   (C)   The funding mechanism shall be in a form approved by the city.
In the event that proposed funding is through an owner’s association, then
it must be demonstrated that the association may not dissolve unless
long-term operation and maintenance activities are accepted by another entity
with equivalent longevity and adequate funding. Furthermore, the owners
association’s responsibility must be stated in the association’s
declaration, covenants, or bylaws, as appropriate.



   (D)   General routine maintenance (controlling vegetative growth and
removing debris) shall be provided by the owner(s) of any stormwater
management facility or BMP. The owner shall maintain a perpetual,
non-exclusive easement that allows access for inspection and emergency
maintenance by the city. The city has the right, but not the duty, to enter
premises for emergency repairs.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.065  PUBLIC OWNERSHIP AND REGIONAL FACILITIES MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   The objective of a regional stormwater management facility,
pond, or other device, is to address the stormwater management concerns in a
given watershed with greater economy and efficiency than possible through
individual facilities. The intended result is fewer stormwater management
facilities to maintain in the affected watershed while sustaining efficiency.



   (B)   All regional stormwater management control facilities proposed
by the owners, if approved and accepted by the city for dedication as a
public regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or maintained. All
other stormwater management control facilities and BMPs shall be privately
owned and/or maintained unless accepted for maintenance by the city.



   (C)   The city may require dedication of privately owned stormwater
facilities which discharge to the MS4. This shall be at the approval of the
City Council.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.066  REQUIREMENTS FOR LONG-TERM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.



   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements shall include a
maintenance plan for all stormwater quality BMPs in new development or
redevelopment that require more than general maintenance (e.g. periodic
mowing). These agreements are part of the P-SWPPP requirements. Agreements
shall contain the following provisions.



   (A)   A plan developed to ensure that the stormwater quality BMPs
are kept functional. The maintenance agreement will specify minimum operation
and maintenance requirements and the frequency at which these activities are
to be performed by the property owner.



   (B)   Schedules for inspections and techniques for operation and
maintenance, including vegetation clearing or mowing and removing accumulated
trash, debris, sediment pollutants, and other forms of pollution.



   (C)   Maintenance expectations for detention and retention
facilities should be designed to require minimal maintenance.



   (D)   The agreement shall be noted on the final plat with the
appropriate notation on the particular lot(s).



   (E)   The agreement described herein shall be binding on the owner,
its administrators, executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in
interest.



   (F)   The format for the agreement shall be provided through example
by the city, or through guidance documents.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.067  MAINTENANCE BONDS FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION FACILITIES.



   The city may require the posting of a maintenance bond to secure the
structural integrity of said facilities as well as the functioning of said
facilities in accordance with the approved P-SWPPP for a term of two years
from the date of acceptance of dedication. An irrevocable letter of credit
can be used as the financial assurance in lieu of a maintenance bond although
the contribution shall be equivalent to the amount that would be estimated
for the maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall be calculated as 20% of
the estimated construction cost and may be reduced to 10% after one year if
there are no concerns by the MS4 representative or their designee. A
qualified professional is to submit a construction cost estimate for the
basis of the bond value.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.068  AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, recording of
the final plat or final release of bond, the as-built condition (including:
invert elevations, size, shape, and location) of critical stormwater
management features must be identified, approved, and provided in a
electronic form to the city representative.



   (B)   The volume, slopes, configuration, condition, and topographic
information of all detention, retention, and water quality practices shall be
certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. This information shall be provided
to the city, in the form of an as-built drawing or other electronic form
accepted by the city. The as-built certification shall indicate if final
conditions are consistent with, or exceed, the SWQMP provisions.



   (C)   If it is determined that information provided in the as-built
drawing, certification, inspection, or survey of the site does not meet or
exceed the SWQMP provisions, the city reserves the right to withhold
certification of occupancy or final bond release. Furthermore, other
enforcement mechanisms may be applied to the permittee or persons making
certifying statements.



   (D)   The requirements of this section do not apply for individual
residential lot development.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.069  QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   A qualified professional is required to perform construction
and post-construction inspections and to direct and/or supervise maintenance
activities to ensure that the SWQMP permit and long-term operation and
maintenance agreement provisions are being implemented properly.



      (1)   Effect. Section 10 qualified professional shall be
effective and enforced on January 1, 2011.



      (2)   Registration. Qualified professionals performing
inspections or overseeing maintenance activities under this chapter must be
registered by the city prior to execution of those actions. All applicants
must file an application with the city.



      (3)   Construction qualified professional prerequisites.



         (a)   Applicants must demonstrate knowledge and
experience in the following areas:



            1.   Construction practices;



            2.   Operational standards;



            3.   Cause and failure indicators; and



            4.   Maintenance measures used to prevent and
correct failures.



         (b)   Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the
following will be considered for registration:



            1.   Successful completion and passage of the
Kentucky Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control course and examination
through the University of Kentucky Transportation Center;



            2.   Professional engineer license in good
standing in the Commonwealth of Kentucky with demonstrated experience in
erosion prevention and sediment control on construction sites;



            3.   Landscape architect license in good standing
in the Commonwealth of Kentucky with demonstrated experience in erosion
prevention and sediment control on construction sites;



            4.   Professional in erosion and sediment control
certification in good standing; and/or



            5.   Similar qualification or certification of any
other similar program in the Commonwealth of Kentucky or in the United States
so long as that program required a test and the applicant passed the test.



         (c)   Documentation demonstrating the above will be
required by the city before registration will be granted.



      (4)   Post-construction qualified professional prerequisites.



         (a)   Applicants must demonstrate knowledge and
experience in the following areas:



            1.   Stormwater quality treatment practices;



            2.   Operational standards;



            3.   Cause and failure indicators; and



            4.   Maintenance measures used to prevent and
correct failures.



         (b)   Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the
following will be considered for registration:



            1.   Professional engineer license in good
standing in the Commonwealth of Kentucky with demonstrated experience in
stormwater quality treatment BMPs;



            2.   Landscape architect license in good standing
in the Commonwealth of Kentucky with demonstrated experience in stormwater
quality treatment BMPs;



            3.   Professional in stormwater quality
certification in good standing; or



            4.   Similar qualification or certification of any
other similar program in the Commonwealth of Kentucky or in the United States
so long as that program required a test and the applicant passed the test.



   (B)   The city may report to the appropriate licensing,
certification, or qualification authority for activities not consistent with
the policies and procedures identified in this chapter. This may include
reporting activities that include but are not limited to, the submittal of
false or misleading information or for repeated incompetence or negligent
actions by the registrant.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



ENFORCEMENT



§ 54.080  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision
or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person
who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter may
be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this subchapter or may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.



   (B)   In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to
public health, environment, or public safety, the city is authorized to enter
upon the subject’s private property, without giving prior notice, to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property including the issuance of immediate stop work orders. The city is
authorized to seek costs of the abatement as described in this chapter.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.081  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever the city finds that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the city may order compliance first by verbal notice of violation,
then by written notice of violation. The written notice of violation shall
contain:



      (1)   The name and address of the alleged violator;



      (2)   The address when available or a description of the
building, structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has
occurred;



      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



      (4)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to
restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion
of such remedial action;



      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or
may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed; and



      (6)   A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the city’s Property Maintenance Codes Enforcement Board by
filing a written appeal within ten days of service of the notice of violation.



   (B)   The notice of violation may require without limitation the
following:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The submittal of required reports and/or other documents;



      (3)   The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal
connections;



      (4)   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall
cease and desist;



      (5)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



      (6)   Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement
expenses;



      (7)   The implementation of pollution practices; and



      (8)   Other activities that serve to implement the provisions
of this chapter.



   (C)   The permittee may request an extension to the NOV if they can
prove the time allotted for remittance is not adequate.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.082  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the violations. The notice of appeal must be received within ten calendar
days from the date of receipt of the notice of violation. Appeals shall be
submitted to the city’s Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board or its
designee. Hearing on the appeal shall take place within ten days from the
date of receipt of the notice of appeal by the Board. The decision of the
Board or its designee shall be final.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.083  STOP WORK ORDER.



   (A)   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the time
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, all construction
activities other than those required to address deficiencies/violations shall
be halted on a project site when a stop work order has been issued.



   (B)   The written stop work order shall be sent by certified mail to
the permittee or may be hand delivered.



   (C)   The written SWO shall specify deficiencies and violations that
must be corrected prior to a city inspection for consideration of removing
the SWO.



   (D)   The permittee shall notify the city in writing of the
anticipated date for completion of the corrective action(s) and provide at
least a two calendar day notice for the city to perform a compliance
inspection.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.084  PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   In the event compliance cannot be achieved within the terms of
a notice of violation and/or a stop work order, the city may proceed with
permit suspension or revocation.



   (B)   Land-disturbing activities are not allowed on a project site
when a permit has been suspended or revoked other than those required to
address deficiencies/violations.



   (C)   The written permit suspension or revocation shall be hand
delivered and/or sent by certified mail to the permittee.



   (D)   A permit suspension requires that the permittee submit a
revised portion of SWQMP as indicated by the city for review and acceptance
by the city of the specific issue of contention. When a permit suspension is
removed, the city shall provide written notice to the permittee.



   (E)   When a permit is revoked, the permittee must reapply for a
permit through the process of requesting a new permit.



   (F)   A permit revocation requires that the permittee resubmit a
SWQMP for a full review and acceptance by the MS4 coordinator or their
designee.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.085  ABATEMENT COSTS.



   (A)   Within ten calendar days after abatement of the violation, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written appeal objecting
to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten calendar days
of such notice. The appeal shall be submitted to the city’s Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Board or its designee. If the amount due is not
paid within ten calendar days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is
taken, within ten calendar days after a decision on said appeal, the charges
shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a
lien on the property for the amount assessed.



   (B)   Each subsequent but separate violation shall see a fine
increase of 25% for each violation.



   (C)   The city may recover attorney’s fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.086  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   (A)   The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and
the city may seek cumulative remedies.



   (B)   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter as a threat to public health, safety,
welfare, and environment is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated
by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



§ 54.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Administrative penalties.



      (1)   If work requiring a permit is started without securing
the appropriate permit, the following administrative penalties will be
assessed against the property owner:



         (a)   Level 1 land disturbance: $50 to $500.



         (b)   Level 2 land disturbance: $100 to $500.



         (c)   Level 3 land disturbance: $150 to $500.



      (2)   A stop work order shall be issued and enforced until the
appropriate permit has been obtained.



   (B)   Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to
take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise
fails to cure the violations described therein within ten calendar days, or
such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, the city may impose a
penalty not to exceed $1,000 per day for each violation that remains
unaddressed after receipt of appropriate enforcement action.



   (C)   Criminal penalties. For intentional or flagrant violations of
this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring
such person to appear in circuit court to answer charges for such



violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 per offense or imprisonment not to exceed 60 calendar days, or
both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation occurred
shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 9-3-2014)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS





         71.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



   70.01   Excessive noise



   70.02   Improper starting of motor vehicle



   70.03   Conduct, activities at drive-in restaurant



   70.04   City park and recreational property



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  EXCESSIVE NOISE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
sound an automobile horn except in an emergency, within the city limits.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
operate an outside mobile or stationary public address system, except in an
emergency or a sanctioned public event or an auction sale within the city
limits.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
operate a sound system within a motor vehicle in a manner so as to permit it
to be heard outside that motor vehicle within the city limits, from 11:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and during worship services.



(2000 Code, § 7-1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.02  IMPROPER STARTING OF MOTOR VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a motor vehicle to be
operated in a manner so as to produce tire squeal or the spinning of tires
within the city.



(2000 Code, § 7-2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  CONDUCT, ACTIVITIES AT DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.



   (A)   A DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT, for the purposes of this section, shall
mean any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, ice cream or other food or
beverage is served directly to or is permitted to be consumed by patrons in
vehicles parked on or adjacent to the premises of such a restaurant.



   (B)   No person, while on or adjacent to the premises of a drive-in
restaurant, shall race the motor of any vehicle, start or stop any vehicle
suddenly, squeal the tires, blow the horn or make or cause to be made any
other loud or unseemly noise by any means whatsoever.



   (C)   No person, while on or adjacent to the premises of a drive-in
restaurant, whether in or out of any vehicle, shall drink any beer or any
other alcoholic beverage.



   (D)   No group of three or more persons shall congregate and linger
at any location on or about the premises of a drive-in restaurant other than
inside of the restaurant building or in a legally parked vehicle.



   (E)   No person shall drive any vehicle onto the premises of a
drive-in restaurant and then drive out of the premises without parking the
vehicle unless there is no unoccupied parking space available on the
premises. No person shall cruise without parking.



   (F)   No person shall leave any vehicle unoccupied on any drive-in
restaurant premises without the knowledge and consent of the operator of the
restaurant, unless the person is inside of the restaurant building.



   (G)   Any unoccupied vehicle may be towed away by the city at the
expense of the owner.



   (H)   It shall be the duty of the operators of any drive-in
restaurant within the city to post in a conspicuous location on the premises
of the restaurant at least two signs, at least three feet by three feet
square bearing the following legend, in letters at least two inches high,
to-wit:



      "CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LINGERING OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE IS
UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLE MAY BE LEFT ON THESE PREMISES WITHOUT THE
KNOWLEDGE AND CONSENT OF THE RESTAURANT OPERATOR, AND ANY SUCH VEHICLE MAY BE
TOWED AWAY AT THE EXPENSE OF THE OWNER."



(2000 Code, § 7-3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  CITY PARK AND RECREATIONAL PROPERTY.



   There shall be no operation or use of a motorized vehicle on city park
or recreational property for any non-essential use. This shall include, but
is not limited to, the operation and use of motorcycles, ATVs, snowmobiles
and other similar devices. This does not preclude the use of any such device
as may become necessary by law enforcement or others in their official
capacity, nor shall it preclude any such device being operated in conjunction
with any event or activity sponsored or endorsed by the city.



(Ord. 02-18, passed 10-7-2002)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Upon conviction of any of the foregoing offenses in § 70.01,
the offending party may be fined from $5 to $50 per offense.



(2000 Code, § 7-1)



   (C)   Any person found guilty under § 70.02 above shall be fined
from $50 to $500 for each offense.



(2000 Code, § 7-2)



   (D)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to arrest, and the violation of this section is hereby
declared a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, a person shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $100.



(2000 Code, § 7-3)



CHAPTER 71:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section



   71.01   Roadway/shoulders of highway



   71.02   Police Commissioners



   71.03   Metered/signed parking



   71.04   Assumption of owner



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  ROADWAY/SHOULDERS OF HIGHWAY.



   (A)   No person shall stop a vehicle, leave it standing or cause it
to stop or to be left standing upon any portion of the roadway; however, this
section shall not be construed to prevent parking in front of a private
residence off the roadway or street in the city where that parking is
otherwise permitted, as long as the vehicle so parked does not impede the
flow of traffic. This division shall not apply to:



      (1)   A vehicle that has been disabled on the right-of-way of
a highway in a manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid the
occupation of the shoulder of a street or impracticable to remove it from the
shoulder of the street until repairs have been made or sufficient help
obtained for its removal. In no event shall a disabled vehicle remain on the
shoulder of a street for 24 hours or more;



      (2)   Motor vehicles when required to stop in obedience to the
provisions of any section of the Kentucky Revised Statutes or any traffic
ordinance, regulation or sign or the command of any police officer; or



      (3)   Vehicles operating as common carriers of passengers for
hire and school buses taking passengers on the vehicle or discharging
passengers therefrom, provided that no vehicle shall stop for that purpose at
a place on the street which does not afford reasonable visibility to
approaching motor vehicles from both directions.



      (4)   Any vehicle required to stop by reason of an obstruction
to its progress.



   (B)   When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a
highway in violation of this section, he or she may move or cause the vehicle
to be moved, or require the operator or other person in charge of the vehicle
to move it. The police officer may cause the vehicle to be removed by
ordering any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor
vehicles to remove the vehicle to a site chosen by the person. Ownership of
the vehicle shall be determined by the city through the vehicle's license
plates, serial number or other means of determining ownership. Within ten
business days of the involuntary removal, the city shall notify the owner by
certified mail that the vehicle was illegally upon public property; the name
and address of the storage facility where the vehicle is located; that
removal of the vehicle from the storage facility will involve payment of
towing and storage charges; and that the vehicle may be sold pursuant to the
provisions of KRS 376.275 if not claimed within 45 days. The notice shall
include the make, model, license number and vehicle identification number. No
notification shall be required if ownership cannot be determined.



   (C)   When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
bridge or causeway or in a tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the removal of the
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety as provided in
division (B) above.



   (D)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
a police officer or traffic control device, in the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk;



      (2)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for disabled persons;



      (3)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (4)   Within an intersection;



      (5)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking; or



      (6)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.



   (E)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her
control into any prohibited area.



   (F)   The restrictions in division (D)(5) above shall not apply to
sheriffs and their deputies or police officers when operating properly
identified vehicles during performance of their official duties.



(2000 Code, § 7-51)  Penalty, see § 71.99



Statutory references:



   Notice of removal of vehicle, KRS 376.275



   Stopping, standing, parking, see KRS 189.450



§ 71.02  POLICE COMMISSIONERS.



   The Police Commissioners of the city shall be authorized, from time to
time, to make changes in parking regulations as may be necessitated by the
public's convenience.



(Ord. 05-14, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 71.03  METERED/SIGNED PARKING.



   (A)   Metered parking on city parking lots shall be for times and
for the amounts of monies as may be indicated upon the meter or other
appropriate sign.



   (B)   All other permissible parking shall be designated by a sign,
which sign shall inform the general public that parking is permissible and
stating the periods of time for which the parking is permissible.



   (C)   All areas designated by sign as no parking areas, or indicated
by a yellow curb line, shall be no parking areas.



(Ord. 05-14, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 71.04  ASSUMPTION OF OWNER.



   For the purpose of §§ 71.02 through 71.04, it shall be assumed that
any violation of parking regulations is the duty of the registered owner of
the vehicle as all drivers of the vehicle would be driving with the consent
and permission of the registered owner.



(Ord. 05-14, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person found to be in violation of any of the terms of §
71.01 above shall be fined at least $10 but not exceeding $100 plus court
costs, in addition to any charges made by the garage or other establishment
to which any vehicle might have been towed and/or impounded.



(2000 Code, § 7-51)



   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the time
allotment in a permitted parking area shall be fined not less than $5 for
each occurrence.



      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the privilege
of parking on a metered parking space shall be fined $0.25 for each violation.



      (3)   Any person, firm or corporation parking in a no parking
zone shall be fined $10 for each violation.



   (D)   (1)   All fines provided for herein may be paid within 24
hours from date and time of violation direct to the City Police Department
and payment of same shall prevent further processing for prosecution for the
violation.



      (2)   All fines not paid within the 24 hours shall forthwith
be transmitted by the chief administrative officer of the City Police
Department to the District Court for enforcement.



(Ord. 05-14, passed 11-7-2005)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         91.   FAIR HOUSING





         92.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         93.   NUISANCES; GENERALLY





         94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         95.   ANIMAL CONTROL





         96.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION





         97.   ALARM SYSTEMS





         98.   SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS




CHAPTER 90:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   90.01   Wearing of hoods or masks



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  WEARING OF HOODS OR MASKS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  All walks, alleys, streets, boulevards, avenues,
lanes, roads, highways or other ways of thoroughfares dedicated to public use
or owned or maintained by public authority.



   (B)   Wearing hoods or masks in a public place. No person or persons
shall, while wearing any hood, mask or device whereby a substantial portion
of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity of the wearer,
enter, be or appear in any public place within the city with the intent to
commit a crime or create alarm.



   (C)   Wearing hoods or masks on the property of another. No person
shall, while wearing any hood, mask or device whereby a substantial portion
of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity of the wearer,
demand entrance or admission, enter or come upon or into, or be upon or in
the premises, enclosure or house of any other person in the city with the
intent to commit a crime or create alarm, unless he or she shall first obtain
written permission of the owner and the occupant of the property.



   (D)   Exemptions. The following are exempted from the provision of
divisions (B) and (C) above:



      (1)   Any person under 13 years of age wearing a traditional
holiday costume in season: Halloween;



      (2)   Any person using masks in theatrical productions or
celebrating masquerade balls;



      (3)   Any person lawfully engaged in trades or employment or
in a sporting activity where a mask or facial covering is worn for the
purpose of ensuring the physical safety of the wearer, or because of the
nature of the occupation, trade or professional sporting activity; or



      (4)   Any person wearing a gas mask in drills, exercises or
emergencies.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates § 90.01(B) or (C) above shall be
guilty of misdemeanor, and shall be fined $100 and/or imprisoned for no
longer than 50 days.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 6-7-2004)



CHAPTER 91:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   91.01   Purpose



   91.02   Responsibility



   91.03   Implementation



   91.04   Analysis



   91.05   Annual report



   91.06   Complaint procedures



§ 91.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the objective of the city through the use of the fair
housing policy to promote equal housing opportunity, to prohibit
discrimination in housing because of race, color, religion, national origin,
sex, age, HIV-positive persons, or disability and to bring about a fair
representation and utilization of minority and women heads of household in
all levels and in all phases of obtaining safe and decent housing.



   (B)   The policy will ensure every person regardless of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, age or disability equal opportunity with
respect to terms and conditions of acquiring suitable living quarters, access
to all types of assistance offered by local units of government and
participation in all local government programs that will provide an
opportunity for both lateral movement and advancement in housing.



(2000 Code, § 5-26)



§ 91.02  RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The Mayor or government employee designated by him or her and
answerable directly to him or her has responsibility for effective
implementation of the policy set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   The responsibility of the Mayor shall include matters such as
ensuring that:



      (1)   The local unit of government's equal housing opportunity
statement is posted in conspicuous places;



      (2)   The notices required by federal, state or local law and
regulations are posted at all work locations;



      (3)   All private and governmental sources of housing are
aware of the local unit of government's policy of equal housing opportunity;
and



      (4)   The statement setting forth the local unit of
government's policy with respect to acquiring safe and decent housing will be
posted in conspicuous places frequented by persons or applicants for
federally subsidized housing.



(2000 Code, § 5-27)



§ 91.03  IMPLEMENTATION.



   (A)   The fair housing policy that will prevent any discrimination
in housing based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age,
HIV-positive persons, or disability will be reviewed by the Council. Upon
review of this document, a resolution supporting the implementation of the
affirmative action plan must be obtained.



   (B)   After adopting this plan, the city's policies regarding fair
housing will be communicated to the public either in writing or by public
advertisement. The Council will also conduct two public hearings to obtain
comments from the public concerning the Council's intention of preventing any
discrimination in housing.



   (C)   The Council will attempt to organize and assist a local
advisory committee that will function as an intermediary between the Council
and the citizens of the community. It will be the responsibility of the
committee to report at least bimonthly to the Council on activities or
matters concerning the prevention of discrimination within the community.



(2000 Code, § 5-28)



§ 91.04  ANALYSIS.



   (A)   The city will conduct a study to determine the composition and
utilization of its housing to ascertain in which areas, if any, that women
heads of household and members of minority groups are concentrated and are
being discriminated against in efforts to obtain safe and decent housing.



   (B)   An update to the housing composition study will be conducted
each year to prevent any further discrimination in housing within the area.



(2000 Code, § 5-29)



§ 91.05  ANNUAL REPORT.



   (A)   A report will be made annually to the Council as to the
progress being made toward the goals of eliminating discrimination on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, HIV-positive
persons, or disability.



   (B)   The citizens' advisory committee will be responsible for
compiling the data and information and presenting it to the local unit of
government.



(2000 Code, § 5-30)



§ 91.06  COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any person who feels he or she has been a victim of
discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, sex,
age, HIV-positive persons, or disability under federal, state or local
enactments, or the city policy governing the conditions of housing may file a
complaint.



      (1)   Discrimination may be found in practices pertaining to
purchasing, renting, placement, movement and selection of safe and decent
housing.



      (2)   The closing part has a number of options:



         (a)   Present complaint directly to the Council;



         (b)   File a formal charge with the
Campbellsville-Taylor County Commission on Human Rights;



         (c)   File a formal charge with the citizens' advisory
committee on prevention of housing discrimination;



         (d)   File a formal charge with the department of
housing and urban development;



         (e)   File a private suit (after statutory requirements
are met); or



         (f)   File a complaint with other appropriate federal or
state agencies.



   (B)   Complaints filed with the Council will be investigated and
determinations made as to cause or lack of cause. An attempt at conciliation
will be made that is just and equitable. If no clear and definite decision is
possible, the matter may be taken to an outside authority.



   (C)   It should be clearly understood by every person in the city
that no person is required or forced to file a complaint with the Council.
Persons electing to do so will be advised of their rights to redress through
other local, state and federal enforcement agencies.



(2000 Code, § 5-31)



CHAPTER 92:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



R.L. Miller Park



   92.01   Hours



   92.02   Operation of vehicles off roadways



 



   92.99   Penalty



R.L. MILLER PARK



§ 92.01  HOURS.



   (A)   The public use of the Robert L. Miller Park shall be limited
to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. All through traffic in the park
shall be permitted to continue without interruption during all hours.



   (B)   No stopping of vehicles within the park shall be permitted
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.



   (C)   No person shall be permitted within the boundaries of the park
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.



(2000 Code, § 8-26)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.02  OPERATION OF VEHICLES OFF ROADWAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally operate
any type of a motor vehicle off of the paved roadways within the confines of
the Robert L. Miller Park.



   (B)   It shall be presumed that anyone operating a vehicle off of
the pavement is operating same intentionally unless the person so offending
can otherwise establish that the operation of the vehicle off of the roadway
was not intentional.



(2000 Code, § 8-27)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 92.01(B) shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $500 per offense.



(2000 Code, § 8-26)



   (C)   Any person found guilty under § 92.02 shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $500 for each occurrence, and in addition thereto, the
city reserves all rights which they may have to claim damages against both
the owner and/or the operator of a vehicle causing damage to the landscaping
or edifices within the park.



(2000 Code, § 8-27)



CHAPTER 93:  NUISANCES; GENERALLY



Section



   93.01   Definition



   93.02   Illustrative enumeration



   93.03   Prohibited



   93.04   Notice to abate



   93.05   Contents of notice



   93.06   Service of notice



   93.07   Abatement by city



   93.08   City's costs and declared lien



   93.09   Littering



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NUISANCE.  Any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a
duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which
act, omission, condition or thing either:



      (1)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of others;



      (2)   Offends decency;



      (3)   Offends the senses;



      (4)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to
obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street,
highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage;



      (5)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the
use of property; or



      (6)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of
life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)



§ 93.02  ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.



   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to
be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items,
conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall be not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting or restrictive:



   (A)   Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation;



   (B)   Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other
abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things, and the storage of motor
vehicles in an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use,
automobile parts, or scrap metal within the city limits, except on premises
authorized by the city for those purposes;



   (C)   Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes
and other vermin;



   (D)   Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated
condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an
unsanitary condition that is a menace to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in
the vicinity where it is located;



   (E)   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as
the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of like odors and stenches;



   (F)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a
reasonable time after death;



   (G)   The pollution of any well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other
substances;



   (H)   Any building, structure or other place or location where any
activity which is in violation of local, slate or federal law is conducted,
performed or maintained;



   (I)   Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on
any lot or piece of ground;



   (J)   Any dead trees on or near a public right-of-way;



   (K)   All hydrants shall be kept clear of weeds, rubbish and any and
all other obstructions by the abutting property owner. Landscaping, or
decorations shall not be used to obstruct or hide fire hydrant from clear
view, nor prohibit access to the hydrant for use or maintenance. Damage
caused to landscaping within 15 feet radius of the hydrant shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the landscaping;



   (L)   No fire hydrant shall have the color changed without
permission form the Fire Chief;



   (M)   Where fire hydrants are installed along a roadway, parking
within ten feet from a fire hydrant is prohibited. When fire hydrants are
installed in parking areas, parking shall be designed and maintained to allow
ten feet clear access to the hose connection side of the hydrant, and four
feet minimum clear radius around the hydrant; and



   (N)   (1)   Any alarm company installing an alarm system which
requires a response from the emergency services shall:



         (a)   Notify the E-911 center of this installation so
that the information records of E-911 can be updated; and



         (b)   Notify the Chief of the appropriate department of
its location and the operation of the system. This will be the responsibility
of the alarm company to carry this out.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow
the creation or maintenance of a nuisance.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city or within the
city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the City Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer or some other duly designed officer of the city shall give five days'
written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which the
nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)



§ 93.05  CONTENTS OF NOTICE.



   The notice to abate a nuisance shall, when practicable, contain:



   (A)   An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within
a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances;



   (B)   The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;



   (C)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;



   (D)   A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; and



   (E)   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and
no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will
abate the nuisance and assess the cost thereof against the person.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)



§ 93.06  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal
process may be served pursuant to law.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)



§ 93.07  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was
served pursuant to the provision herein, the City Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer or other duly designated officer of the city shall
proceed to abate the nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred
in the abatement thereof.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)



§ 93.08  CITY'S COSTS AND DECLARED LIEN.



   Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance
under the provisions herein shall constitute a lien against the property upon
which the nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected
as provided for by law. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time
of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate until satisfied.



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)



§ 93.09  LITTERING.



   For littering regulations and fines, see § 93.99 below.



(2000 Code, § 12-2)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   In addition to the right of the city to abate the nuisance(s),
whoever violates any provision herein shall be fined not less than $20 nor
more than $250 for each offense; a separate offense shall be committed for
each day the violation occurs. The citation for a violation shall only be
issued after the individual has not abated the nuisance and the
administrative process of abatement has been completed by the city. The city
may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with
this chapter or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.



   (C)   Any person who deposits, throws or leaves any trash, debris or
litter on any public highway or public land within the city shall be fined
not less than $10 nor more than $300.



(2000 Code, § 12-2)



(Ord. 01-02, passed 3-5-2001)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Excavations and Construction



   94.01   Opening permit required



   94.02   Application and cash deposit



   94.03   Restoration of pavement



   94.04   Barriers around excavations



   94.05   Warning lights



   94.06   Sidewalk construction



   94.07   Repair of sidewalks by city



Road and Bridge Projects



   94.15   Public hearing required



   94.16   Notice requirements



   94.17   Public may testify; effect of testimony



   94.18   Hearing to be held prior to construction



   94.19   Separate hearing for each project not required



   94.20   Exemptions from hearing requirement



Obstructions



   94.30   Unloading on street or sidewalk



   94.31   Street and sidewalk obstruction



   94.32   Materials on street or sidewalk



   94.33   Removal of ice and snow



 



   94.99   Penalty



EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION



§ 94.01  OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city
official, to make any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way
of the city unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to
commencement of the work.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.



   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project
and shall be issued by the authorized city official.  Application shall be
made on a form prescribed by the City Council, giving the exact location of
the proposed opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth to be excavated,
and other facts as may be provided for.  The permit shall be issued only
after a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of restoration has been
posted with the authorized city official, conditioned upon prompt and
satisfactory refilling of excavations and restoration of all surfaces
disturbed.



§ 94.03  RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.



   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface
shall be performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the
authorized city official, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and
specifications approved by the Council.



   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to
fill the excavation, restore the surface, and remove all excess materials
within the time specified in the permit or, where not specified therein,
within a reasonable time after commencement of the work, the city may proceed
without notice to make the fill and restoration and the deposit referred to
in § 94.02 shall be forfeited.  Thereupon the deposit shall be paid into
the appropriate city fund, except that part demanded and paid to the
permittee as the difference between the deposit and the charges of the city
for restoration services performed by it.  If the amount of the services
performed by the city should exceed the amount of the deposit, the Clerk or
other proper administrative officer shall proceed to collect the remainder
due from the permittee.



§ 94.04  BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.



   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  WARNING LIGHTS.



   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in
any manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public way, at all times during the night season shall install and
maintain at least two illuminated red lamps which shall be securely and
conspicuously posted on, at, or near each end of the obstruction or
excavation, and if the space involved exceeds 50 feet in extent, at least one
additional lamp for each added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or
obstructed.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.



   It shall be the duty of the authorized city official to supervise
construction or repair of sidewalks within the city.  He or she shall cause
specifications to be prepared for the construction of the various kinds of
pavements and transmit the specifications to the City Council for approval. 
When the specifications are approved, the City Council shall advertise for
proposals to do all the work which may be ordered by the city in construction
and repair of sidewalks, and shall authorize the Mayor to contract therefor,
for a period not exceeding one year, with the lowest responsible bidder, who
shall furnish good and sufficient sureties for the faithful performance of
the work.  The Mayor, if authorized by City Council, may make separate
contracts for the different kinds of work with different parties.



Statutory references:



   Sidewalks; construction along public roads; specifications, see KRS
178.290



   Sidewalks; ramps for wheelchairs, see KRS 66.660



§ 94.07  REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS BY CITY.



   If the abutting property owner fails to repair, reconstruct or improve
a defective sidewalk promptly, the city may cause the sidewalk to be
repaired, reconstructed or improved, pursuant to the provisions of KRS 94.010
et seq.



(2000 Code, § 12-48)



ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS



§ 94.15  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   Before the city expends state-derived tax revenues on a municipal
highway, road, street, or bridge it shall hold a hearing in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter to take the sense of the public with regard
to the project and to priorities for use of tax monies for road and bridge
purposes.



(KRS 174.100)



§ 94.16  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state-derived tax
revenues on a road or bridge by the city, the city shall hold a public
hearing for the purpose of taking the sense of the public with regard to road
and bridge matters within the city.  Notice of the hearing shall be given
not less than seven days nor more than 21 days before the scheduled date of
the public hearing, and before beginning work on any project covered by this
subchapter.



(KRS 174.100(1))



§ 94.17  PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.



   (A)   At the hearing any person may speak with regard to any
proposed project, any project which he or she feels should be built or done
which has not been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and any
other matter related to road or bridge projects.



(KRS 174.100(2))



   (B)   The city shall not be bound by the testimony heard at the
hearing but shall give due consideration to it.



(KRS 174.100(3))



§ 94.18  HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.



   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project
wherein state-derived tax revenues are involved until the hearing as provided
herein has been held.



(KRS 174.100(4))



§ 94.19  SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate hearing
for each project.  A single hearing encompassing the entire road and bridge
program, provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified
at the hearing, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.



(KRS 174.100(5))



§ 94.20  EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency
repair or replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or
man-caused disasters, nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.



(KRS 174.100(6))



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to projects
which are under construction as of the effective date of this subchapter
unless construction is suspended after that date and the city desires to
reactivate the project.



(KRS 174.100(7))



OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 94.30  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.31  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon.  Each day that any fence or
building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a
separate offense.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.32  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.  No owner, occupant,
or person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use thereof.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.33  REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his or her premises free and clear of snow and ice to the
extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove
therefrom all snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing
weather conditions, accumulated thereon within a reasonable time which will
ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after the abatement of any storm during which
the snow and ice may have accumulated.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.



CHAPTER 95:  ANIMAL CONTROL



Section



   95.01   Leash or restraint required



   95.02   Animal nuisance



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  LEASH OR RESTRAINT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No owner or keeper of any dog or other domestic animal
(excepting cats) shall permit or cause the dog or animal to be off the
premises of the owner or keeper, unless the animal is under leash or other
physical restraint.



   (B)   This section includes public park property.



   (C)   Those persons walking animals with leashes or other physical
restraints in public parks or any property other than that of the owner or
keeper also shall be responsible for removing all excrement created by the
animal.



(Ord. 03-05, passed 9-2-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.02  ANIMAL NUISANCE.



   (A)   The animal control officer(s) or any peace officer is
authorized to impound any animal deemed a public nuisance as generally
defined below, or as may be required to assure compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   A public nuisance shall be determined by the officer in his or
her discretion and based on one or more of the following criteria:



      (1)   Excessive noise;



      (2)   Animals creating a hazard to people;



      (3)   Animals exhibiting aggressive behavior;



      (4)   Animals destroying property;



      (5)   Animals that appear to be stray or wandering at large;



      (6)   Animals that appear to be undernourished, sick or
injured; and/or



      (7)   Violation of the leash or restraint requirement, to
include an owner or keeper permitting or failing to restrict a domesticated
pet from using another's property as a playground or toilet or otherwise
failing to reasonably respect the rights of another property owner.



(Ord. 03-05, passed 9-2-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The owner or keeper who violates this chapter shall be
penalized as follows:



      (1)   First offense: verbal warning;



      (2)   Second offense: $50 fine; and



      (3)   Third and subsequent offense: $100 fine, impoundment of
the animal by the animal control officer and the owner or keeper cited to
court, plus reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the city and county
relative to the animal, including, but not limited to, boarding charges.



   (B)   This penalty provision does not prevent an officer from
impounding any animal (including cats) prior to the third offense when, in
the officer's discretion, the impoundment is warranted and necessary for the
safety, health and protection of any person, animal or property.



(Ord. 03-05, passed 9-2-2003)



CHAPTER 96:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



   96.01   Fire Prevention Code



§ 96.01  FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of the State Fire Prevention Code 2006 (Standards of
Safety). The Kentucky Fire Prevention Code 2006 (Standards of Safety) as
promulgated in 815 KAR 10:060 by the Commissioner of the Department of
Housing, Buildings and Construction on the advice and recommendation of the
State Fire Marshal, is hereby adopted in full as an ordinance of the city.
Copies of the code book are available through the Department of Housing,
Buildings and Construction, 1047 U.S. 127 South, Frankfort, Kentucky 40601.



   (B)   Designated enforcement officer. The City Fire Department shall
be designated as the local enforcement agency for the standards of safety as
appointed by the city.



   (C)   Permits and fees. The requirements for permits and required
fees shall be as provided by the local Fire Department.



   (D)   Appeal process. All final decisions of the Fire Code Official
of the city, shall be appealable to a local appeals board or in other proper
manners pursuant to the procedures adopted by the City Council.



   (E)   Saving clause. Nothing in this section or in the Fire
Prevention Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in division (A) above; nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this section.



(Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-2007)



CHAPTER 97:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   97.01   Definitions



   97.02   Alarm registration



   97.03   False alarms permitted; fees charged



   97.04   Duties of alarm protective service providers



   97.05   Registration of alarm protective service personnel



   97.06   Alarm permit application



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SITE.  Area controlled by a single alarm system, including those
alarms which are designed to elicit a response from the City Police
Department.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any alarm system which automatically causes a contact
with the City Police Department for the purpose of reporting an active alarm.



(Ord. 07-06, passed 5-29-2007)



§ 97.02  ALARM REGISTRATION.



   (A)   No person shall install an alarm system or use or possess an
operative alarm system without first notifying the City Police Department.
The Department shall require detailed information regarding the alarm system.



   (B)   Any alarm company servicing equipment in the city limits shall:



      (1)   Submit a list of alarm customers within the city limits
to the City Police Department; and



      (2)   Keep a log of requests for service for each alarm
system. These logs shall be available for review by the City Police
Department and shall be kept for a period no less than 120 days from the date
that service was requested by the alarm user.



(Ord. 07-06, passed 5-29-2007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.03  FALSE ALARMS PERMITTED; FEES CHARGED.



   (A)   Each alarm user shall be permitted six false alarms per alarm
site per calendar year (i.e., six false police-response (i.e. burglary)
alarms each year).



      (1)   After the sixth false alarm, the City Police Department
will assess a per run fee to defray the cost of the excessive number of
runs/responses to the city. The alarm user shall inform the City Police
Department of action taken to prevent further false alarms.



      (2)   The fee schedule is as follows:



 

City Police Department
 
False Alarm Responses per Calendar Year


0 to 6 false alarms
 
$0


7 to 12 false alarms
 
$50 each response run


13 or more false alarms
 
$100 each response run



 



   (B)   After an alarm user experiences three false alarms per alarm
site per calendar year, the alarm user shall notify his or her or its alarm
service provider of the recurring malfunction and shall produce proof to the
City Police Department of the service call conducted by the alarm service
provider within ten days of the false alarm or show proof if the alarm was
activated by employee error, the employee has been trained in the correct use
of the alarm system. Any alarm user who violates this section of the
ordinance by failing to present proof within the stated time period shall be
penalized by acceleration of the fee schedule set forth above so that every
false alarm following the third false alarm shall result in a response run
fee of $50 per City Police Department response run.



   (C)   No alarm user shall be subject to a per run fee for false
alarms that result from acts of God, civil disturbance or abnormal weather
conditions. Nor shall a fee be charged if the activation was a result of an
alarm company's failure to provide service within 24 hours of reporting a
malfunction and requesting service. It shall, however, be the burden of the
alarm user to provide reasonable proof that service was requested.



(Ord. 07-06, passed 5-29-2007)



§ 97.04  DUTIES OF ALARM PROTECTIVE SERVICE PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Any and all persons, firms, corporations or other business
entities providing alarm protective services to alarm sites within the city
limits of the city shall within 30 days following enactment of the ordinance
notify and inform alarm systems users for whom the alarm protective service
provider installed an alarm system or otherwise provides services, that the
alarm system user must obtain an alarm permit registration from the City
Police Department on or before the operational date of this chapter.



   (B)   Any and all persons, firms, corporations or other business
entities providing alarm protective services shall, before installing,
servicing, repairing, maintaining or replacing an alarm system at an alarm
site within the city limits, notify and inform the alarm system user for whom
the services are to be performed that the alarm system user must have
obtained an alarm permit application from the city police. If the permit
application has been obtained, the city police must be notified before any
modification, installation or repairs are made.



   (C)   No person shall install, service, repair, maintain or replace
an alarm system at an alarm site without the alarm system user having first
obtained a valid alarm permit in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 07-06, passed 5-29-2007)



§ 97.05  REGISTRATION OF ALARM PROTECTIVE SERVICE PERSONNEL.



   Any and all persons who own, have or acquire an interest in any
business entity which provides alarm protective services or who are employed
by the business entity shall, prior to acquiring the interest or commencing
business or the employment, register with the city, by completing application
for and obtaining a permit authorizing the conduct of business within the
city limits of the city.



(Ord. 07-06, passed 5-29-2007)



§ 97.06  ALARM PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit the
operation of an alarm system at an alarm site unless a valid alarm permit has
been issued by the city, with exception of an alarm protective service
provider unless the alarm protective system provider is the owner, agent or
person in control of the property which the alarm system is designed to
protect.



   (B)   An alarm system user shall obtain an alarm permit for each
alarm site. There is no fee paid by the alarm system user/applicant for the
alarm permit or the application.



   (C)   Application for an alarm shall be obtained from and submitted
for approval to the City Police Department. The application shall require the
following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm
system user;



      (2)   The street address of the alarm site and the name and
telephone number of the occupant thereof;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm
protective service provider or providers who will install and/or service the
alarm system; and



      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of at least three
persons on behalf of the alarm system at any time upon notification from the
city should same become necessary, a minimum of two of the named three
persons must be county residents.



   (D)   The permit holder shall immediately notify in writing the City
Police Department dispatch of any and all changes in the information provided
on the application.



   (E)   An alarm permit shall not be transferable.



   (F)   Any alarm system user violating this chapter by failure to
obtain permit shall be given one warning by the City Police Department after
one alarm response run to an alarm site for which the alarm system user has
failed to obtain an alarm permit; thereafter, each response run to the alarm
site by the City Police Department shall result in a penalty of $50 per run
payable by the alarm system user. Any penalty assessed hereunder shall be in
addition to any applicable response run fee imposed under § 97.03 above.



(Ord. 07-06, passed 5-29-2007)



CHAPTER 98:  SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS



Section



   98.01   Purpose



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Prohibition



   98.04   Exceptions



   98.05   General responsibilities



   98.06   Enforcement



   98.07   Other provisions



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  PURPOSE.



   In order to serve the public health, safety and general welfare, it is
the declared purpose of this chapter to prohibit smoking in all enclosed
public places.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DWELLING.  Any place used as a primary residence.



   ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACE.  An area that:



      (1)   Is closed overhead by a roof or other covering of any
material, whether permanent or temporary;



      (2)   Has 40% or more of its perimeter closed in by walls or
other coverings of any material, whether permanent or temporary; and



      (3)   Is open to the public.



   PRIVATE ORGANIZATION.  An establishment which maintains selective
members, is operated by the membership, does not provide food or lodging for
pay to anyone who is not a member or a member's guest and has been granted an
exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a non-profit organization
under 26 U.S.C. § 501.



   SMOKE or SMOKING.  The act of lighting, inhaling, burning or exhaling
the smoke from any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe, or other combustible
tobacco or other product.



   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE.  A retail store devoted primarily to the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products and accessories utilized for the consumption of
tobacco and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and
that is not operated as part of, or in conjunction with, any business subject
to the prohibition of § 98.03 below. The sale of other products shall be
considered incidental if the sales generate less than 25% of the total annual
gross sales. Revenue generated from cigarette vending machine sales shall not
be used to determine whether a business satisfies the definition of a RETAIL
TOBACCO STORE.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 98.03  PROHIBITION.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places, including
all enclosed places of employment within the city.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The prohibition set forth in § 98.03 above shall not apply to
any of the following:



      (1)   In any dwelling;



      (2)   A private organization except when the establishment is
open to the public; or



      (3)   A retail tobacco store; provided that smoke does not
infiltrate into an area where smoking is otherwise prohibited by the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall authorize smoking in any place
where it is otherwise prohibited by statute, ordinance, regulation or by
order of the Fire Marshal.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 98.05  GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   An owner, lessee, principal manager or person in
control of an enclosed public place shall post signs, with letters of not
less than one inch high or symbols no less than three inches high, using the
words "No Smoking" or the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with
a red bar across it conspicuously either on all public entrances or in a
position clearly visible on entry into the enclosed public place.



      (2)   The owner, operator, manager or designee or employee of
every enclosed public place shall inform persons violating this chapter of
the applicable provisions thereof and require compliance.



      (3)   All ashtrays except for ashtrays displayed for sale and
not for use on the premises and except for receptacles located outside the
enclosed public place used only for disposal of smoking material, and other
smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited and shall not be permitted by the owner, operator, manager or
other person having control of the enclosed public place. Any permanent
structure that functioned or was used as an ashtray shall be disabled or
altered to prevent its use as an ashtray.



      (4)   The requirements of this section do not apply to any
exempt dwelling.



   (B)   (1)   An owner, lessee, principal manager, or person in
control of an enclosed public place shall:



         (a)   Ask smokers to refrain from smoking in any
no-smoking area; and



         (b)   Use any other legal means which may be appropriate
to further the intent of this chapter.



      (2)   An owner, principal manager, proprietor or any other
person in control of an enclosed public place shall ensure compliance by
subordinates, employees and agents with this chapter.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 98.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   Enforcement of this chapter shall be by citation issued by any police
officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the city. Notice of the provisions of
the chapter shall be provided by publication.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 98.07  OTHER PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Smoking is prohibited within 15 feet from the main outside
entrance for the public to any enclosed public place as to ensure that
tobacco smoke does not enter the enclosed public place through entrances,
windows, ventilation systems or other means.



   (B)   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in
any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or
customer because that employee, applicant  or customer exercises any rights
afforded by this chapter.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   An owner, manager, proprietor, lessee or other person in
control of the premises who violates any provision herein, including a person
who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited, shall be subject to the
following penalties:



      (1)   A fine of $25 for the first offense;



      (2)   A fine of $100 for the second offense;



      (3)   A fine of $250 for the third and each subsequent offense;



      (4)   Persons who smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited
and who refuse to extinguish their smoking material when asked, may be
required to leave the premises, and shall be subject to prosecution for
trespass if they do not leave when asked; and



      (5)   If the person who violates any provisions of this
chapter is the owner, manager, proprietor, lessee or other person in control
of the premises, the fines described in divisions (A)(1), (2) and (3) above
shall be doubled.



   (B)   Each calendar day during which the violation occurs shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 6-1-2009)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         111.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE





         112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL





         113.   PAWN SHOPS AND BROKERS





         114.   COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS/FACILITIES





         115.   SOLICITATION




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Insurance Premium Tax



   110.01   Imposed



   110.02   Amount of fee; life insurers



   110.03   Insurers other than life



   110.04   When due



   110.05   Annual report



Outdoor Advertising Displays



   110.15   Purpose



   110.16   General provisions and definitions



   110.17   Maintenance and removal



   110.18   Prohibitions



   110.19   Permitted uses by district



   110.20   Requirements



   110.21   Nonconforming signs



   110.22   Cap and replacement



   110.23   Construction permit



   110.24   Notice of violation



   110.25   Property exempt from subchapter



   110.26   Fees



 



   110.99   Penalty



INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX



§ 110.01  IMPOSED.



   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the city on July 1
of each year.



(2000 Code, § 6-56)



§ 110.02  AMOUNT OF FEE; LIFE INSURERS.



   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues life
insurance policies on the lives of persons residing within the city shall be
2% of the first year's premiums actually collected within each calendar
quarter by reason of the issuance of the policies.



(2000 Code, § 6-57)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see KRS 91A.080(2)



§ 110.03  INSURERS OTHER THAN LIFE.



   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any
insurance policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be 10% of the
premiums actually collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the
issuance of the policies on risks located within the city on those classes of
business which the company is authorized to transact, less all premiums
returned to policy holders. However, any license fee or tax imposed upon
premium receipts shall not include premiums received for insuring employers
against liability for personal injuries to their employees, or death caused
thereby, under the provisions of the workers' compensation act being KRS
Chapter 342, and shall not include premiums received on policies of group
health insurance provided for state employees under KRS 18A.225(2) or
premiums received by any self-funded health benefits program for state
employees created pursuant to KRS Chapter 18A.



(2000 Code, § 6-58)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see KRS 91A.080(3)



§ 110.04  WHEN DUE.



   All license fees imposed by this subchapter shall be due no later than
30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. License fees which are not
paid on or before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest rate
as defined in KRS 131.010(6).



(2000 Code, § 6-59)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see KRS 91A.080(7), (8)



§ 110.05  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this
subchapter shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a written
breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the following
categories of insurance:



   (A)   Casualty;



   (B)   Automobile;



   (C)   Inland marine;



   (D)   Fire and allied perils;



   (E)   Health; and



   (F)   Life.



(2000 Code, § 6-60)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see KRS 91A.080(7)



OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DISPLAYS



§ 110.15  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is intended to provide reasonable standards for outdoor
advertising while discouraging their proliferation, disrepair or garishness.



(2000 Code, § 6-76)



§ 110.16  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   An outdoor advertising display means an identification,
description or illustration which directs attention to a product, person,
business or service not offered or sold as the primary use, business or
activity on the premises where it is located.



   (B)   An outdoor advertising display may not be erected or placed on
any property which is zoned for either residential, historic or agricultural
use, except as permitted by this subchapter.



   (C)   An outdoor advertising display may only be erected or placed
in permitted areas. For purposes of this subchapter, PERMITTED AREAS shall be
property adjacent to the rights-of-way of Kentucky Highways 210, 68 and 55.



(2000 Code, § 6-77)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.17  MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   When the product, person, business or service that is
advertised on an outdoor advertising display is abandoned or altered, the
display must be removed or altered within 90 days to depict an existing
product, person, business or service.



   (B)   An outdoor advertising display is considered not functional:



      (1)   When its essential elements are no longer readable
unless the display is not in use and is being properly maintained;



      (2)   When a condition of dilapidation exists; or



      (3)   When the area that is leased for display or within 25
feet of a display on undeveloped property is not kept free of weeds, debris
or refuse.



   (C)   The Building Inspector has the right of entry to inspect
outdoor advertising displays to determine whether they are functional. If the
Building Inspector determines that a display is not functional, he or she
shall send written notice to the owner of the display to remove, alter or
repair the display or the area of undeveloped property on which the display
is located. If the owner does not comply within 90 days, the Building
Inspector shall order removal of the sign at the owner's expense.



(2000 Code, § 6-78)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.18  PROHIBITIONS.



   The following are prohibited in connection with any outdoor advertising
display:



   (A)   Placement over or in a street, highway right-of-way or
sidewalk;



   (B)   Placement where the display or its illumination may interfere
with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with traffic or railroad signs or
signals or oncoming traffic; or where they would present a traffic hazard as
determined by the Building Inspector;



   (C)   Lights resembling danger or emergency lights;



   (D)   Flashing, moving or intermittent lights, except white; and



   (E)   Rotating or revolving beams of light.



(2000 Code, § 6-79)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.19  PERMITTED USES BY DISTRICT.



   (A)   An outdoor advertising display may not be erected or placed in
any residential, historic or agricultural district.



   (B)   An outdoor advertising display may only be erected or placed
along Kentucky Highways 210, 68 and 55, subject to the restrictions set forth
in this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 6-80)



§ 110.20  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Height. An outdoor advertising display shall not exceed 50
feet in height; the measurement to be from average grade of the property upon
which the subject display is erected to the lowest point on the principal
face of the outdoor advertising display.



   (B)   Size. The total area of all faces in any configuration of an
outdoor advertising display shall not exceed the total of 600 square feet on
each side of the display.



   (C)   Distance from certain districts. An outdoor advertising
display may not be erected or placed within 500 feet of an historical
district, public, elementary or public secondary school or residential
district, as measured along the right-of-way immediately adjacent to the
advertising display.



   (D)   Spacing. The distance between two outdoor advertising displays
may not be less than 500 feet on the same side of a right-of-way as measured
along the right-of-way adjacent to the advertising display.



(2000 Code, § 6-81)



§ 110.21  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   The structural support of outdoor advertising signs deemed
nonconforming uses under the Zoning Ordinance may be reconstructed, rebuilt
or replaced in order to bring the sign into compliance.



   (B)   Should the nonconforming outdoor advertising sign be damaged
or destroyed, the owner may reconstruct, rebuild or replace the sign. In
doing so, the face area of the outdoor advertising display shall not be
increased.



   (C)   If, as a result of the location of the sign, it is in
violation of this subchapter, the owner shall be entitled to remove the
outdoor advertising sign but shall be permitted to erect a new sign at a
subsequent location, which erection shall be specifically permitted,
notwithstanding § 110.22 below with respect to cap and replacement. The
owner shall not, however, be required to do so.



(2000 Code, § 6-82)



§ 110.22  CAP AND REPLACEMENT.



   (A)   In order that the total face area and number of faces of all
lawful outdoor advertising signs within the business districts and the city
not be increased, no person shall construct an outdoor advertising sign
without first removing an outdoor advertising sign equal in face area and
number of faces.



   (B)   At present, there exists within the city approximately 34
outdoor advertising displays which would be subject to this subchapter.



   (C)   Permits for construction of an outdoor advertising sign shall
only be issued for additional outdoor advertising signs at the ratio of one
face for each population increase in the city of 400 in order that the
proliferation of outdoor advertising displays be curtailed.



(2000 Code, § 6-83)



§ 110.23  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.



   No person shall construct an outdoor advertising sign without obtaining
an outdoor advertising construction permit from the City Building Inspector.
An outdoor advertising sign permit shall be required in addition to a
building permit and any other permit or license required by law or ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 6-84)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.24  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The Building Inspector shall annually inspect every outdoor advertising
sign to determine compliance with law. The Inspector shall send a notice of
violation to the holder of the annual outdoor advertising sign permit or, if
no annual permit has been issued with respect to a sign, to the owner of the
real property on which the sign is located of any outdoor advertising sign
found not to comply and shall post a copy of the notice on the sign or its
supporting structure which will require either compliance or removal pursuant
to § 110.17 above.



(2000 Code, § 6-85)



§ 110.25  PROPERTY EXEMPT FROM SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter does not affect outdoor advertising structures on
interstate highways or parkways in that these signs are regulated by the
State Department of Transportation.



(2000 Code, § 6-87)



§ 110.26  FEES.



   The fees and charges shall be imposed upon owners and applicants for
outdoor advertising sign construction permits according to the fee schedule
of building permits.



(2000 Code, § 6-88)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 110.15 through 110.26
shall be fined not more than $250; provided, however, that the violation has
not been corrected within 90 days after notice of same. Display of an outdoor
advertising sign in violation of §§ 110.15 through 110.26 within a
different calendar month shall be a separate offense on a second conviction
as to the same outdoor advertising sign as to the same provision of §§
110.15 through 110.26.



(2000 Code, § 6-86)



CHAPTER 111:  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Fee; generally



   111.03   Tax payment required



   111.04   Apportionment



   111.05   Employers to withhold



   111.06   Returns required



   111.07   Extensions



   111.08   Refunds



   111.09   Federal audit provisions



   111.10   Administrative provisions



   111.11   Information to remain confidential



   111.12   Collection and use of tax; records



   111.13   Minimum and maximum liability



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASSOCIATION.  A partnership or any other form of unincorporated
enterprise owned or operated by two or more persons.



   BUSINESS.  Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit. BUSINESS shall not
include a board of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations or unions
or other associations performing services usually performed by trade
associations or unions as recognized by the Internal Revenue Service.
BUSINESS shall not include funds, foundations, corporations or associations
organized and operated for the exclusive and sole purpose of religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, educational, civic or fraternal purposes,
where no part of the earnings, incomes or receipts of such unit, group or
association, inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or other person.



   BUSINESS ENTITY.  Each separate corporation, limited liability
company, business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
registered limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association,
joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service organization
or other legal entity through which business is conducted;



   CITY.  Campbellsville, Kentucky.



   COMPENSATION.  Wages, salaries, commissions or any other form of
remuneration paid or payable by an employer for services performed by an
employee, which are required to be reported for federal income tax purposes
and adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
retirement, profit sharing or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred
for federal income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar
arrangement, including but not limited to salary reduction arrangements under
I.R.C. §§ 401(a), 401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h) or 457; and



      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
welfare benefit, fringe benefit or other benefit plan made by salary
reduction or other payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce
federal taxable compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including but
not limited to I.R.C. §§ 125 and 132.



   CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT.  The date that the adjustments made
by the Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business
entity's federal income tax return become final and unappealable.



   CORPORATION.  A corporation of joint stock company including S
corporations organized under the laws of the United States, Kentucky, another
state, territory or foreign country or a dependency thereof, to otherwise
existing under color of law as a corporation including a nonprofit
corporation and a joint stock company and recognized as such for federal
income tax purposes.



   DOMESTIC SERVANT.  An individual employed to drive his employer as a
chauffeur or employed on the grounds or in the home of his or her employer,
to cook, clean, wash, garden, transport or otherwise care for or wait upon
the employer, the employer's family and guests or to care for the person,
home, grounds and/or vehicles of the employer, the employer's family and
guests, including but not limited to maids, butlers, nurses, nursemaids,
gardeners, cooks' launderers and chauffeurs engaged to service the employer,
the employer's family and guests, but not including individuals who are
employed by a cleaning service, personal nursing service, chauffeuring
service or other entity which offers the services of its employees to the
public.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person who renders services to another person or any
business entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and
any officer, employee or elected official of the United States, a state or
any political subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any
one or more of the above. A person classified as an independent contractor
under the Internal Revenue Code shall not be considered an EMPLOYEE.



   EMPLOYER.  The person for whom an individual performs or performed any
service, of whatever nature, as the employee of that person, except that:



      (1)   If the person for whom the individual performs or
performed the services does not have control of the payment of the wages for
the services, the term EMPLOYER means the person having control of the
payment of the wages; and



      (2)   In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a
nonresident alien individual, foreign partnership or foreign corporation, not
engaged in trade or business within the United States, the term EMPLOYER
means that person.



   FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.  All forms filed for federal income tax
purposes including all schedules.



   FIDUCIARY.  A guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver,
conservator or any individual or corporation acting in a fiduciary capacity
for any other person. This includes all persons required to file under KRS
141.190.



   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT.  The revenue agent's report
or other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by
the Internal Revenue Service.



   FISCAL YEAR.  Fiscal year as defined in I.R.C. § 7701(a)(24).



   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.  The Internal Revenue Code in effect on
December 31, of the year in which the tax is due, exclusive of any amendments
made subsequent to that date, other than amendments that extend provisions in
effect on December 31, of the year in which the tax is due, that would
otherwise terminate.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  An individual who does not have a permanent
business location in the city and who sells items of merchandise.



   KENTUCKY STATE INCOME TAX RETURN.  All forms filed for state income
tax purposes including all schedules.



   LICENSE FEE.  A tax imposed on:



      (1)   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation
earned by persons within the city for work done and services performed or
rendered in the city; and



      (2)   The net profits of self-employed persons, corporations,
S corporations, associations, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint ventures, fiduciaries, itinerant merchants or any other entity
resulting from businesses, trades, occupations, professions or activities
conducted in the city.



   LICENSEE.  Any person required to file a separate return or to pay a
license fee thereon under this chapter.



   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY.  An unincorporated association formed under
KRS Chapter 275, or similar statute of another state.



   NET PROFIT.  Gross income as defined in I.R.C. § 61, minus all the
deductions from gross income allowed by I.R.C. Chapter 1, and adjusted as
follows:



      (1)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax
or local tax which is computed, in whole or in part, by reference to gross or
net income and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States,
local taxing authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico, any territory or possession of the United States, or any
foreign country or political subdivision thereof;



      (2)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly
or indirectly is allocable to income which is either exempt from taxation or
otherwise not taxed;



      (3)   Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss
carryback or carryforward allowed under I.R.C. § 172;



      (4)   Include any amount of income and expenses passed through
separately as required by the Internal Revenue Code to an owner of a business
entity that is a pass-through entity for federal tax purposes; and



      (5)   Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state
taxation by the Kentucky Constitution, or the Constitution and statutory laws
of the United States.



   NEXUS.  A minimum connection between a person/business entity and the
taxing jurisdiction brought about when the person/business entity
purposefully avails itself of the privileges and protection of the
jurisdiction while engaging in business or practicing a trade, occupation or
profession, without excluding by implication other activities which may
create a nexus.



   OCCUPATION TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The official collector and
administrator of the occupational tax, to be appointed by the city.



   PARTNERSHIP.  The relationship between two or more who join together
to carry on a trade or business. Each partner contributes money, property,
labor or skills, and each expects to share in the profits and losses. A
partner can be an individual person, corporation, trust, estate or another
partnership.



   PERSON.  Every natural person, whether a resident or non-resident of
the city. Whenever the word PERSON is used in a clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as
applied to a partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall
mean the officers and directors thereof.



   QUESTIONNAIRE.  The registration form required by the occupational tax
office to be completed before the commencement of business within city.



   RENTAL UNIT.  Any room or rooms connected or other structure or
portion thereof constituting a separate, independent establishment of
premises for rent, lease or sublease to the occupant thereof.



   RETURN or REPORT.  Any properly completed and, if required, signed
form, statement, certification, declaration or any other document permitted
or required to be submitted or filed with the city.



   SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION.  When applied to
a person employed by others shall have the same meaning and shall include the
gross amount of all salaries, wages, commissions, fees (including director
fees), bonuses or any other money payments of any kind, or other
considerations having a monetary value, which a person receives or becomes
entitled to, or is given credit for by an employer, without deducting for
withholding taxes, social security benefits, any form of insurance or
retirement benefits, or other deductions made by an employer in calculating
"take home-pay".



   SALES REVENUE.  Receipts from the sale, lease or rental of goods,
services or property.



   SOLE PROPRIETOR.  A natural person engaged in any business, profession
or occupation, but not as an employee.



   TAX DISTRICT.  Any city or city with the authority to levy net profits
or occupational license taxes.



   TAXABLE NET PROFIT.  In case of a business entity having payroll or
sales revenue only within the city, means net profit as defined in this
section.



   TAXABLE NET PROFIT.  In case of a business entity having payroll or
sales revenue both within and without the city means net profit as defined in
this section, and as apportioned under § 111.04 below.



   TAXABLE YEAR.  The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the
calendar year, upon the basis of which net income is computed.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person or business made liable for taxation or for the
payment of amounts withheld from employees under the terms of this chapter.



   TRADE, OCCUPATION or PROFESSION.  Include any and all activities and
the rendering of any and all services of all kinds for net profit or gain of
any kind when applied to persons so engaged for themselves whether the person
be a resident of city or not.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.02  FEE; GENERALLY.



   (A)   Every person or business engaged in any trade, occupation or
profession, or other activity or anyone required to file a return under this
chapter in the city shall be required to complete and execute the
questionnaire prescribed by the occupational tax office. Each person shall be
required to complete a separate questionnaire for each separate business
before the commencement of business or in the event of a status change, other
than change of address. Licensees are required to notify the occupational tax
office of changes of address, or the cessation of business activity, and of
other changes which render inaccurate the information supplied in the
completed questionnaire.



   (B)   Every natural person and every entity defined in § 111.01
above engaging in any activity for profit, or filing Kentucky Income Tax
forms 740, 741, 765, 720 or 720S, shall be required to file and pay to the
Occupational Tax Administrator an annual occupational license fee resulting
from engaging in each activity. The license fee shall be measured by 1% of
compensation defined in § 111.01 above and 1% of the net profits defined in
§ 111.01 for each separate business or entity.



      (1)   Each person, business and entity above operating for
profit entirely within the city shall attach a copy of their appropriate
Kentucky Income Tax Return (form 720 or 720S along with 720L, 740, 741 or
765) and supporting schedules (e.g., Federal Schedule C, E or F.).



      (2)   All partnerships and LLCs (not their partners or
members) and S corporations (not their shareholders) are subject to this
chapter, that is, the occupational license fee is not "passed through" these
entities. In the case of guaranteed payments to partners, the partners are
subject to the occupational license fee on any like payments. The partnership
will be subject to the occupational license fee on any income shown on
Schedule K, page 3, of Kentucky Form 765, less the guaranteed payments.



   (C)   Subject to this chapter is all income derived from the hire,
rental or leasing of personal property, including those persons engaged in
farm activity. All wages, salaries, commissions or other income earned or
received by persons, associations, partnerships, corporations, S
corporations, joint ventures or any renting or leasing real estate if the
person, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other entity
owns any interest in real estate in the city used for commercial or
industrial purposes.



   (D)   Persons, associations, partnerships, corporations, joint
ventures or any other entity will be subject to the occupational license fee
on any income shown on Federal Schedule E.



   (E)   Every person or business engaged in farm activity for profit
will be subject to the occupational license fee on any net income shown on
Federal Schedule F.



   (F)   Sole proprietors engaged in any business activity for profit
will be subject to the occupational license fee on any income shown on
Federal Schedule C.



   (G)   Wages earned either within or outside the city may not be used
as a credit against the net profits of a business



   (H)   A person practicing a business, profession, trade or
occupation shall be deemed to be subject to the net profits licenses fee if
the person has a nexus with the city sufficient to justify the imposition of
the license fee in a manner consistent with the commerce clause and the due
process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United
States and other applicable federal law. If the person has a sufficient nexus
with the city, but also has a sufficient nexus with other cities or counties
of the state, other states of the United States, and/or other nations, then
the net profits derived from activities conducted within the city shall be
determined by the apportionment formula set out in § 111.04 below herein (or
other applicable section). It shall not be necessary that there be an
independently established nexus between the city and each activity from which
the licensee has derived income subject to apportionment. Consequently, the
"net profit" of the corporation, fiduciary, partnership or other association
shall be subject to apportionment and taxation based on unitary business
principles. To the extent that the licensee submits satisfactory proof that
any income is not from a unitary source, such income may be excluded.



   (I)   Establishing "nexus": without excluding by implication other
activities which may create a nexus, one or more of the following connections
between a person/business entity in the city shall normally establish a
sufficient nexus:



      (1)   Location of a place of business in the city;



      (2)   Frequent and continuing entry into the city in the
course of business by an officer or employee of a business;



      (3)   Delivery of goods to residents in the city other than
through the mails or by common carrier;



      (4)   Contracting to buy or sell goods in the city; and



      (5)   Contracting substantial business activity in the city
leading to a contract to sell goods.



   (J)   Paid preparer certification in lieu of filing of return:



      (1)   Upon the certification of the taxpayer and the
certification of a "paid tax preparer", provided on a form approved by the
Occupational Tax Administrator, that the net profit or other income of an
employee, taxpayer or other entity shown upon the approved form is and has
been calculated by the paid tax preparer certifying the form based on actual
filed tax returns which are and shall remain for the applicable federal
statute of limitation on file in the preparer's office;



      (2)   The filing shall be deemed consent by the taxpayer and
preparer for the Administrator to review the forms on file at any time deemed
necessary by the Administrator;



      (3)   Upon filing § 1.03 shall be deemed to have been
complied with without the necessity of deposit of a copy of the returns or
forms with the Administrator; and



      (4)   Notwithstanding the above the paid preparer and taxpayer
shall make the return or forms available to the Administrator immediately
upon written request from the Administrator.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.03  TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Occupational license fee is required generally as set
forth in § 111.02 above.



      (2)   All partnerships, S corporations, and all other entities
where income is "passed through" to the owners are subject to this chapter.
The occupational license tax imposed in this chapter is assessed against
income before it is "passed through" these entities to the owners.



      (3)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate or
withdraws from the city during any taxable year, or if any business entity in
any manner surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the
dissolution, cessation of business, withdrawal or loss or surrender of
charter shall not defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and
collection of any occupational license tax for the period of that taxable
year during which the business entity had business activity in the city.



      (4)   If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a
federal income tax return, the occupational license tax shall be computed for
the purposes of this chapter on the basis of the same calendar or fiscal year
required by the federal government, and shall employ the same methods of
accounting required for federal income tax purposes.



   (B)   Exemptions.



      (1)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section
shall not apply to the following persons or business entities:



         (a)   Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust
company, combined trust, banking and title business organized and doing
business in this state, any savings and loan association whether state or
federally chartered;



         (b)   Any compensation received by members of the State
National Guard for active duty training, unit training assemblies and annual
field training;



         (c)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for
election training or work at election booths in state, city and local
primary, regular or special elections;



         (d)   Public service corporations that pay an ad valorem
tax on property valued and assessed by the State Department of Revenue
pursuant to the provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are
predominantly non-public service who are also engaged in public service
activity are required to pay a license fee on their net profit derived from
the non-public service activities apportioned to the city;



         (e)   Persons or business entities that have been issued
a license under KRS Chapter 243 to engage in manufacturing or trafficking in
alcoholic beverages. Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but may
exclude the portion of their net profits derived from the manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages;



         (f)   Insurance companies incorporated under the laws of
and doing business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky except as provided in KRS
91 A.080; and



         (g)   Any profits, earnings, distributions of an
investment fund which would qualify under KRS 154.20-250 to 154.20-284 to the
extent any profits, earnings or distributions would not be taxable to an
individual investor.



      (2)   All natural persons aged 65 and older shall be exempt
from the provisions of the occupational license fee as to the first $2,000 of
salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation earned by those persons in
the city for work done or services performed or rendered in the city, or
exempt as to the first $2,000 of net profits of any business, trade
occupation or profession conducted in the city. It shall be the duty of all
employers to withhold on all wages. Each individual person entitled to this
refund must file FORM-ERC65 provided by or obtainable from the occupational
tax office. A W-2 and proof of age must be provided to receive the refund. No
more than one exemption will be allowed per person or business. This
exemption may be used on either personal wages or net profits.



      (3)   A person engaged in agriculture business (raising crops
and livestock) who employs less than five employees on a regular time basis,
(450 hours during a quarter), may file a return and pay the withholding tax
at the end of the taxable year.



      (4)   Compensation received for domestic services rendered by
those persons classified as domestic servants by § 111.01 above.



      (5)   Those persons qualifying under KRS 68.197(2).



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.04  APPORTIONMENT.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) below, net profit shall be
apportioned as follows:



      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales
revenue in more than one tax district, by multiplying the net profit by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in division
(B) below, plus the sales factor, described in division (C) below, and the
denominator of which is two;



      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than
one tax district, by multiplying the net profit by the sales factor as set
forth in division (C) below; and



      (3)   For the purposes of divisions (A) through (D) of this
section, the business entity shall file an apportionment form provided by the
occupational tax office.



   (B)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is
the total amount paid or payable in the city during the tax period by the
business entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total
compensation paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax
period. Compensation is paid or payable in the city based on the time the
individual's service is performed within the city.



   (C)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
total sales revenue of the business entity in the city during the tax period,
and the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business
entity everywhere during the tax period.



      (1)   The sales, lease or rental of tangible personal property
is in the city if:



         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a
purchaser, other than the United States government, or to the designee of the
purchaser within the city regardless of the f.o.b. point or other conditions
of the sale; or



         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store,
warehouse, factory or other place of storage in the city and the purchaser is
the United States government.



      (2)   Sales revenues, other than revenue from the sale, lease
or rental of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real
property, are apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the numerator of
which is the time spent in performing the income-producing activity within
the city and the denominator of which is the total time spent performing that
income-producing activity.



      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real
property is allocated to the tax district where the property is located.



   (D)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly
represent the extent of the business entity's activity in the city, the
business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in respect to
all or any part of the business entity's business activity, if reasonable:



      (1)   Separate accounting;



      (2)   The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;



      (3)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors which
will fairly represent the business entity's business activity in the city; or



      (4)   The employment of any other method to effectuate an
equitable allocation and apportionment of net profit.



   (E)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the city, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or
payable as a result of work done or service performed or rendered within the
city. The license tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage which the
compensation for work performed or services rendered within the city bears to
the total wages and compensation paid or payable. In order for the city to
verify the accuracy of a taxpayer's reported percentages under this division
(E), the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.05  EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.



   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee
shall deduct and withhold upon the payment of the compensation any tax
imposed against the compensation by the city. Amounts withheld shall be paid
to the city in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall, for the quarter ending after January 1 and for each quarter
ending thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of
each quarter, make a return and report to the city, and pay to the city, the
tax required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is
permitted or required to report within a reasonable time after some other
period as determined by the city.



   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any
sums required by this chapter to be withheld and paid shall be personally and
individually liable to the city for any sum or sums withheld or required to
be withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (D)   The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any
employer who fails to withhold or pay over to the city sums required to be
withheld under this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the
amounts withheld to the city, the lien shall commence as of the date the
amounts withheld were required to be paid to the city. If the employer fails
to withhold, the lien shall commence at the time the liability of the
employer is assessed by the city.



   (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and
file on a form furnished or approved by the city a reconciliation of the
occupational license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to
employees. Either copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage
and tax statements, or a detailed employee listing with the required
equivalent information, as determined by the city, shall be submitted.



   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or
before January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and
occupational license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid
to the employee for payment to the city during the preceding calendar year.



   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax
required to be deducted and withheld under this section.



   (H)   The President, Vice President, Secretary, Treasurer or any
other person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity
subject to this chapter shall be personally and individually liable, both
jointly and severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation
paid to one or more employees of any business entity, and neither the
corporate dissolution or withdrawal of the business entity from the city, nor
the cessation of holding any corporate office, shall discharge that liability
of any person; provided that the personal and individual liability shall
apply to each or every person holding the corporate office at the time the
tax becomes or became obligated. No person shall be personally and
individually liable under this division who had no authority to collect,
truthfully account for, or pay over any tax imposed by this chapter at the
time that the taxes imposed by this chapter become or became due.



   (I)   Every employee receiving compensation in the city subject to
the tax imposed under this chapter shall be personally liable for the tax
notwithstanding the provisions of this section. In all cases where the
employer does not withhold the tax levied under this chapter from the
employee, the employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with the
city each quarter in the same manner as if they were the employer. If an
employer fails to or is not required to withhold, report or pay the license
fee it shall become the duty of the employee to file with the city. The only
employer that is not required to withhold, report and pay the occupational
license tax is the federal government, including the United States Postal
Service. The payment required to be made by an employee, can be made
quarterly, for the periods ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and
December 31 of each year, or at any time the employee wishes to make an
estimated payment for the year in which wages are earned. All license fees
must be received by February 28 for the preceding calendar year, together
with a copy of the employee's W-2 form. Employers not required to withhold,
report, or pay the license fee must annually during the month of January of
each year, make a return to the Occupational Tax Administrator, in which is
set forth the name and social security number of each employee of the
employer during the preceding calendar year, giving the amount of salaries,
wages, commissions or other compensation earned during the preceding year by
each employee. This list shall include all current full time employees, part
time employees, temporary employees and terminated employees whether it be
voluntary or involuntary.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.06  RETURNS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year
shall be made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a
fiscal year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be
supplied by the city.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal
income tax return and all supporting statements and schedules at the time of
filing its occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in the
opinion of the city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax return
of any business entity in order to audit the return, the city may compel the
business entity to produce for inspection a copy of any statements and
schedules in support thereof that have not been previously filed. The city
may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal
government.



   (C)   Every business entity subject to an occupational license tax
governed by the provisions of this chapter shall keep records, render under
oath statements, make returns and comply with rules as the city from time to
time may prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city may
require a business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a
return, render statements under oath, or keep records, as the city deems
sufficient to determine the tax liability of the business entity.



   (D)   The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the
correctness of any return or for the purposes of making an estimate of the
taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of
the business entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.



   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business
entity, as appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the city at
the time prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return,
determined without regard to any extension of time for filing the return.



   (F)   It shall be the responsibility of persons who make Federal
Form 1099 "non-employee compensation" payments to natural persons other than
employees for services performed within the city, to maintain records of the
payments and to report the payments to the city. The payments must be
reported on by remitting Federal Form 1099 by February 28 of the year
following the close of the calendar year in which the non employee
compensation was paid. If a business entity or person is not required to
remit Federal Form 1099 to the IRS, including but not limited to payments
less than $600, they are still liable to remit the equivalent information to
the city. The information required to be reported by the licensee shall
include:



      (1)   Payer's name, address, Social Security and/or federal
identification number;



      (2)   Recipient's name and address;



      (3)   Recipient's Social Security and/or federal
identification number;



      (4)   Amount of non employee compensation paid in the calendar
year; and



      (5)   Amount of non employee compensation earned in the city
for the calendar year.



   (G)   Licenses are permitted to report items on all returns and
accompanying schedules in whole dollar amounts. To do so, licensees should
drop any amount less than $0.50 and increase any amount from $0.50 to $0.90
to the next highest dollar.



   (H)   Automatic extension if due date falls on Saturday, Sunday or
city holiday: any return required to be filed hereunder shall be considered
to have been timely filed if it is postmarked or hand-delivered to the
occupational tax office on or before the due date or, in the event the due
date is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, if it is postmarked or
hand-delivered to the occupational tax office on the next day which is not a
Saturday, Sunday or a city legal holiday.



   (I)   Any request for a refund, or for credit for an overpayment of
any occupational license fee paid to the Tax Administrator, unless paid under
protest, must be filed within one year from the date of the filing of the
completed return, if timely filed.



      (1)   In a case where the return involved was not timely
filed, the request for the refund must be made within one year from the
original due date of the return.



      (2)   For the purpose of this regulation, a return shall be
considered as timely filed if it is received at the occupational tax office,
or postmarked, by the due date specified in any duly approved extension of
time for filing granted upon the request of the licensee.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.07  EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The city may grant any business entity an extension of not
more than six months, unless a longer extension has been granted by the
Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by the city and the business entity,
for filing its return, if the business entity, on or before the date
prescribed for payment of the occupational license tax, requests the
extension and pays the amount properly estimated as its tax.



   (B)   If the time for filing a return is extended, the business
entity shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple
interest on the tax shown due on the return, but not been previously paid,
from the time the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax
paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.08  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under § 111.05
above, a refund or credit shall be made to the employer only to the extent
that the amount of the overpayment was not deducted and withheld under §
111.05 above by the employer.



   (B)   Unless written application for refund or credit is received by
the city from the employer within two years from the date the overpayment was
made, no refund or credit shall be allowed.



   (C)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities
performed outside the city, based on time spent outside the city, whose
employer has withheld and remitted to this city, the occupational license tax
on the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city,
may file for a refund within two years of the date prescribed by law for the
filing of a return. The employee shall provide a schedule and computation
sufficient to verify the refund claim and the city may confirm with the
employer the percentage of time spent outside the city and the amount of
compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to
approval of the refund.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.09  FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   As soon as practicable after each return is received, the city
may examine and audit the return.



      (1)   If the amount of tax computed by the city is greater
than the amount returned by the business entity, the additional tax shall be
assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by the city
within five years from the date the return was filed, except as otherwise
provided in this division (A).



         (a)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a
fraudulent return the additional tax may be assessed at any time.



         (b)   In the case of a return where a business entity
understates net profit, or omits an amount properly includable in net
profits, or both, which understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of
25% of the amount of net profit stated in the return, the additional tax may
be assessed at any time within six years after the return was filed.



         (c)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax
relating directly to adjustments resulting from a final determination of a
federal audit, the additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of
the times provided in this division, or six months from the date the city
receives the final determination of the federal audit from the business
entity, whichever is later.



      (2)   The times provided in this division (A) may be extended
by agreement between the business entity and the city. For the purposes of
this division, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for
filing the return shall be considered as filed on the last day. Any extension
granted for filing the return shall also be considered as extending the last
day prescribed by law for filing the return.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final
determination of the federal audit within 30 days of the conclusion of the
federal audit.



   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed herein.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.10  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay
the collection or payment of the tax levied by this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter may be refunded or credited within two years of the date prescribed
by law for the filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the city,
whichever is the later, except that:



         (a)   In any case where the assessment period contained
in this chapter has been extended by an agreement between the business entity
and the city, the limitation contained in this division shall be extended
accordingly; and



         (b)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly
to adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file
a claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this subsection
or six months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.



      (2)   For the purposes herein, a return filed before the last
day prescribed by law for filing the return shall be considered as filed on
the last day.



   (C)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes
collected pursuant to this chapter is vested exclusively in the city.



   (D)   The Occupational Tax Administrator is hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and is hereby empowered to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations, relating to
any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, provisions for the
re-examination and correction of returns as to which an overpayment or
underpayment is claimed or found to have been made, and the rules and
regulations relating promulgated by him or her shall be binding upon the
licensee and the employers.



   (E)   The Occupational Tax Administrator, or any agent or employee
designated in writing by him or her, is hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any employer or supposed employer or any
licensee or supposed licensee in order to determine the accuracy of any
return made, or, if no return was made, ascertain the amount of license fee
imposed by the terms of this chapter. Each employer or supposed employer or
licensee or supposed licensee is hereby directed and required to give to the
Occupational Tax Administrator or his or her duly authorized agent or
employee the means, facilities and opportunity for the examination and
investigation as are hereby authorized. The Occupational Tax Administrator is
hereby authorized to examine any person under oath concerning any wages,
salaries, commissions or other compensation or net profits which were or
should have been returned and to this end he or she may compel the production
of books, papers, records and the attendance of all persons before him or
her, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he or she believes to have
knowledge of the wages, salaries, commissions or other compensations or net
profits, to the extent that any officer empowered to administer oaths in this
commonwealth is permitted to so order. If as a result of an investigation
conducted by the Occupational Tax Administrator a return is found to be
incorrect, the Occupational Tax Administrator is authorized to assess and
collect any underpayment of employee license fee withheld at the source or
any underpayment of occupational or net profit license fee due by any
licensee. If no return has been filed and an occupational license fee is
found to be due, the license fee actually due may be assessed and collected
and penalties and interest added thereto.



   (F)   It is not the intention of the city by this chapter to impose
and require an occupational license fee prohibited by law.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.11  INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.



   (A)   No present or former employee of the city shall intentionally
and without authorization inspect or divulge any information acquired by him
or her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding the tax
schedules, returns or reports required to be filed with the city or other
proper officer, or any information produced by a hearing or investigation,
insofar as the information may have to do with the affairs of the person's
business.



      (1)   This prohibition does not extend to information required
in prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or any
other infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public
record, nor does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer's
properly authorized agent with information respecting his or her own return.



      (2)   Further, this prohibition does not preclude any employee
of the city from testifying in any court, or from introducing as evidence
returns or reports filed with the city, in an action for violation of the
city tax laws or in any action challenging the city laws.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of
Revenue of the Commonwealth of Kentucky or his or her duly authorized agent
all the information and rights to inspect any of the books and records of the
city if the Commissioner of Revenue of the commonwealth grants to the city
the reciprocal right to obtain information from the files and records of the
State Department of Revenue and maintains the privileged character of the
information so furnished. Provided, further, that the city may publish
statistics based on the information in a manner as not to reveal data
respecting net profits or compensation of any person or business entity.



   (C)   In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar
reciprocity agreements as described in division (B) above with any other
taxing entity, should there be a need for exchange of information in order to
effect diligent enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.12  COLLECTION AND USE OF TAX; RECORDS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Occupational Tax Administrator to
collect and account for all license fees imposed by this chapter and dispose
the same in the Occupational Tax Fund of city.



   (B)   These monies and all interest earned on these monies being
held on deposit by the city are to be disbursed as follows:



      (1)   All expenses, including salaries, incurred in the
operation of the Occupational Tax Administrator's office; and



      (2)   The administration of the Occupational Tax
Administrator's office shall be based upon a calendar year.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.13  MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM LIABILITY.



   A tax district may impose minimum and maximum tax liabilities for the
tax on net profits.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   A business entity subject to tax on net profits may
be subject to a penalty equal to 5% of the tax due for each calendar month or
fraction thereof if the business entity:



         (a)   Fails to file any return or report on or before
the due date prescribed for filing or as extended by the city; or



         (b)   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or
report on or before the due date prescribed for payment.



      (2)   The total penalty levied pursuant to this division (A)
shall not exceed 25% of the total tax due; however, the penalty shall not be
less than $25.



   (B)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or
before the date prescribed under § 111.05 above may be subject to a penalty
in an amount equal to 5% of the tax due for each calendar month or fraction
thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to this division (B) shall not
exceed 25% of the total tax due; however, the penalty shall not be less than
$25.



   (C)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
business entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to
12% per annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not previously paid,
from the time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the city. A fraction
of a month is counted as an entire month.



   (D)   Every tax imposed by this chapter, and all increases, interest
and penalties thereon, shall become, from the time the tax is due and
payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.



   (E)   The city may enforce the collection of the occupational tax
due under § 111.03 above and any fees, penalties and interest as provided in
divisions (A) through (D) above, or any other provision of this chapter, by
civil action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. To the extent authorized
by law, the city shall be entitled to recover all court costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred by it in enforcing any provision of this chapter.



   (F)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
person, business entity or employer who willfully fails to make a return,
willfully makes a false return, or who willfully fails to pay taxes owing or
collected, with the intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected,
or any part thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (G)   Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures,
counsels or advises the preparation or presentation under, or in connection
with, any matter arising under this chapter of a return, affidavit, claim or
other document, which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter,
whether or not the falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the
person authorized or required to present the return, affidavit, claim or
document, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (H)   A return for the purpose of this section shall mean and
include any return, declaration or form prescribed by the city and required
to be filed with the city by the provisions of this chapter, or by the rules
of the city or by written request for information to the business entity by
the city.



   (I)   Any person violating the provisions of § 111.11 above by
intentionally inspecting confidential taxpayer information without
authorization, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not longer
than six months, or both.



   (J)   Any person violating the provisions of § 111.11 above by
divulging confidential taxpayer information shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 6-13-2009)



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL



Section




General Regulations




   112.001   Title and purpose



   112.002   Definitions



   112.003   Application




License Requirements




   112.015   City licenses



   112.016   Certain special licenses defined



   112.017   Refund of fees



   112.018   Regulatory license fee



   112.019   Disposition of fees and any other type of payment




City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator




   112.030   Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator



   112.031   Appeals




Application and Maintenance of License




   112.045   Advertisement



   112.046   Application fee



   112.047   Form of application



   112.048   Other conditions



   112.049   Form of license



   112.050   Change of information



   112.051   Renewal of license



   112.052   Lost or destroyed license



   112.053   Revocation or suspension



   112.054   Proceedings for revocation or suspension of license



   112.055   Transfer or assignment



   112.056   Refusal of license; guidelines for approval of quota
licenses



   112.057   Review of license; books, records and reports



   112.058   Dormancy




Hours for Sale and Delivery




   112.070   Hours for sale and delivery




Conditions, Prohibitions and Restrictions




   112.085   Gambling



   112.086   Radio receiving apparatus



   112.087   Security



   112.088   Prizes and premiums prohibited



   112.089   Treating prohibited



   112.090   Drunkenness



   112.091   Underage sales



   112.092   Sign requirements-notice to persons under the age of 21



   112.093   License to be displayed



   112.094   Legal transactions for wholesalers, distributors and retail



   112.095   Employment restrictions



   112.096   Lavatory facilities required



   112.097   Nudity and adult entertainment activities prohibited



   112.098   Cause for revocation




Minors




   112.110   Alcohol restrictions




Consumption on Premises Prohibited




   112.125   Consumption at package store prohibited



   112.126   Habitual congregating




Malt Beverage Keg Registration




   112.140   Definitions



   112.141   Malt beverage keg identification tag



   112.142   Keg registration



   112.143   Unlawful sales




Mandatory Responsible Beverage Service Training




   112.155   Mandatory responsible beverage service training




Signs and Advertising




   112.170   Regulations




Patio and Outdoor Sales




   112.185   Patio and outdoor sales regulations



   112.186   Exception(s) to screening requirements for outdoor sales
and service of alcoholic beverages, specifically, permitted sidewalk cafes in
the city's downtown business area



 



   112.998   Enforcement



   112.999   Penalty



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 112.001  TITLE AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known as the “Alcoholic Beverage
Control Ordinance” of the City of Campbellsville, Kentucky (hereinafter
referred to as the “city”).



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform
regulations and requirements for the licensing and regulation of alcoholic
beverage manufacture and sales pursuant to authorization under KRS Chapters
241 to 244.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.002  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions of the words used throughout this chapter, unless the
context requires otherwise, shall have the same meaning as those set out in
the alcoholic beverage control laws (KRS Chapters 241 through 244) of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and all amendments and supplements thereto.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.003  APPLICATION.



   (A)   This chapter shall be construed to apply to the manufacture
and traffic in both malt beverages and distilled spirits and wine where the
context permits such application. Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or
relieve the licensee, or the owner, proprietor, employee, agent or person in
charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold from the
restrictions, requirements and penalties of any other ordinance of the city,
or of any statues of the state relating to violations pertaining to alcoholic
beverages.



   (B)   The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky (KRS Chapters 241 to 244) and all amendments and
supplements thereto, are adopted so far as applicable to this chapter except
as otherwise lawfully provided herein.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



LICENSE REQUIREMENTS



§ 112.015  CITY LICENSES.



   (A)   For the privilege of causing, permitting and engaging in the
actions, businesses, and transactions authorized thereby in regard to traffic
in alcoholic beverages in the city and pursuant to the authority of KRS
243.070, there is hereby established a corresponding city license for each of
the state licenses described in KRS 243.070. The fee for each city license
shall be as set out in the schedule set forth below. In the event KRS 243.070
shall hereafter be amended to authorize additional city licenses, the fee for
each city license shall be the maximum fee provided in the statute as amended.



      (1)   Distiller’s License, per annum $500.



      (2)   Rectifier’s License.



         (a)   Class A, per annum $3,000.



         (b)   Class B (craft rectifier), per annum $960.



      (3)   Wholesaler’s License, per annum $3,000.



      (4)   Quota Retail Package License, per annum $1,000.



      (5)   Quota Retail Drink License, per annum $1,000.



      (6)   Special Temporary License, per event $166.



      (7)   Non-quota Type 1 Retail Drink License, per annum
(includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages) $2,000.



      (8)   Non-quota Type 2 Retail Drink License, per annum
(includes distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages) $1,000.



      (9)   Non-quota Type 3 Retail Drink License, per annum
(includes distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages) $300.



      (10)   Special Temporary Alcohol Auction License, per event
$200.



      (11)   Special Sunday Retail Drink License, per annum $300.



      (12)   Extended Hours Supplement License, per annum $2,000.



      (13)   Caterer’s License, per annum $800.



      (14)   Bottling House or Bottling House Storage License, per
annum $2,000.



      (15)   Brewer’s License, per annum $500.



      (16)   Microbrewery License, per annum $500.



      (17)   Malt Beverage Distributor's License, per annum $200.



      (18)   Non-quota Retail Malt Beverage Package License, per
annum $200.



      (19)   Non-quota Type 4 Retail Malt Beverage Drink License,
per annum $200.



      (20)   Malt Beverage Brew-on-Premises License, per annum $100.



      (21)   Limited Restaurant License, per annum (includes
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages) $1,050.



      (22)   Limited Golf Course License, per annum (includes
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages) $1,050.



   (B)   The fee for each of the first five supplemental bar licenses
shall be the same as the fee for the primary drink license. There shall be no
charge for each supplemental license issued in excess of five to the same
licensee at the same premises.



   (C)   The holder of a nonquota retail malt beverage package license
may obtain a nonquota type 4 malt beverage drink license for a fee of $50.
The holder of a nonquota type 4 malt beverage drink license may obtain a
nonquota retail malt beverage package license for a fee of $50.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.016  CERTAIN SPECIAL LICENSES DEFINED.



   The following definition shall apply to this chapter as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF FEES. All city licenses, except
temporary licenses, shall begin on April 20 of any year and shall expire on
April 19 of the following year as set forth in KRS 243.090 and 804 KAR 4:390.
Any licenses issued after April 20 of any year shall be assessed a fee which
is based on the pro rata portion of the remainder of the license period;
however, the cost of any license shall not be less than one-half the amount
of the full fee for an annual license of that type.



   LIMITED GOLF COURSE LICENSE. A limited golf course license may be
issued pursuant to KRS Chapter 243 if an establishment meets the following
conditions: a golf course with nine or 18 holes that meets United States Golf
Association criteria as a regulation golf course. A limited golf course
license shall authorize the licensee to purchase, receive, possess, and sell
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages at retail by the drink for
consumption on the licensed premise.



   LIMITED RESTAURANT LICENSE. A limited restaurant license may be issued
pursuant to KRS Chapter 243, if said restaurant meets the definition of a
“limited restaurant” as set forth in KRS 241.010 (31) it is a facility
where the usual and customary business is the serving of meals to consumers,
which has a bona fide kitchen facility, which receives at least 70% of its
gross income from the sale of food, and which maintains seating capacity of
either 100 or 50 persons for dining. If the limited restaurant only maintains
seating capacity for 50 persons, it shall not have open bar and all alcoholic
beverages shall be sold in conjunction with the sale of a meal. Distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages shall be deemed to be purchased in
conjunction with a meal if the distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages
are served after the meal is ordered and no more than one half hour after the
meal is completed.



   NON-QUOTA TYPE 1 RETAIL DRINK LICENSE. A non-quota retail drink license
may be issued to the following as defined by Kentucky Revised Statutes to the
following: a convention center or a convention hotel complex; a horse
racetrack; an automobile racetrack; a railroad system; a commercial airlines
system or charter flight system; a qualified historic site; and a state park.



   NON-QUOTA TYPE 2 RETAIL DRINK LICENSE. A non-quota retail drink license
may be issued pursuant to and as defined by Kentucky Revised Statutes to the
following:



      (1)   A hotel that contains at least 50 sleeping units,
contains minimum dining seating for at least 50 persons, and which maintains
50% of its gross food and drink sales from the sale of food;



      (2)   A restaurant which contains minimum dining seating for
at least 50 persons, and which maintains 50% of its gross food and drink
sales are from the sale of food;



      (3)   An airport; or



      (4)   A riverboat.



   NON-QUOTA TYPE 3 RETAIL DRINK LICENSE. A non-quota 3 retail drink
license may be issued pursuant to and defined by Kentucky Revised Statutes to
the following:



      (1)   A private-club in existence for longer than one year
prior to the license application and which excludes the general public;



      (2)   A dining car;



      (3)   A distiller; and



      (4)   A bed and breakfast.



   NON-QUOTA TYPE 4 RETAIL MALT BEVERAGE DRINK LICENSE. A non-quota type 4
retail malt beverage drink license may be issued pursuant to and as defined
in Kentucky Revised Statutes to the following: a holder of a quota retail
drink license; a holder of a microbrewery license; a holder of a small farm
winery license; and any other business wishing to sell malt beverages by the
drink for consumption on the premises only. A non-quota retail malt beverage
drink license shall not be issued to any premises from which gasoline and
lubricating oil are sold, or from which the servicing and repair of motor
vehicles is conducted, unless there is maintained in inventory for sale on
the premises at retail not less than $5,000 of food, groceries, and related
products valued at cost.



   PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES; DELINQUENCY. No licensee shall enter into or
begin operating any business for which a license is required by this chapter
until the license fee has been paid in full. The fee for renewal of any
license shall be paid with the renewal application. Failure to pay any
license fee within ten days after it becomes due shall result in a penalty
equal to 10% of the license fee. Any licensee failing to pay the fees,
including penalties, within ten days after such fees are due may be subject
to revocation of the license and to other penalties as provided in this
chapter.



   SPECIAL TEMPORARY LICENSE. A special temporary license may be issued
only as set forth in KRS 243.260 and 804 KAR 4:250. Such a license may be
issued to any regularly organized fair, exposition, racing Association,
organized civic or community-sponsored event, or charitable event as defined
by applicable law. This license shall authorize the licensee to exercise the
privileges of a quota retail drink licensee and a non-quota type 4 malt
beverage drink licensee at designated premises for a specified and limited
time, which shall not exceed 30 days and which shall expire when the
qualifying event ends. All restrictions and prohibitions applying to a
distilled spirits and wine quota retail drink license or a non-quota retail
malt beverage drink license shall apply also to a special temporary licensee
as described in this section.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.017  REFUND OF FEES.



   (A)   Should any licensee under this chapter be prohibited from
conducting the licensed business for the full period covered by the license
because of any changes that may hereafter be made in the laws of the
commonwealth with reference to alcoholic beverages or other cause outside
licensee’s control, then the city shall refund to licensee the
proportionate part of the license fee for the period during which licensee is
prevented from carrying on said business if the licensee provides sufficient
proof to the city ABC Administrator that such period of inactivity was not
the fault of the licensee or the result of a revocation, suspension or other
wrongdoing by licensee, or an agent or employee of the licensee.



   (B)   In the event a violation of this chapter occurs that results
in the suspension or revocation of the license, the city shall not be
required to refund any portion of the license fee.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.018  REGULATORY LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 243.075, there is hereby imposed a regulatory
license fee on the gross receipts of sale of alcoholic beverages of each
licensee who has a local license issued by the city ABC Administrator. The
city's regulatory license fee shall be fixed annually in the city’s budget
ordinance at a percentage rate reasonably estimated to fully reimburse the
city for the costs of any additional policing, regulatory or administrative
expenses related to the sale of alcohol. Initially, the city’s regulatory
license fee shall be 8% of gross sales of all alcoholic beverages sold by the
drink. In the case of retail sales of package distilled spirits and wine, the
regulatory license fee shall be 8% of gross sales. The regulatory license fee
shall be 8% on gross retail sales of package malt beverages.



   (B)   Payment of said regulatory fee shall be remitted to the city
ABC Administrator, who shall transmit all fees to the City Clerk, or his
designee, for deposit into the appropriate designated account. The city may
use said fees as permitted by law, including but not limited to, any cost of
additional policing, regulatory or administrative expenses related to the
sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. The regulatory license fee shall be
in addition to any other fees or licenses permitted by law, except that a
credit against a regulatory license fee in the city shall be allowed in an
amount equal to any license fee shall be based on paperwork required by the
local and/or state ABC Administrator, which may include but is not limited to
tax returns and financial statements. Said paperwork and payment will be due
according to the schedule set forth by the Mayor, or his designee, which may
be set at, but is not limited to, time periods consisting of a monthly or
quarterly billing by the local ABC Office and/or the city.



   (C)   Failure to pay such remittance within ten days of the due date
constitutes a violation and shall subject a Licensee to suspension or
revocation.



   (D)   Penalty for failure to file a return and pay remittance by the
due date is 5% of the regulatory fee for each 90 days or fraction thereof.
The total late filing penalty shall not exceed 25% of the regulatory fee;
provided, however, that in no case shall the penalty be less than $10.



   (E)   Interest at the rate of 8% per annum will apply to any late
payments.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.019  DISPOSITION OF FEES AND ANY OTHER TYPE OF PAYMENT.



   Disposition of fees and any other type of payment to the city: the city
ABC Administrator shall transmit all fees and any other types of payment made
to the city, upon collection, to the City Clerk, or his/her designee, for
deposit into the appropriate designated account.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



CITY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR



§ 112.030  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 241.160 and KRS 241.170, there is hereby
created the Office of the City of Campbellsville Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator.



   (B)   The Chief of Police of the City of Campbellsville shall serve
as the City Alcohol Beverage Administrator, pursuant to KRS 241.160.



   (C)   The City Alcohol Beverage Administrator may from time to time
appoint such additional personnel, such as alcohol beverage control
investigator(s), as is necessary to assist him or her in the administration
of this chapter.



   (D)   The functions of the city ABC Administrator shall be the same
with respect to the city licenses and regulations as the functions of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the Commonwealth of Kentucky (hereinafter
referred to as ABC Board) with respect to state licenses and regulations.



   (E)   To prevent potential conflicts of interests, no person shall
be a city ABC Administrator, an investigator, or an employee of the city,
under the supervision of the city ABC Administrator, who would be
disqualified to be a member of the ABC Board under state law set forth in KRS
241.100.



   (F)   The city ABC Administrator shall have authority delegated by
the Mayor, and as authorized under KRS Chapters 241 through 244. The city ABC
Administrator, and his investigators, may inspect any premises where
alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, stored or otherwise trafficked
in, without first obtaining a search warrant.



   (G)   The city ABC Administrator and his investigators shall have
available at all reasonable times for their inspection all books and records
required to be maintained by licensees under KRS 244.150 and the city ABC
Administrator shall receive copies of all reports submitted by licensee to
the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.



   (H)   The City ABC Administrator, before entering upon his or her
duties, shall take the oath as prescribed in Section 228 of the Constitution
and shall execute a bond with a good corporate surety in the penal sum of not
less than $1,000. Any employee delegated or assigned to the ABC
Administration may also be asked to execute a similar bond in such penal sum
as the city deems necessary unless said person if already covered under the
city’s active bonds as required under KRS in regards to officials and
employees of the city.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.031  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals from the orders of the city ABC Administrator may be
taken to the state ABC Board by filing with the Board within 30 days a
certified copy of the orders of the city ABC Administrator. The Board shall
hear matters at issue as upon an original proceeding. Appeals from orders of
the city ABC Administrator shall be governed by KRS Chapter 13B.



   (B)   When any decision of the city ABC Administrator shall have
been appealed, or when a protest has been lodged against an application for
any license within the city, and the ABC Board shall have made a decision
regarding such appeal or protested application, the city ABC Administrator,
upon receipt of notice of finality of the decision, shall enter such orders
and take such action as required by the final order of the ABC Board. As
provided by law, and as used herein, no order of the ABC Board is final until
all appeals or appeal times shall have been exhausted. A “final order” of
the ABC Board is the order entered by said Board, unless an appeal is taken
from the Board's order, in which case the “final order” is the order
entered by the Board upon direction from the reviewing court of last resort
in the final order of said reviewing court.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



APPLICATION AND MAINTENANCE OF LICENSE



§ 112.045  ADVERTISEMENT.



   Before an application for a license shall be considered, the applicant
must publish a notice of its intent to apply for an alcoholic beverage
license in a newspaper meeting the requirements of KRS Chapters 424,
including the following:



   (A)   The advertisement shall state the name and address of the
applicant. It shall state the members of the partnership if the applicant is
a partnership, and membership of the LLC if the applicant is an LLC, as well
as the name of the business and its address. If the applicant is a
corporation, the advertisement shall state the names and addresses of the
principal officers and directors of the corporation, as well as the name and
address of the corporation itself. All advertisements shall state the
location of the premises for which the licenses sought, and the type of
license for which application is made.



   (B)   The applicant shall attach to the application a newspaper
clipping of the advertisement and proof of the publication is provided in KRS
424.170.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.046  APPLICATION FEE.



   A non-refundable application fee of $50 shall be paid with the filing
of the application for a city license. If the license is granted, the
application fee shall be credited against the initial license fee.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.047  FORM OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   All licenses granted under this chapter shall be approved by
the city ABC Administrator. Applications for the issuance of new licenses and
for renewals of existing licenses shall be in writing and upon the forms
provided by the Kentucky ABC Board and/or the city, both of which may be
amended and supplemented from time to time by each respective agency.



   (B)   The application shall be verified and shall set forth in
detail such information concerning the applicant and the premises for which
the license is sought, as required by the Kentucky Revised Statutes, the
state ABC Board, and the city, including as follows:



      (1)   Name and address;



      (2)   Nature of interest;



      (3)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;



      (4)   Date of birth;



      (5)   Date of residence was established in Kentucky, if a
resident of Kentucky.



      (6)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other
license or LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization
holding a license under this chapter;



      (7)   Extent of stock or company ownership;



      (8)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license
or LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a
license in any other state or province.



   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by a certified check,
cashier check, or money order for the amount of the license fee, less the $50
application fee.



   (D)   In addition to the above specified information, the applicant
shall file, with the application, responses to any additional questions as
may be posed or prescribed by the city ABC Administrator. The City Council
has adopted a statement of guidelines and priorities for the issuance of
licenses within this chapter to determine the extent to which applications
may further, or impede, the objectives of those guidelines. Therefore, in
addition to the information contained in the application, the city ABC
Administrator may require such other information as the Administrator may, in
his or her discretion, deem desirable, reasonable, or appropriate to the
consideration of the application.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.048  OTHER CONDITIONS.



   In addition to any other inquiries, conditions or considerations
required or permitted by law:



   (A)   The city ABC Administrator shall not grant any alcoholic
beverage license or approve a renewal of a license until the applicant and
his or her place of business shall have been approved by a licensed building
inspector, and any and all other inspections required by the Kentucky
Building Code or other applicable law;



   (B)   All applicants shall voluntarily submit to a criminal
background check and shall sign a waiver allowing the release of this
information to the city ABC Administrator; and



   (C)   No license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages may be granted
or renewed to any person who is delinquent in the payment of any property
taxes, both real and personal, any other taxes due to the city, fees of any
type, or charges due to any department of the city at the time of issuing the
license, nor may any license be granted or renewed to sell upon any premises
or property, owned and occupied by the licensee upon which there are any of
the above delinquent payments due and owing to the city. Further, if a
licensee becomes delinquent in the payment of any of the above at any time
during the license period, the license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages
may be subject to revocation or suspension.



   (D)   No person, whether applicant for license, or a licensee, shall
in any manner attempt to bribe, threaten, unduly influence or intimidate the
city ABC Administrator, or any member of the city’s staff, or any state ABC
Administrator or staff, in any matter in which an application or proposed
application for license, or procedure for revocation or suspension is pending
before such officer. This division is not intended to stifle expressions of
opinion; however, it is intended to make clear that the ABC Administrators
are public officials charged with the administration and enforcement of the
law, both local and state. Any person applying for a license, or contesting
the revocation or suspension of a license, who engages in attempted bribes,
threats, attempted undue influence or mtimidation of a city or state ABC
Administrator or staff shall be disqualified from receiving or retaining a
license, in addition to other penalties as provided by law. The procedures
for appeals shall apply to disqualifications, revocations or suspensions
under this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit
monetary settlements in lieu of revocation or suspension of license after a
final order or revocation or suspension, where the chapter and applicable
statutes allow for such payments in settlement.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.049  FORM OF LICENSE.



   All city licenses shall be in such form as may be provided by the ABC
Administrator, but at the least shall contain:



   (A)   The name and address of the licensee;



   (B)   The number of the license;



   (C)   The type of license;



   (D)   A description by street and number, or otherwise, of the
licensed premises;



   (E)   The name and address of the owner of the building in which the
licensed premises are located;



   (F)   The expiration date of the license;



   (G)   A statement in substance that the license shall not be a
property or vested right and that it may be revoked at any time pursuant to
law.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.050  CHANGE OF INFORMATION.



   (A)   If after a license to individuals or to a sole proprietor has
been issued, there is a change in any fact required to be set forth in the
application, a verified amendment in writing giving notice of the change
shall be filed with the city ABC Administrator with ten days of the change.



   (B)   Since a number of licenses issued by the city are in the name
of corporations or other business organizations, it is necessary that
ownership changes in such organizations be reported to the city ABC
Administrator. The city ABC Administrator can, therefore, investigate the
person to whom the ownership or management is transferred in order to
ascertain whether that person is precluded by statute from holding an
interest in an alcoholic beverage license.



   (C)   As used with regard to a partnership, corporation, LLC or
other business organization herein, the word “change” is construed to
include any change in managers, partners or LLC members, directors or
officers of the corporation, or change in ownership or stock whereby any
person secures 10% of the outstanding ownership or stock. Transfer of more
than 10% of the total ownership or stock shall require a new license.



   (D)   The following information shall be required concerning any new
manager, partner or LLC member, new director, officer, or person securing any
interest in alcoholic beverage license:



      (1)   Name and address;



      (2)   Nature of interest;



      (3)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;



      (4)   Date of birth;



      (5)   Date residence was established in Kentucky, if a
resident of Kentucky. If a Campbellsville resident, indicate when residence
was established;



      (6)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other
license or in any LLC, corporation, partnership or other business
organization holding a license under this act;



      (7)   Extent of stock or company ownership;



      (8)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license
or in any LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization
holding a license in any other state or province.



   (E)   This information shall be filed with the city ABC
Administrator as a verified amendment of the application pursuant to which
the license was granted. Filing shall be made within ten days of any change
of required information.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.051  RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Every year, except in the case of the temporary licenses, each
licensee shall renew its license. All renewal licenses must be on file with
the city ABC Administrator no less than 30 days prior to the expiration of
the license for the preceding license period or the same shall be canceled,
except where the Licensee is unable to continue in business at the same
premises licensed during the preceding license period as a result of
construction, act of God, casualty, death, the acquisition or threatened
acquisition of the premises by any Federal, state, city or other governmental
agency or private organization possessing power of eminent domain, whether
such acquisition is voluntary or involuntary, or loss of lease through
failure of landlord to renew exiting lease; provided that said licensee shall
file a written verified statement no less than 20 days from the expiration
date of the license, setting forth these facts, and the city ABC
Administrator is hereby authorized to extend the time for filing of a renewal
of such license for a reasonable length of time within the sound discretion
of the city ABC Administrator; provided, however, such licensee shall pay a
license fee from the expiration date of the former license or licenses. Said
license fee shall not by payable until application is made for the transfer
of said license to a new location.



   (B)   The renewal by the city ABC Administrator of the license shall
not be construed to be a waiver or acceptance of any violation which occurred
prior to such renewal and shall not prevent subsequent proceedings against
the licensee.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.052  LOST OR DESTROYED LICENSE.



   When a license shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part of
the licensee or his or her agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu of the
original license shall be issued by the city ABC Administrator after the
Administrator shall have been satisfied as to the facts; provided, however,
that the applicant for said duplicate license shall pay a fee of $10 for the
duplicate license.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.053  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Any license may be revoked or suspended by the city ABC
Administrator if the licensee shall have violated any of other provisions of
KRS Chapters 241 through 244, or any rule or regulation of the ABC Board, or
of the Kentucky Department of Revenue, relating to the regulation of the
manufacture, sale, and transportation, or taxation, of alcoholic beverages or
if such licensee shall have violated or shall violate any act of Congress or
any rule or regulation of any Federal board, agency or commission, or this
chapter now, heretofore, or hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of
the manufacture, sale, and transportation, or taxation, of intoxicating
liquors, or any rules or regulations of the city heretofore in existence or
authorized by the terms of KRS Chapters 241 through 244 to be created,
irrespective of whether the licensee knew of or permitted the violation or
whether the violation was committed is disobedience of his or her
instructions, or any such license may be revoked or suspended for any cause
which the city ABC Administrator in the exercise of his or her sound
discretion deems sufficient.



   (B)   A license may be revoked for any of the reasons for which the
city ABC Administrator would have been required to refuse a license if the
facts had been known.



   (C)   In addition to the foregoing stated causes, any license may be
revoked or suspended for the following causes:



      (1)   Conviction of the licensee or his or her agent or
employee for selling any illegal beverages on the premises licensed.



      (2)   Making any false, material statements in an application
for a license.



      (3)   If within a period of two consecutive years, any
licensee or any clerk, servant, agent or employee of the licensee shall have
been convicted of two violations of the terms and provisions of KRS Chapters
241 through 244 or any act heretofore or hereafter in effect relating to the
regulation of the manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages
or if within such period, any licensee or any clerk, servant, agent or
employee of the license shall have twice been convicted of any felony or of
any misdemeanor directly or indirectly attributable to the use of alcoholic
beverages, or of one such felony and one such misdemeanor.



      (4)   Willful and deliberate failure or default of a licensee
to pay an excise tax or any part thereof, or any penalties imposed by or
under the provisions of any statutes, this chapter, or acts of Congress
relative to taxation or for a violation of any rules or regulations of the
Kentucky Department of Revenue made in pursuance thereof.



      (5)   Setting up, conducting, operating or keeping, on the
licensed premises, any gambling game, device, machine or contrivance, or
lottery or gift enterprise, or handbook or facility for betting or
transmitting bets on horse races; or permitting to be set up, conducted,
operated, kept, or engaged in, on the licensed premises, any such game,
device, machine, contrivance, lottery, gift enterprise, handbook or facility.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.054  PROCEEDINGS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon the verified complaint of any person, or on the
initiative of any law enforcement officer, or of the city ABC Administrator,
the city ABC Administrator may institute proceedings to revoke or suspend any
license granted under this chapter. A license may be revoked or suspended
only after the licensee shall have been given written notice, by certified or
registered mail, of the proposed revocation, including notice of the reasons
for such proposed action. The licensee shall be given opportunity to be heard
in opposition to the proposed revocation or suspension. The notice of
proposed action shall advise the licensee of the date, time and place of the
hearing. Notice shall be sufficient if mailed to the licensee at the address
shown in the last application for a license or in the last statement
supplemental to or in amendment of the application, whether or not the
mailing is receipted for or claimed.



   (B)   The specific procedures to be followed in hearings on actions
for revocation or suspension shall be those set out in the Kentucky
Administrative Procedure Act (KAR Chapter 13B).



   (C)   A decision of the city ABC Administrator revoking or
suspending a license may be appealed as provided in KRS 243.550.



   (D)   Within three days after any order of revocation or suspension
of a license becomes final, notice of revocation shall be given to the
licensee and to the owner of the licensed premises. A notice mailed to the
licensee and to the owner of the licensed premises at the address shown in
the last application for a license or in the last statement supplemental to
the application shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this section. The
licensee shall at once surrender his or her license to the city ABC
Administrator. If the revoked or suspended license is not forthwith
surrendered by the licensee, the Chief of Police, at the request of the city
ABC Administrator, shall immediately cause one of his or her officers to take
physical possession of the license and return it to the city ABC
Administrator.



   (E)   When a license has been revoked or suspended, the former
licensee may, with prior approval of the city ABC Administrator, dispose of
and transfer his or her stock of alcoholic beverages to an appropriate entity.



   (F)   Appeal from the decision of the city ABC Administrator
revoking or suspending a license shall be to the ABC Board. The timely filing
of an appeal shall stay further proceedings for revocation.



   (G)   If a license is revoked or suspended by an order of the city
ABC Administrator, and the decision is not appealed, the licensee shall at
once suspend all operations authorized under his or her license. Upon the
entry of a final order of the ABC Board sustaining or ordering revocation or
suspension on appeal, the licensee shall at once suspend all operations
authorized under this license.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.055  TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned
either as to licensee or location except with prior approval of the city ABC
Administrator and not then until a payment of $100 shall be made to the city
ABC Administrator.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.056  REFUSAL OF LICENSE; GUIDELINES FOR APPROVAL OF QUOTA LICENSES.



   (A)   The city ABC Administrator may refuse to issue a license for
any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Causes for refusal to issue or renew a license and for
suspension or revocation of a city license shall be the same as provided for
state licenses according to KRS 243.450, 243.490 and 243.500, as well as
violation of any city ordinance regarding alcohol beverage licensing, sales
or the administration thereof.



      (2)   If the applicant has done any act for which a revocation
of license would be authorized under local, state, or Federal law; or



      (3)   If the applicant has made any false material statement
in his or her application.



   (B)   An applicant who has been refused a license by the city ABC
Administrator may appeal the refusal to the ABC Board pursuant to KRS 241.200.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.057  REVIEW OF LICENSE; BOOKS, RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   Applicants to whom a license is issued pursuant to this
chapter shall provide periodic information demonstrating compliance with the
conditions of any license, such as, but not limited to, the continuing
requirement that a minimum percentage of the applicant’s business income is
earned from the sale of food. This documentation shall be provided on a
schedule to be coordinated with the applicant’s quarterly regulatory fee
filings. The city shall provide the form schedule to the licensee. The
licensee’s acceptance of a license to manufacture or traffic in alcoholic
beverages shall constitute consent to the filing of the quarterly report. In
the case of caterer filing, the quarterly report shall identity each catered
event by type of event, date and address of the event, and shall provide a
per event breakdown of sales and the ratio of food sales to alcohol sales
during the reporting period. This requirement for filing of reports
notwithstanding, the city may at any time come upon the premises of any
licensee and examine the books and records to determine whether the licensee
is in compliance with all parts of this chapter. In the event the conditions
of any license requirement are not met during any particular quarter, the
city ABC Administrator shall have discretion in determining whether
revocation is appropriate or whether the licensee may be allowed a reasonable
period of time to reach compliance. If a good faith effort is demonstrated by
the licensee, the city ABC Administrator may apply an accounting period of at
least one year in determining whether or not the food sale percentage
requirement has been met.



   (B)   Every licensee under this chapter shall keep and maintain,
upon the licensed premises, adequate books and records of all transactions
involved in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the same manner required by
the rules and regulations of the ABC Board. Such books and records shall be
available at all reasonable times for inspection by the city ABC
Administrator and such city employees who may assist the city ABC
Administrator in his or her review.



   (C)   For the purpose of assisting the city ABC Administrator in
enforcement of this chapter, every licensee required to report to the ABC
Board under KRS 243.850 shall provide a copy of such report to the city ABC
Administrator. Copies of any and all reports and correspondences to the ABC
Board required by statute shall be furnished to the city ABC Administrator.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.058  DORMANCY.



   (A)   It is necessary that a licensee actually conduct the business
authorized by such a license or else the license will be declared dormant and
become null and void after 90 days. Such is the intent of this section.
Realizing that a licensee, like other business, may have his or her business
interrupted by situations not under his or her control, various exceptions to
the dormancy rule have been included in this section.



   (B)   Any license under which no business is transacted during a
period of 90 days shall be deemed inactive and, unless the conditions set
forth in division (C) below are proved to the satisfaction of the city ABC
Administrator, the license shall be surrendered to the city ABC
Administrator. If the license is not voluntarily surrendered, it shall be
revoked by the city ABC Administrator.



   (C)   The provisions of division (B) hereof shall not apply to any
licensee who is unable to continue in business at the premises for which a
license is issued due to construction, an act of God, casualty, death, the
acquisition of the premises by any Federal, state, city or other governmental
agency under power of eminent domain, whether acquisition is voluntary or
involuntary, or loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew existing
lease. Prior to the expiration of 90 days of inactivity, such licensee shall
furnish to the city ABC Administrator a verified statement setting forth the
fact that the licensee is unable to continue in business, for any of the
specific reasons set forth herein, and the city ABC Administrator may grant
an extension of the dormancy with the license continuing to remain in effect
during the license period or until same is transferred to another premises,
notwithstanding the fact that no business is transacted during said period;
provided, however, no such license shall be considered valid unless business
is conducted there under within 12 months from the date of notice to the city
ABC Administrator. Such extension may not extend beyond the renewal date but
may be for such times as the city ABC Administrator deems appropriate in
exercise of his or her sound discretion.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



HOURS FOR SALE AND DELIVERY



§ 112.070  HOURS FOR SALE AND DELIVERY.



   (A)   A licensee for distilled spirits, wine and/or malt beverages
shall be permitted to sell or dispense distilled spirits, wine and/or malt
beverages between the hours of 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. (midnight) Monday
through Saturday.



   (B)   A licensee for distilled spirits, wine and/or malt beverages
shall be permitted to sell or dispense distilled spirits, wine and/or malt
beverages on Sunday after the hours of 12:00 p.m.(noon) to 12:00 a.m.
(midnight) licensees must obtain a Sunday retail drink license in order to
sell distilled spirits or wine by the drink on Sunday.



   (C)   A licensee may sell and dispense distilled spirits, wine,
and/or malt beverages on New Year’s Eve between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
until 1:00 a.m. on January 1, regardless of the day of the week on which New
Year’s Eve occurs; provided that the appropriate licenses have been
obtained from both the city and the state ABC Board.



   (D)   Licensees which operate as golf courses, private clubs and
distilleries shall be allowed to sell distilled spirits, wine, or malt
beverages by the drink on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) until
12:00 a.m. (midnight).



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



CONDITIONS, PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS



§ 112.085  GAMBLING.



   No gambling or game of chance unless otherwise authorized by the
Commonwealth of Kentucky shall be permitted in any form on such licensed
premises. Dice, slot machines, quarter pushers, prize redemption machines
with programmable payouts, or any device of chance is prohibited and shall
not be kept on such premises.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.086  RADIO RECEIVING APPARATUS.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed under this chapter to
have, or maintain, any radio receiving apparatus on such premises which is
intentionally adjusted so as to receive police messages broadcast from any
law enforcement agency in Taylor County as it is now, or may hereafter be
operated. In addition to other penalties provided for the violation of this
section, the Chief of Police or the city ABC Administrator, or his or her
designated investigator, shall have the authority to confiscate any and all
such radio receiving apparatus.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.087  SECURITY.



   The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining security on his or
her premises including providing adequate outside lighting to permit
customers to utilize the parking area and to promote the safety, health and
welfare of the general public utilizing the licensed premise. Security
standards are further necessary to discourage unlawful activity in and around
the licensed premises.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.088  PRIZES AND PREMIUMS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to give away or offer to give away
anything tangible of value as a premium or prize, or for any other purpose in
direct connection with the sale of malt beverages unless permitted by KRS
244.500.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.089  TREATING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the licensee under this chapter to give away
any alcoholic beverage in any quantity for free or for less than a full
monetary consideration unless the licensee holds a sampling license or its
license type permits limited free samples (i.e., small farm winery,
microbrewery, brewer’s) or products are sampled at educational event
authorized by 804 KAR 1:110 and 804 KAR 11:030.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.090  DRUNKENNESS.



   No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
person to become drunk or intoxicated on the premises, nor shall any licensee
sell alcoholic beverages to any person who is actually or apparently under
the influence of alcoholic beverages, or known to the seller or server to be
an habitual drunkard or any person known to the seller or server to have been
convicted of drunkenness as many as three times within the most recent 12
month period. No licensee shall permit any person who is actually or
apparently under the influence of alcoholic beverages to remain on the
licensed premises. As used herein, whether a person is actually or apparently
under the influence of alcoholic beverages shall be determined by the
licensee or server with specific reference to the principles and guidelines
established in mandatory alcohol server training as to the signs of alcohol
intoxication.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.091  UNDERAGE SALES.



   The licensee shall not sell or dispense alcoholic beverages to any
person who is under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.092  SIGN REQUIREMENTS-NOTICE TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.



   Per state law, the licensee shall display at all times in a prominent
place a sign at least eight inches by 11 inches in 30 point or larger type
font which states as follows:



      “Persons under the age of 21 are subject to a fine of up to
$100 if they:



         (1)   Enter licensed premises to buy, or have served to
them, alcoholic beverages.



         (2)   Possess, purchase or attempt to purchase, or get
another to purchase alcoholic beverages.



         (3)   Misrepresent their age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic beverages.”



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.093  LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.



   (A)   Pursuant to the requirements set forth in KRS 243.895, the
licensee, before commencing any business for which a license has been issued,
shall post and display at all times in a conspicuous place in the room or
principal room where the business is carried on so that all persons visiting
the place may readily see the license. The licensee shall not at any time
post the license on premises other than the licensed premises or upon
premises where traffic in alcoholic beverages is being carried on by any
person other than the license, or knowingly deface, destroy or alter the
license in any respect.



   (B)   The licensee shall post in a prominent place easily seen by
patrons a printed sign at least 11 inches by 14 inches in size, with letters
at least one inch high, supplied by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, and with gender-neutral language supplied by the Kentucky Cabinet
for Health and Family Services, which shall warn that drinking alcoholic
beverages prior to conception or during pregnancy can cause birth defects. A
person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$10, nor more than $50.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.094  LEGAL TRANSACTIONS FOR WHOLESALERS, DISTRIBUTORS AND RETAIL.



   No wholesaler or distributor shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any
person in the city for any consideration except under cash terms of the
wholesaler or distributor at or before the time of delivery. A wholesaler is
also permitted to extend credit for 30 days to a retailer for the purchase of
distilled spirits and wine. No retail licensee shall sell to a consumer for
any consideration except for cash or case equivalent at time of purchase.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.095  EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS.



   No licensee shall knowingly employ in connection with his or her
business any person who:



   (A)   Has been convicted of any felony within the last two years
unless permitted by KRS 244.090(2);



   (B)   Has been twice convicted of any misdemeanor or offense
directly or indirectly attributable to the use of intoxicating liquors within
the last two years unless permitted by KRS 244.090(2);



   (C)   Is under the age of 20 years who will be serving alcoholic
beverages or who will be having any contact whatsoever with the sale of
alcohol as defined under state statute, unless said person is exempt or
permitted by KRS 244.090; and



   (D)   Within two years prior to the date of his or her employment,
has had any city license under this chapter revoked for cause.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.096  LAVATORY FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   All retail beer and retail drink licenses shall be required to provide
indoor or outdoor lavatory facilities for their customers where such
beverages are consumed on the premises.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.097  NUDITY AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   No licensee shall offer or permit nudity, adult entertainment
activities, including nude or nearly nude dancing, adult motion picture,
television, slide or stage shows, cabarets or sexual entertainment centers on
any licensed premise. No licensee shall permit explicit sexual activity,
whether actual or simulated, upon any licensed premises. No licensee shall
sponsor or permit wet t-shirt or wet clothing contests, lingerie fashion
shows, mud wrestling, jello wrestling or similar activities, nor shall a
licensee allow dancing with touching for compensation (including but not
limited to wages, tips or gratuities), or any other service, display or
contest requiring physical contact between patrons and/or patrons and
employees on any licensed premises. No licensee shall sponsor, offer or
permit drinking contests, all-you-can-drink specials or free drinks on any
licensed premise in the city.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.098  CAUSE FOR REVOCATION.



   Violation of this and any other chapter shall subject the licensee to
penalties provided in this chapter and shall be cause for revocation or
suspension of city licenses.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



MINORS



§ 112.110  ALCOHOL RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Except as specifically authorized under KRS Chapters 241
through 244, no person under the age of 21 may possess alcoholic beverages or
enter onto any licensed premises for the purpose of acquiring alcoholic
beverages.



   (B)   As provided in KRS 244.085, no person under the age of 21,
except in the company of a parent or guardian, may enter any premises
licensed for the package sale of alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this
prohibition, “premises” specifically encompasses the entire lot upon
which a licensed establishment is situated, including any drive-up window.
The prohibition contained in this division (B) shall not apply to premises
where the usual and customary business of the establishment is a gas station,
convenience store, grocery store, drugstore, or similar establishment.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly permit, aid, assist, induce, cause
or otherwise encourage any minor to be in possession of, use or consume
alcoholic beverages. All licenses, as set out in this chapter, shall require
proof of age of all persons attempting to purchase or consume alcoholic
beverages on the licensee’s premises.



   (D)   No person being the owner or occupant or otherwise in
possession or control of any property located within the city shall knowingly
allow any minor to remain on such property while in possession of, using or
consuming alcoholic beverages.



   (E)   It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this section if
the person charged, upon discovery of said minor individuals, manifests a
proper effort to enlist the aid of and cooperate with law enforcement
personnel in stopping the minor individuals’ possession, consumption or use
of alcoholic beverages, or that the minor individuals’ possession of
alcoholic beverages was exempted by state law.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES PROHIBITED



§ 112.125  CONSUMPTION AT PACKAGE STORE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No licensee of a package store, whether trafficking in
distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages, shall permit consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises unless it also holds the appropriate
drink license. The licensee shall post a prominent notice on the premises
stating that consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises is prohibited.



   (B)   This restriction regarding on premises consumption shall not
prohibit sampling as allowed for microbreweries And wineries under the
provisions of KRS Chapter 243, or where sampling is permitted for a retail
distilled spirits and wine licensee under the provisions of KRS 244.050, or
beer tastings as permitted in 804 KAR 11:030.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.126  HABITUAL CONGREGATING.



   (A)   Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in KRS
Chapters 241 through 244, as used in this subchapter, the following terms are
defined as follows:



      HABITUAL. Consistent, that is, by frequent practice or use, but
not necessarily constant or exclusive.



      PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. A retail establishment selling distilled
spirits, wine and malt beverages in package containers pursuant to licenses
issued for those purposes.



      PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any activity that endangers or interferes with
the general use and enjoyment of neighboring property, passers-by or the
health, safety and welfare of the public.



      VACANT PROPERTY. A vacant lot on which no building or other
structure exists or property on which any structure is unoccupied or unused,
or which otherwise reflects abandonment by the owner or person with the right
of occupancy.



   (B)   Licensed premises. No person or entity operating a package
liquor store, whether trafficking in distilled spirits, wine or malt
beverages, including retail package beer licensees, shall knowingly allow or
permit habitual congregating of persons on the unenclosed portion of the
licensed premises so as to constitute a public nuisance.



   (C)   Vacant property. No person or entity being the owner or
otherwise in possession or control of any vacant property shall knowingly
allow or permit habitual congregating of persons on the unenclosed portion of
such property so as to constitute a public nuisance.



   (D)   It shall be a defense to any prosecution under §§ 112.125 et
seq., if a licensed vendor or property owner shall permit the city to post
and maintain a legible, painted or printed sign in at least two separate
prominent places in such area, in letters of not less than three inches in
height, stating that congregating of persons in prohibited and that violators
shall be prosecuted for trespass pursuant to KRS 511.080.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



MALT BEVERAGE KEG REGISTRATION



§ 112.140  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definition shall apply to this section as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   KEG. A container designed and capable of holding six or more gallons of
malt beverage.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.141  MALT BEVERAGE KEG IDENTIFICATION TAG.



   All retail licensees (herein after referred to as “licensee”)
operating within the city who sell malt beverages in kegs for consumption off
the premises of the licensee shall attach a numbered identification tag or
other device as provided by the city to each keg at the time of sale and
shall require the purchaser to complete and sign a keg registration form for
the keg stating the following:



   (A)   The purchaser is of legal age to purchase, possess and use the
malt beverage;



   (B)   The purchaser is not purchasing the keg for resale and will
not allow any person under the age of 21 to consume the malt beverage;



   (C)   The purchaser will not remove, obliterate or allow to be
removed or obliterated the identification tag;



   (D)   The purchaser will state the property address where the keg
will be consumed and physically located; and



   (E)   The purchaser is aware of his/her duty to maintain a copy of
the keg registration form visible and readily accessible near the location of
the keg.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.142  KEG REGISTRATION.



   (A)   The licensee shall obtain the name, address and telephone
number of the purchaser and shall require the purchaser to produce a valid
driver’s license number and, if that is not available, to produce at least
one other valid form of identification.



   (B)   The licensee shall retain copies of the keg registration forms
for a period of one year and shall make the keg registration form available
for inspection by state and local alcoholic beverage control officers and
other enforcement officers.



   (C)   The keg registration form shall be forwarded to the city
within five working days in all situations when the keg is not returned or is
returned with the identification tag removed or obliterated.



   (D)   The city is authorized to develop appropriate rules and
regulations and to develop and make available forms for the identification
tags and keg registration forms.



   (E)   All licensees that sell or offer for sale kegs shall post on
the licensed premises a notice provided by the city concerning the provisions
of this section.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.143  UNLAWFUL SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale kegs
without the identification tags attached and the keg registration form
completed. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove or to
obliterate the identification tag or to fail to have the declaration form
visible and readily accessible from the location of the keg. The penalties
for violation of this section shall be the penalties as set out in this
chapter. In addition, licensees violating this section shall be subject to
appropriate alcoholic beverage control administrative remedies.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



MANDATORY RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVICE TRAINING



§ 112.155  MANDATORY RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVICE TRAINING.



   (A)   All persons employed or engaged in the selling and/or serving
of alcoholic beverages shall participate in and complete the Kentucky
S.T.A.R. program or such other program as approved in writing by the city ABC
Administrator.



   (B)   All persons required to complete training shall complete that
training within 30 days of the date on which the person first becomes subject
to the training requirement. When a new business is licensed to serve
alcoholic beverages all employees must be trained prior to the opening of the
business. This training requirement shall apply to persons serving for all
licensees including special temporary licensees.



   (C)   Each licensee shall be responsible for compliance with the
training requirements and shall maintain for inspection by the city ABC
Administrator a record or file on each employee that shall contain the
pertinent training information. Each premise licensed hereunder must at all
times when alcoholic beverages are being served have at least one person
currently certified in responsible beverage service training on duty as
described herein.



   (D)   All persons completing the training required by this section
shall be re-certified not less than once every three years thereafter.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



SIGNS AND ADVERTISING



§ 112.170  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All signage shall be in compliance with any and all other
existing rules, regulations, and ordinances of the City of Campbellsville,
including but not limited to, the planning and zoning ordinance as currently
enacted, and/or as may be amended in the future.



   (B)   No flashing lights shall be used to illuminate the exterior of
any premises licensed under this chapter.



   (C)   Any advertising by any licensee under this chapter shall be in
compliance with KRS 244.130 and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (D)   No licensee shall publish or display advertising that is false
or misleading, nor shall any licensee publish or display advertising that
implies that consumption of alcoholic beverages is fashionable or the
accepted course of behavior, or advertising that contains any statement,
picture or illustration implying that the consumption of alcoholic beverages
enhances athletic prowess, whether or not any known athlete is depicted or
referred to, nor shall any licensee publish or display advertising that
encourages intoxication by referring to the intoxicating effects of alcohol
(or the use of terms such as “high test,” “high proof” or “extra
strong”) or depicting activities that tend to encourage excessive
consumption.



   (E)   No licensee shall erect or allow to be erected any banner that
displays any particular brand of alcoholic beverage on the outside of the
building or on the property.



   (F)   Any off premises signage advertising the sale of alcoholic
beverages is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to attach signage advertising
alcoholic beverages to the exterior of the building or the exterior premises
of the business. This prohibition shall include the use of outdoor umbrellas
or other outdoor or patio fixtures that feature the name or logo of an
alcoholic beverage or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages.



   (G)   Signage which refers directly or indirectly to alcoholic
beverages will be limited to one sign not over two square feet that must be
displayed from the inside of the window or interior of the business. No
additional signs, banners, posters or other type of displaying advertising
which refers either directly or indirectly to alcoholic beverages shall be
displayed on, nor shall it be visible from the exterior of any premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages, except that reference to such
may be included in the name of the business. This restriction shall not
prevent any licensee from placing in the windows of the licensed premises
business cards not larger than  two and one-half inches in size, setting
forth the price at which the licensee offers alcoholic beverages for sale.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to
distribute or cause to be distributed any handbills, circulars, or cards as a
medium of advertising alcoholic beverages.



   (I)   No licensee shall advertise alcoholic beverages on any
municipally owned property or at any municipally sponsored event.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



PATIO AND OUTDOOR SALES



§ 112.185  PATIO AND OUTDOOR SALES REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Patio and outdoor sales of alcoholic beverages shall be
permitted only on premises licensed for sales of alcoholic beverages by the
drink.



   (B)   No licensee shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale in a
patio or outdoor area of the licensee’s premises except in a clearly
defined patio or outdoor area which is enclosed by a fence or other
screening. All outdoor areas and screening shall be subject to the approval
of the city ABC Administrator. An exception to this restriction may be
granted for seasonal sidewalk cafes, upon application to and authorization
from the ABC City Administrator. The permission to operate a sidewalk cafe
shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to
the regulation of local zoning authorities as well as codes enforcement and
public safety officers.



   (C)   No licensee shall offer patio or outdoor sales of alcoholic
beverages unless the patio or outdoor area and fencing or screening area
shall have been approved in advance by the ABC Administrator.



   (D)   Unless exempted by the following provisions of this chapter,
and by permission of the city ABC Administrator, patio areas must comply with
the screening requirements of this chapter. Sidewalk cafe seating areas must
comply with this chapter and with local zoning laws and other public safety
requirements noted in this chapter, or in other local ordinances, statutes or
regulations.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.186  EXCEPTION(S) TO SCREENING REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR SALES AND
SERVICE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, SPECIFICALLY, PERMITTED SIDEWALK CAFES IN THE
CITY'S DOWNTOWN BUSINESS AREA.



   (A)   Licensees in the downtown business district/area may request
an exception from the outdoor screening of patio provision in order to permit
seasonal sidewalk cafes that serve food and alcoholic beverages as an adjunct
to the primary and adjacent licensed premises. In the case of permitted
sidewalk cafes, they shall be deemed part of the licensed premises.



   (B)   Any food establishment which operates a restaurant and is
licensed under this chapter and the provisions of the state ABC Code, may,
upon application to the local ABC Administrator, ask permission to expand the
operation of that restaurant onto a part, and only that part, of the public
sidewalk which immediately adjoins the licensed premises (hereinafter
referred to as “sidewalk cafe”). Licensees who do not serve food shall
not be eligible to apply for a sidewalk cafe permit.



   (C)   Conditions for sidewalk café permit. The issuance of a permit
shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions; provided,
however, that the ABC Administrator may without adverse hearing procedures
impose additional reasonable restrictions or withdraw approval upon the
operation of any sidewalk cafe where necessary in the judgment of the said
Administrator to protect the public health, safety or welfare or to prevent a
nuisance from developing or continuing:



      (1)   No sidewalk café shall be permitted in any portion of
the public sidewalk where normal pedestrian traffic flow is obstructed. A
minimum clearance width of 36 inches must be maintained on the public
sidewalk at all times. The sidewalk cafe shall not be permitted in any manner
to obstruct the entrance/exit to the restaurant.



      (2)   No tables, chairs or any other furmshings, except plant
tubs, shall be placed in the area used for the sidewalk cafe during any
period when the sidewalk cafe is not open and being operated. They shall be
removed at the end of each business day at the hour specified in the permit.
Umbrellas, tables, chairs, and other portable appurtenances shall be confined
to the area shown on the approved permit. While such cafe is in operation,
all tables and chairs shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition.



      (3)   The use of a portion of the public sidewalk as a
sidewalk cafe shall not be an exclusive use. All public improvements,
including but not limited to, trees, light poles, traffic signals, pull boxes
or manholes, or any public-initiated maintenance procedures, shall take
precedence over said use of the public sidewalk at all times.



      (4)   The licensee shall, in addition to all other
requirements of law, take reasonable steps to insure that alcoholic beverages
are consumed only by patrons of the establishment who are of age, and not by
passersby or persons who are not of age or who are obviously or apparently
intoxicated.



      (5)   No disposable cups or drinking vessels may be used and
the licensee shall not permit any alcoholic beverages to be taken off
premises by patrons, customers or guests.



      (6)   No amplified sound shall be used within a sidewalk cafe.
At no time shall any music originating from any part of the premises create a
nuisance.



      (7)   Dancing shall not be permitted or allowed in the
sidewalk café;



      (8)   The Licensee must at all times comply with all Federal,
state and local laws regarding the sale, service and consumption of alcohol
and the operation of the premises;



      (9)   The permit for sidewalk cafe may not be assigned or
transferred.



   (D)   Other requirements applicable to sidewalk cafes. No sidewalk
cafe permit shall be effective unless the licensee has filed with the City
Administrator evidence of insurance, insuring the licensee against liability
imposed by law arising out of the ownership, maintenance or operation of such
sidewalk cafe, in an amount to be established by the City Attorney and the
city's Safety Coordinator. The city shall be named an additional insured in
the policy required. Such insurance policy shall further provide expressly
that it may not be canceled except upon ten day’s written notice (or more)
filed with the ABC Administrator and the City Attorney.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.998  ENFORCEMENT.



   City police officers and the city ABC Administrator and his/her
investigators) are hereby authorized to enforce this chapter in full.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 112.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   In addition to any criminal prosecution instituted in Taylor
District Court against an alleged violator, the city ABC Administrator may
assess civil fines in lieu of suspension as authorized in KRS 243.480,
including the per diem assessments for ongoing violations. Payment of all
fines shall be remitted to the city ABC Administrator, who shall then
transmit the fines to the City Clerk for deposit in the appropriate
designated account.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, for which no other penalty is hereby provided,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to prosecution in the Taylor
County Court System, as follows: for the first offense, be fined not less
than $100 nor more than nor more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than
six months, or both. The penalties provided for in this subsection shall be
in addition to the revocation or suspension of the offender’s license. If
the offender is a corporation, LLC, joint stock company, association or other
business organization, or a fiduciary, the principal officer or officers
responsible for the violation may be imprisoned.



(Ord. 16-08, passed 11-21-2016)



CHAPTER 113:  PAWN SHOPS AND BROKERS



Section



   113.01   Tracking system



   113.02   Electronic database



   113.03   Owner/operator requirements



   113.04   Electronic recordkeeping



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  TRACKING SYSTEM.



   Each and every owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker doing
business in the city shall within one year of the adoption of this chapter,
maintain an electronic inventory tracking system which is capable of delivery
and transmission of all statutorily-required information via computer to the
entity designated by the City Police Department.



(Ord. 09-04, passed 8-3-2009)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.02  ELECTRONIC DATABASE.



   The Police Department has entered into an agreement with l.e.a.d.s.
online which operates an electronic database for law enforcement agencies for
the purpose of identifying stolen merchandise and persons suspected of the
thefts.



(Ord. 09-04, passed 8-3-2009)



§ 113.03  OWNER/OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS.



   The owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker will be required to
upload the information to the entity designated by the City Police Department
within 24 hours of receipt of the goods purchased (pawned).



(Ord. 09-04, passed 8-3-2009)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  ELECTRONIC RECORDKEEPING.



   (A)   (1)   The following businesses operating and doing business
in the limits of the City of Campbellsville shall adhere to the same
requirements as pawn shops and pawnbrokers, namely:



         (a)   Jewelers;



         (b)   Second-hand stores;



         (c)   Scrap metal dealers; and



         (d)   Businesses engaged in buying and selling copper
and other scrap metals.



      (2)   However, it is specifically noted that the following
items of property are excluded from application of this section:



         (a)   Clothing;



         (b)   Home furnishings; and



         (c)   Kitchen appliances.



   (B)   This section does not apply to first-hand items of property
sold by any of the businesses subject hereto. For example, a jewelry store
which sells first-hand and second-hand property is only required to adhere to
the requirements of this section for those items of property which are
second-hand.



(Ord. 10-17, passed 12-29-2010)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   The failure on the part of any owner or operator of a pawn shop or
pawnbroker to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the offender shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $25 for each separate offense. Each day of noncompliance with this
chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 09-04, passed 8-3-2009)



CHAPTER 114:  COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS/FACILITIES



Section



   114.01   Intent and applicability



   114.02   Definitions



   114.03   General provisions



   114.04   Existing telecommunications facilities



   114.05   Co-location



§ 114.01  INTENT AND APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions herein are designed to specifically address the
requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes regarding and regulating the
placement of wireless telecommunication facilities in the city, and further
to provide for the telecommunications in appropriate locations at sites which
provide adequate service while protecting the public, preserving the
character and value of the surrounding property, and protecting the view from
residential areas.



(Ord. 09-10, passed 12-9-2009)



§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTENNAE OR RELATED EQUIPMENT.  Transmitting, receiving or other
equipment used to support cellular telecommunications service or personal
communications service. This definition does not include towers.



   CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER.  Any tower constructed for, or an existing
facility that has been adopted for, the location of transmission or related
equipment to be used in the provision of cellular telecommunications services
or personal communications services. This includes, but is not limited to,
any alternative-design mounting structure (bell tower, steeple, pole) that
accommodates, minimizes, camouflages or conceals the presence of a cellular
antenna or tower.



   CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWERS FOR CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES OR
PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.  An antenna for cellular
telecommunications services or personal communications services may be
allowed as a conditional use in B-4, I-1 and I-2 zones after receiving
approval from the City Planning and Zoning Commission's (hereinafter
"Planning Commission") review and approval of the uniform application in
accordance with the comprehensive plan and the Zoning Ordinance. Co-location
of service facilities is preferred. Co-location objectives may be satisfied
by configuration of new facilities for multiple carriers or by co-location on
existing facilities. Any request for review of a proposal to construct such a
cellular antenna tower shall be made only in accordance with these
provisions. However, if the property is subject to an existing conditional
use permit, the property owner shall obtain approval of the appropriate
amendment or modification request. The request shall be filed simultaneously
with the cellular antenna tower for cellular telecommunications services or
personal communications services request filed pursuant to these provisions.
Review of the conditional use permit plan shall be limited to a determination
of the impact of the CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER FOR CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATION
SERVICES OR PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES construction on the requirements
of the conditional use permit on the site.



   CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  A retail telecommunications
service that uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites and mobile
switching stations.



   CO-LOCATION.  Locating two or more transmission antennas or related
equipment on the same cellular antenna tower.



   PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICE.  As defined in the United States Code
(see 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)).



   UNIFORM APPLICATION.  An application to construct a cellular antenna
tower submitted to the Planning Commission in conformity with these
provisions.



   UTILITY.  Defined in KRS 278.010(3).



(Ord. 09-10, passed 12-9-2009)



§ 114.03  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Any request filed under this chapter for review of a proposal to
construct antenna tower shall include the following:



   (A)   Submit a copy of the applicant's complete Uniform Application
to the Planning Commission to construct a cellular antenna tower for cellular
or personal communications services. The uniform application shall include a
grid map that shows the location of all existing cellular antenna towers and
that indicates the general position of proposed construction sites for new
cellular antenna towers within an area that includes:



      (1)   All of the Planning Commission's jurisdiction; and



      (2)   Any subsequently modified boundary (including, but not
limited to an increase or decrease) of the Planning Commission's jurisdiction.



   (B)   Include in any contract with an owner of the property upon
which a cellular antenna tower is to be constructed, a provision that
specifies, in the case of abandonment, a method that the utility will follow
in dismantling and removing a cellular antenna tower including a timetable
for removal. Furthermore, the Planning Commission may request the owner of a
cellular tower or antenna to provide a declaration of intent for continued
operation and use of the tower or antenna. In the event that the tower or
antenna is abandoned or there is no response from the owner within 90 days,
it must be removed within six months of ceasing operation at the owner's
expense. Prior to issuance of a permit for construction of a tower or
antenna, a bond or other appropriate surety shall be filed with the Planning
Commission, in order to ensure the successful dismantling and removal of the
tower or antenna and any associated accessory structure; and



   (C)   In addition to the foregoing requirements, a uniform
application shall include:



      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The applicant's articles of incorporation, if applicable;



      (3)   A geo-technical investigation report, signed and sealed
by a professional engineer registered in the state, that includes boring logs
and foundation design recommendations;



      (4)   A written report, prepared by a professional engineer or
land surveyor, of findings as to the proximity of the proposed site to flood
hazard areas;



      (5)   Clear directions from the county seat to the proposed
site, including highway numbers and street names, if applicable, with the
telephone number of the person who prepared the directions;



      (6)   The lease or sale agreement for the property on which
the tower is proposed to be located, except that, if the agreement has been
filed in abbreviated form with the County Clerk, an applicant may file a copy
of the agreement as recorded by the County Clerk and, if applicable, the
portion of the agreement demonstrating compliance with KRS 100.987(2);



      (7)   The identity and qualifications of each person directly
responsible for the design and construction of the proposed tower;



      (8)   A site development plan or survey, signed and sealed by
a professional engineer registered in the state, that shows the proposed
location of the tower and all easements and existing structures within 500
feet of the proposed site on the property on which the tower will be located,
and all easements and existing structures within 200 feet of the access
drive, including the intersection with the public street system;



      (9)   A vertical profile sketch of the tower, signed and
sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state, indicating the
height of the tower and the placement of all antennas;



      (10)   The tower and foundation design plans and a description
of the standard according to which the tower was designed, signed and sealed
by a professional engineer registered in the state;



      (11)   A map, drawn to a scale no less than one inch equals
200 feet, that identifies every structure and every owner of real estate
within 500 feet of the proposed tower;



      (12)   A statement that every person, who according to the
records of the property valuation administrator, owns property within 500
feet of the proposed tower or property contiguous to the site upon which the
tower is proposed to be constructed, has been:



         (a)   Notified by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the proposed construction which notice shall include a map of
the location of the proposed construction;



         (b)   Given the telephone number and address of the
local Planning Commission; and



         (c)   Informed of his or her right to participate in the
Planning Commission's proceedings on the application.



      (13)   A list of the property owners who received the notice,
together with copies of the certified letters sent to the listed property
owners;



      (14)   A statement that the chief executive officer of the
affected local governments and their legislative bodies have been notified,
in writing of the proposed construction;



      (15)   A copy of the notice sent to the chief executive
officer of the affected local governments and their legislative bodies;



      (16)   A statement that:



         (a)   A written notice, of durable material at least two
feet by four feet in size stating that "(Name of applicant) proposes to
construct a telecommunications tower on this site" and including the address
and telephone numbers of the applicant and the Planning Commission, has been
posted and shall remain in a visible location on the proposed site until
final disposition of the application; and



         (b)   A written notice, at least two feet by four feet
in size, stating that "(Name of applicant) proposes to construct a
telecommunications tower near this site" and including the addresses and
telephone numbers of the applicant and the planning commission, has been
posted on the public road nearest the site.



      (17)   A statement that notice of the location of the proposed
construction has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county in which the construction is proposed;



      (18)   A brief description of the character of the general
area in which the tower is proposed to be constructed which includes the
existing land use for the specific property involved;



      (19)   A statement that the applicant has considered the
likely effects of the installation on nearby land uses and values and has
concluded that there is no more suitable location reasonably available from
which adequate service to the area can be provided and that there is no
reasonable available opportunity to locate its antennas and related
facilities on an existing structure including documentation of attempts to
locate its antennas and related facilities on an existing structure, if any,
with supporting radio frequency analysis, where applicable, and a statement
indicating that the applicant attempted to locate its antennas and related
facilities on a tower designed to host multiple wireless service providers'
facilities on an existing structure, such as a telecommunications tower or
other suitable structure capable of supporting the applicant's antennas and
related facilities; and



      (20)   A map of the area in which the tower is proposed to be
located, that is drawn to scale, and that clearly depicts the necessary
search area within which an antenna tower should pursuant to radio frequency
requirements, be located.



(Ord. 09-10, passed 12-9-2009)



§ 114.04  EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   Telecommunications facilities in existence on the date of the adoption
of this chapter, which do not comply with this chapter ("existing
telecommunications facilities"), are subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   Existing telecommunications facilities may continue in use for
the purpose now used, but may not be expanded or replaced without complying
with this chapter, except as further provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Existing telecommunications facilities, which are hereafter
damaged or destroyed due to cause beyond the control of the applicant, may be
repaired and restored to their former use, location and physical dimensions
subject to obtaining a building permit therefor, but without otherwise
complying with this chapter.



   (C)   The owner of any existing telecommunications facility may
expand the telecommunications facility to accommodate co-located antennas or
facilities by obtaining a building permit therefor, and without having to
conform to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 09-10, passed 12-9-2009)



§ 114.05  CO-LOCATION.



   (A)   The applicant shall make a reasonable attempt to co-locate its
transmitting and related equipment on an existing cellular antenna tower and
the applicant shall provide the Commission with a statement indicating that
the applicant has:



      (1)   Successfully attempted to co-locate on towers designed
to host multiple wireless service providers' facilities or existing
structures such as a telecommunications tower or another suitable structure
capable of supporting the applicant's facilities, and that identifies the
location of the tower or suitable structure on which the applicant will
co-locate its transmission and related facilities; or



      (2)   Unsuccessfully attempted to co-locate on towers designed
to host multiple wireless service provider's facilities or existing
structures such as a telecommunications tower or another suitable structure
capable of supporting the applicant's facilities and that:



         (a)   Identifies the location of the towers or other
structures on which the applicant attempted to co-locate; and



         (b)   Lists the reasons why the co-location was
unsuccessful in each instance.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall deny a uniform application to
construct a cellular antenna tower based on an applicant's unwillingness to
attempt to co-locate additional transmitting or related equipment on any new
or existing towers or other structures.



   (C)   In the event of co-location, a utility shall be considered the
primary user of the tower, if the utility is the owner of the antenna tower
and if no other agreement exists that prescribes an alternate arrangement
between the parties for use of the tower. Any other entity that co-locates
transmission or related facilities on a cellular antenna tower shall do so in
a manner that does not impose additional costs or operation restrictions on
the primary user.



(Ord. 09-10, passed 12-9-2009)



CHAPTER 115:  SOLICITATION



Section



   115.01   Panhandling



 



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  PANHANDLING.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PANHANDLE.  To approach strangers and beg for money or food.



   (B)   Panhandling on public property. No person shall panhandle upon
the public streets or at the intersection of public streets in the city
without the express written permission of the city.



   (C)   Panhandling on private property. No person shall panhandle
upon any private property in the city unless said person is the owner of the
private property or unless said person has the written permission of the
owner of the private property.



(Ord. 13-09, passed 11-4-2013)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of § 115.01 shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $100 or be imprisoned for not less than ten days
nor more than 30 days or both for each offense.



(Ord. 13-09, passed 11-4-2013)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   MINORS; CURFEW




CHAPTER 130:  MINORS; CURFEW



Section



   130.01   Curfew for minors; generally



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  CURFEW FOR MINORS; GENERALLY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ALLOW.  Either permit or neglect to prevent. It requires actual
or constructive knowledge on the part of the parent or guardian, that is, the
parent or guardian must actually know about the child violating this section,
or the circumstances must be such that a reasonably prudent parent or
guardian should have known the child was violating this section.



      MINOR.  Any person under the age of 18, or as may be otherwise
phrased, any person of the age of 17 or under.



      PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a minor:



         (a)   As a natural or adoptive parent;



         (b)   As a legal guardian;



         (c)   As a person who stands "in loco parentis"; or



         (d)   As a person whom legal custody has been given by
order of court.



      REMAIN.  To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily upon
or in any public assembly, building, place, street or highway.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
18 to be or remain in or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or
highway within the city at night during the following periods:



 

From
 
To




1:00 a.m. Saturday
 
6:00 a.m. Saturday


1:00 a.m. Sunday
 
6:00 a.m. Sunday


11:00 p.m. Sunday
 
6:00 a.m. Monday


11:00 p.m. Monday
 
6:00 a.m. Tuesday


11:00 p.m. Tuesday
 
6:00 a.m. Wednesday


11:00 p.m. Wednesday
 
6:00 a.m. Thursday


11:00 p.m. Thursday
 
6:00 a.m. Friday




 



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having
legal custody of a minor to allow the minor to be or remain in or upon a
public assembly, building, place, street or highway in the city under
circumstances not constituting an exception as enumerated in division (C)
below during the time periods contained in division (B)(1) above.



   (C)   In the following exceptional cases a minor in or upon any
public assembly, building, place, street or highway in the city during the
nocturnal hours provided for in division (B) above shall not be considered in
violation of this section:



      (1)   When the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian;



      (2)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly, provided that written notice signed by the
minor and countersigned by a parent is in the possession of the minor
specifying when, where and in what manner the minor will be exercising the
First Amendment rights;



      (3)   In case of reasonable necessity but only after the
minor's parent has communicated to the police department the facts
establishing the reasonable necessity;



      (4)   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where the
minor resides, or on the sidewalk or either next-door neighbor who has not
communicated an objection to a police officer or the Police Department;



      (5)   When returning home, by a direct route from, and within
one hour of the termination of, a school activity, or any activity of a
religious or other voluntary association, provided that justification
indicating the place and time of termination of the event can be given to any
investigating officer of the Police Department;



      (6)   When authorized by regulation issued by the Mayor in
cases of reasonable necessity involving more minors than may reasonably be
dealt with on an individual basis. This regulation should be issued
sufficiently in advance to permit publicity through news media and through
other agencies such as the schools. The regulation shall define the activity,
the scope of the use of the public assembly, building, place, street or
highways permitted, and the period of time involved not to extend more than
one hour beyond the time for termination of the activity, and the reason for
finding that the regulation is reasonably necessary. The Mayor shall notify
the Police Department of that information;



      (7)   When engaged in a business or occupation which the laws
of the state authorize a person under 18 years of age to perform; and



      (8)   When the minor, who is a duly authorized and licensed
driver, is operating a motor vehicle within the city for the purpose of
passing through, by direct route, from one location to another either within
or out of the city, including all minors that may also be within the vehicle.



   (D)   (1)   A police officer upon finding or being notified of
any minor in or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway
whose parent is believed to be in violation of this section may stop and
question the minor and request information as his or her name and age and the
name and address of his or her parent, guardian or person having legal
custody.



      (2)   If the police officer determines or has reasonable cause
to believe that a curfew violation has occurred, the police officer may
obtain from the minor the information necessary to issue a citation to the
minor's parent, guardian or person having legal custody and then either take
the minor to his or her home or direct the minor to proceed immediately to
his or her home.



(2000 Code, § 12-1)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody allowing a minor to
violate § 130.01(B)(1) shall be subject to a fine of no more than $500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or both.



(2000 Code, § 12-1)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE





         151.   BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS





         152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION





         153.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION





         154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS





         155.   ZONING CODE




CHAPTER 150:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section



   150.01   Title



   150.02   Definitions



   150.03   Jurisdiction



   150.04   Violation and citation; appeal; abatement of nuisances;
liability



   150.05   Appeal process; different types of appeals



   150.06   Appointment of members; term of office; liability



   150.07   General powers of the Board



   150.08   Organization of Board; conduct of meetings and members;
quorum



   150.09   Board hearing; notice; final order



   150.10   Appeal to district court; final judgment



   150.11   Lien; charges, cost, fees



   150.12   Transfer of ownership



   150.13   Property Maintenance Code



   150.14   Demolition permit required; fees



 



   150.99   Penalty



§ 150.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Ordinance".



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED.  Property or any improvements thereon that is unoccupied,
not in use, neglected and/or not serviced by public utilities.



   DEMOLITION.  The act of demolishing or razing of a building, structure
or part thereof to the ground level.



   HEAT SUPPLY DAYS.  As used in § 150.13 below and the International
Property Maintenance Code §§ 602.3 and 602.4 shall be the period from
September 1 to May 30.



   OFFENSES. 



      (1)   FIRST OFFENSE.  A citation issued on a specific parcel
of property on one occasion within a 12-month period.



      (2)   SECOND OFFENSE.  A citation issued on a specific parcel
of property on two occasions within a 12-month period.



      (3)   THIRD + OFFENSE.  A citation issued on a specific
parcel of property on three or more occasions within a 12-month period.



   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.  Includes the “Nuisance Code” as that
term is defined in KRS 82.700(3). It shall consist of all of the provisions
set forth herein and any and all other ordinances hereafter adopted by the
Mayor and City Council pursuant to KRS 82.700 et seq. and/or KRS 381.770, as
may be amended from time to time.



   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.  The administrative body
created and acting under the authority of the KRS 82.700 et seq. and KRS
381.770.



   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Includes all city
citation officers and other positions authorized to enforce this code.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Includes, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The physical condition or occupancy of any property
regarded as a public nuisance at common law;



      (2)   Any physical condition or occupancy of any property or
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but
not limited to, abandoned wells, or swimming pools, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures;



      (3)   Any property that has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing
facilities;



      (4)   Any property that is unsafe for human habitation;



      (5)   Any property that is in imminent danger of becoming a
fire or other hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or unsecure, so as to pose an
imminent threat or danger to life, limb or property;



      (6)   Any property from which the plumbing, electrical,
heating or other facilities required by this code have been removed or from
which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered
ineffective or the required precautions against trespassers have not been
provided;



      (7)   Any property that is unsanitary, littered with rubbish
or garbage or has uncontrolled grass and weeds growing on it;



      (8)   Any residence, building, outbuilding or other structure
that is in a state of dilapidation, disrepair, deterioration or decay, faulty
construction, overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned, damaged by fire to the
extent that it is uninhabitable, in danger of collapse or failure or
dangerous to anyone on or near the property; and



      (9)   Any residence, building, outbuilding or other structure
that has been abandoned for a minimum continuous period of six months,
thereby creating an attractive nuisance to children and/or which tends to
diminish the value of adjacent properties.



   REMEDY.  The action taken to abate any nuisance, in order to bring the
property determined to be in violation, into compliance with the requirements
of this Property Maintenance Code.



   VENTILATION DAYS.  As used in § 150.13 and International Property
Maintenance Code § 304.14 shall be the period from April 1 to October 31.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.03  JURISDICTION.



   The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer and Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction over and shall
enforce this Property Maintenance Code and all other ordinances hereafter
adopted which specifically provide for the enforcement by the Code
Enforcement Officers or Board, in the manner set forth herein.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.04  VIOLATION AND CITATION; APPEAL; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES; LIABILITY.



   The following provisions shall govern all enforcement powers,
responsibilities and procedures administered by the Property Maintenance Code
Enforcement Officer(s).



   (A)   Notice of violation. Except as provided in division (B) below,
if a Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer believes, based on the
Officer's personal observation or investigation, that a person has violated
the Property Maintenance Code, the Officer shall issue a notice of violation
to the property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator, allowing
that person a specified and reasonable number of days to abate the violation.
The violator may upon request, be allowed a reasonable extension of time to
abate the violation without imposition of any charges, costs, penalties and
fees, in the sole discretion of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Officer. If the violator fails to abate the violation within the time
prescribed therein, a new and separate notice of violation may be issued for
subsequent and separate violations of the Property Maintenance Code. In the
event that the resident, tenant, occupant or other violator is issued a
notice of violation, the property owner of record will receive a copy of the
notice.



   (B)   Notice of violation procedure. Notices of violation issued by
Code Enforcement Officer for violations of the code shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The address, location or description of the property
found to be in violation of the code;



      (2)   The date and time of inspection;



      (3)   The name and address of the person to whom the notice is
issued;



      (4)   The date the notice is issued;



      (5)   The facts constituting the offense;



      (6)   The section of the code violated;



      (7)   The name of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Officer;



      (8)   The fines, charges, costs, penalties and/or
administrative fees, imposed for the violation if it is not abated in the
manner required by the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer;



      (9)   The maximum fine that may be imposed under this chapter
for the violation in question;



      (10)   The procedure for the violator to follow in order to
appeal the notice;



      (11)   A statement that if the violator fails to appeal the
citation or time to abate within the time allowed, the violator shall be
deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board to appeal the notice and the Code Enforcement Officer's
determination that the violation occurred shall be final; and



      (12)   Notice that a lien may be filed against the property on
which the violation occurred if it is not abated in the manner required by
the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer and that proceedings to
enforce the lien may be initiated to collect fines, charges, costs, penalties
and/or fees, including attorney and administrative fees.



   (C)   Type and delivery of notice. The notice of violation shall be
in writing and shall be reasonably calculated to inform the violator of the
nature of the violation. It may be hand-delivered to the property owner,
resident, tenant, occupant or other violator or may be served or sent by
first class mail addressed to the last known property owner of record as
listed in the county property valuation office. If the notice cannot be
delivered to the owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator in
person or notice sent by first class mail is returned by the United States
Postal Service because the notice is undeliverable, marked return to sender
or the owner has left no forwarding address notice shall be given by placing
it on the door of the most visible entrance to the property with dwellings or
structures located thereon, or by posting a sign, at least eight and one-half
inches by 11 inches in dimension in a conspicuous location on the property.



   (D)   Issuance of citation. If the property owner, resident, tenant,
occupant or other violator fails or refuses to abate the violation within the
time and manner required by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Officer is
authorized to issue a citation. The citation shall represent a determination
by the Code Enforcement Officer that a violation has been committed and that
determination shall be final unless it is appealed by the alleged violator to
the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board in the manner prescribed
herein.



   (E)   Citation procedure. Citations issued by Code Enforcement
Officer for violations of the code shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The address, location or description of the property
found to be in violation of the code;



      (2)   The date and time of inspection;



      (3)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation
is issued;



      (4)   The date the citation is issued;



      (5)   The facts constituting the offense;



      (6)   The section of the code violated;



      (7)   The name of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Officer;



      (8)   The fines, charges, costs, penalties and/or
administrative fees, imposed for the violation if the citation is not
appealed in the manner prescribed within this chapter;



      (9)   The maximum fine that may be imposed under this chapter
for the violation in question;



      (10)   The procedure for the violator to follow in order to
pay the fine or to appeal the citation;



      (11)   A statement that if the violator fails to pay the fine
set forth in the citation or appeal the citation within the time allowed, the
violator shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing before
the Code Enforcement Board to appeal the citation and the Code Enforcement
Officer's determination that the violation occurred shall be final; and



      (12)   Notice that a lien may be filed against the property on
which the violation occurred and that proceedings to enforce the lien may be
initiated to collect fines, charges, costs, penalties and/or fees, including
attorney and administrative fees.



   (F)   Type and delivery of citation. The citation shall be in
writing and shall be reasonably calculated to inform the violator of the
nature of the violation. It shall be hand-delivered to the property owner,
resident, tenant, occupant or other violator or may be served or sent by
first class mail addressed to the last known property owner of record as
listed in the county property valuation office. If the notice cannot be
delivered to the owner in person or notice sent by first class mail is
returned by the United States Postal Service because the notice is
undeliverable, marked return to sender or the owner has left no forwarding
address notice shall be given by placing it on the door of the most visible
entrance to the property with dwellings or structures located thereon, or by
posting a sign, at least eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in dimension
in a conspicuous location on the property



   (G)   Abatement of nuisance. If the violator does not appeal the
citation within the time prescribed, the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
citation shall enter a final order finding and determining that the violation
was committed and no appeal was timely filed. The Code Enforcement Officer
may thereafter cause the nuisance to be abated by any and all means
reasonable and necessary. A copy of the final order shall be served on the
property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator found to be in
violation of this code.



   (H)   Emergency abatement. Nothing in division (G) above shall
prohibit the city from taking immediate action to abate any violation of this
chapter without prior notice to the property owner, resident, tenant or other
occupant when an Enforcement Officer, upon inspection of the property has
reason to believe that, in the absence of immediate remedial action, a
violation will, within reasonable probability, cause irreparable or
irreversible harm and/or property damage. Immediately on the next business
day after an emergency abatement by the Officer, the Officer shall
immediately provide written notice to the Mayor of the emergency
determination and the abatement action undertaken.



   (I)   Right of entry. Enforcement Officer(s), and their duly
authorized agents, assistants, employees or contractors, after first having
obtained the consent of the property owner, resident, tenant or other
occupant may enter upon private or public property to conduct inspections. If
the property owner, resident, tenant or other occupant does not give the
Enforcement Officer(s) consent to enter upon and inspect the property, an
on-site inspection of the property shall not occur until it is authorized by
a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (J)   Liability. The Code Enforcement Officers, charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, while acting within the course and scope of
their duties under this chapter, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally and are hereby relieved from any and all personal liability for
injury's and damage to persons or property. It is thus intended by this
chapter that any suit instituted against any Code Enforcement Officer or
employee because of a lawful act performed by that Officer or employee in the
discharge of duties imposed under the provisions of this chapter be defended
by the city's liability carrier until final adjudication of any proceedings.



   (K)   Discretionary modifications. The Enforcement Officer shall
have the discretion to modify a notice of violation, only before the issuance
of a citation, provided the Officer shall first find that special
circumstances that makes strict compliance with this chapter impractical find
the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this
chapter. A modified notice shall constitute a "new" notice and shall be
deemed to replace the original (voided) notice. The details of actions
granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the Building and
Codes Department files.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.05  APPEAL PROCESS; DIFFERENT TYPES OF APPEALS.



   The following details the appeal process.



   (A)   Appeal of notice of violation. Any property owner, resident,
tenant, occupant or other violator served with a notice of violation or on
whose property a notice of violation is posted, shall no later than ten days
after the issuance of the notice of violation or posting thereof on the
property, may file an appeal in writing to City Hall, attention to the Mayor
and the Building and Codes officer of the city requesting a hearing before
the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board to appeal the notice of
violation. If the violator fails to appeal the citation within ten days as
provided herein, the person shall be deemed to have waived his or her right
to a hearing before the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board and the
Code Enforcement Officer's determination that a violation was committed,
shall be considered final and enforceable.



   (B)   Appeal of citation. Upon receipt of a citation, the property
owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator shall respond to it not
later than ten days following the issuance or posting on the property the
notice of violation by either paying the fines, charges, costs, penalties
and/or fees, including administrative fees assessed therein, or by filing an
appeal in writing with the city, in writing, requesting a hearing before the
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board. Payment of assessed fines,
charges, administrative fees and penalties shall not relieve the property
owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator from his or her
obligation to bring the property on which the violation occurred into
compliance with this code within a reasonable time thereafter, as solely
determined by the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.06  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; LIABILITY.



   There is hereby created pursuant to KRS 82.700 to KRS 82.725, a City
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board (hereafter the "Board"), which
shall be composed of three members.



   (A)   Members of the Board shall own property within the city for a
period of at least one year prior to appointment to the Board and shall
maintain legal ownership interest in at least one parcel of real property
within the city throughout the term in office.



   (B)   Members shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city with the
approval of the City Council.



   (C)   The initial appointments to the three member Board shall be as
follows: one member shall be appointed to a one-year term. One member
appointed to a two-year term. One member appointed to a three-year term. All
subsequent Board appointments shall be for a term of three years.



   (D)   If a vacancy on the Board occurs, the Mayor with approval of
the City Council, shall within 60 days of the vacancy, appoint a new member
or members. If the vacancy is not filled within the prescribed time period,
the City Council shall appoint a member to fill the vacancy.



   (E)   Members of the Board shall only be removed therefrom by the
City Council for misconduct, inefficiency or willful neglect of duty. Prior
to removal, the Mayor or member(s) of the City Council requesting same, shall
submit in writing to the member in question and the Campbellsville City
Council, the reasons for it.



   (F)   Members of the Board charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, while acting on behalf of the city and within their official duties
and capacity, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and are hereby
relieved individually and collectively from all personal liability for any
injury and or damages to persons or property as a result of the discharge of
official duties imposed herein. Any suit instituted against any Board member
because of an act performed by that Board member in the lawful discharge of
duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the
legal representative of the city until the final determination of the
proceedings.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.07  GENERAL POWERS OF THE BOARD.



   The Board is authorized and directed to:



   (A)   Conduct evidentiary hearings, issue decisions and abatement
orders and impose fines, charges, costs, penalties and/or fees, including
administrative fees in the final adjudication of appeals brought before it;



   (B)   To adopt any and all policies, rules and regulations,
reasonably required to implement, administer and conduct its business and
hearings brought before it; and



   (C)   Authorize enforcement officer(s) to file liens against
properties found to be in violation of the Code to secure the collection of
fines, penalties, fees, charges and or cost, including administrative fees.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.08  ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; CONDUCT OF MEETINGS AND MEMBERS; QUORUM.



   (A)   The Board shall annually elect a Chairperson from among its
members. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.



   (B)   The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings on a date, and
during times to be established by the Board. Regular and special meetings
shall be scheduled and held in accordance with requirements of the State Open
Meetings Act being KRS 61.800 et seq. Regular and special meetings may be
cancelled if there are no appeals or other business to be considered by the
Board.



   (C)   All meetings and hearings of the Board, shall be held in
accordance with the requirements of KRS 82.700 et seq., KRS 381.770 et seq.,
Roberts Rules of Order, the State Open Meetings Act being KRS 61.800 et seq,
and the State Open Records Act being KRS 61.870 et seq and the city code of
ethics.



   (D)   For the purpose of conducting all business and hearings
brought before it, two members of the Board, shall, if present, constitute a
quorum.



   (E)   Minutes, records and/or transcripts of all proceedings and
action taken shall be kept by the Board and the vote of each member on any
issue decided by them shall be recorded therein.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.09  BOARD HEARING; NOTICE; FINAL ORDER.



   (A)   When an appeal has been properly filed and a hearing has been
requested, the Board shall convene for the purposes of conducting a hearing
not later than 60 days after the appeal has been filed with the city.
Otherwise the Board may convene for the purpose of conducting any other
business brought before it or a majority of the membership of the Board.



   (B)   Not less than ten days before any requested hearing, the Board
shall notify the appellant of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
Notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested at his or
her last known address; or by personal delivery.



   (C)   Any person requesting a hearing before the Board who fails to
appear at the time and place set for the hearing shall be deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing on an appeal a notice of violation or citation
and a determination that a violation was committed shall be entered and
become final. The Board shall enter a final order confirming the violation
and shall direct the nuisance to be abated and/or impose the fines, charges,
costs, penalties and/or fees, including administrative fees assessed in the
citation. If the violator has not abated the nuisance conditions on the
notice of violation or citation within the time provided, the city may
promptly abate the nuisance and/or issues another violation which may be a
new and separate offence in accordance with § 150.04(A) above. A copy of the
final order shall be served upon the violator/appellant.



   (D)   When a hearing is held under this section, the Board shall
elicit testimony from witnesses and allow relative demonstrative evidence.
All testimony shall be recorded by audio, video or stenographic means.



      (1)   The Chairperson or any Board member shall have authority
to administer the following oath.



"Do you solemnly swear and affirm to tell the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth".



      (2)   Testimony shall be taken from the Property Maintenance
Code Enforcement Officer, the alleged violator and any witnesses to the
violation offered by the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer or
alleged violator and any witnesses with relevant personal knowledge of the
violation or citation on appeal. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply,
but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the
proceedings.



   (E)   In making its determination, the Board shall, based solely on
the evidence, adduced during the hearing determine by a preponderance of the
evidence whether or not a violation has been committed. If at the conclusion
of the hearing, the Board determines that a violation has been committed, an
order shall be issued upholding the notice of violation or citation and the
Board shall authorize the Building and Codes Department to abate the nuisance
condition on appeal and impose reasonable and necessary fines, charges,
costs, penalties and/or fees, including administrative fees imposed therein,
or a combination of the forgoing remedies. Provided however, the final order
of the Board shall provide the violator with reasonable time, not to exceed
30 days, to abate the violation. If the violator does not abate in the manner
required and within the time provided in the final order, another notice of
violation may be issued in accordance with § 150.04(A) above, for another
violation of the Property Maintenance Code.



   (F)   Findings of fact, conclusions of law and decisions of the
Board shall be reduced to writing and signed and dated by the majority of the
Board the date the order was entered. A copy of the findings of fact,
conclusions of law and decisions of the Board shall be furnished to the
appellant named in the citation at his or her last known address.



   (G)   The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer may abate
the violation in order to bring the property into compliance with the
Property Maintenance Code if a final order upholding the citation is entered
by the Board or any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.10  APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT; FINAL JUDGMENT.



   (A)   An appeal from any judgment, decision or determination of the
Board shall be made to the County District Court within seven days of the
date of the Board's judgment, decision or determination. The appeal shall be
initiated by the filing of a complaint and a copy of the Board's final order
in the same manner as any civil action under the State Rules of Civil
Procedure.



   (B)   The action before the District Court shall be tried de novo
and the burden shall be upon the city to establish that a violation occurred.
If the court finds that a violation occurred, the property owner, resident,
tenant, occupant or other violator shall be ordered to abate the violation
and pay to the city all fines, charges, costs, penalties and/or fees,
including administrative fees occurring as of the date of the judgment. If
the District Court finds a violation did not occur, the city shall be ordered
to dismiss the notice of violation or citation and the plaintiff/appellant
shall be authorized to recover his or her court costs (filing fees, not
attorney fees). If the property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other
violator does not abate the violation in the time provided, another notice of
violation may be issued in accordance with § 150.04(A) above, for each
subsequent and separate violation of the Property Maintenance Code.



   (C)   If no appeal from a final judgment, decision or order of the
Board is filed within the time period set in division (A) above, the Board's
order shall be deemed final and enforceable for all purposes provided herein.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.11  LIEN; CHARGES, COST, FEES.



   (A)   The city shall have a lien against any property or properties
finally determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Board or court of
competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Property Maintenance Code to
secure the payment and recovery of the reasonable value of labor and
materials used to abate the nuisance violation, including fines, charges,
costs, penalties and/or fees, including administrative fees authorized by
state law. The lien shall be superior to and have priority over, all other
subsequent liens on the property except state, county, school board and city
taxes and prior perfected secured interest (i.e., mortgage and the like).



   (B)   The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and
shall bear interest, at the rate of 12% per annum thereafter, until paid.



   (C)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) above,
the person found to have committed the violation shall be personally
responsible for the amount of all fines, charges, costs, penalties and/or
fees, including administrative fees assessed for the violation and for all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of
the Property Maintenance Code. The city may bring a civil action against the
person and shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a
debt.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.12  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure
who has received a notice of violation, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of the dwelling unit or structure to another until the
requirements list in the notice of violation have been complied with, or
until the owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee a true copy of any notice of violation issued by the Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the Enforcement
Officer a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of the notice of violation and
fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the necessary
corrections and repairs required by the notice of violation.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 150.13  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   (A)   Generally. Provisions of the current International Property
Maintenance Code adopted by reference herein. The city hereby adopts, enacts
and incorporates by reference, as if fully set forth herein, in their
entirety, sections:



 



108
 
Unsafe Structures and Equipment


201
 
General


202
 
General Definitions


301
 
General


302
 
Exterior Property Areas


303
 
Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs


304
 
Exterior Structure


305
 
Interior Structure


306
 
Handrails and Guardrails


308
 
Extermination


401
 
General


402
 
Light


403
 
Ventilation


404
 
Occupancy limitations


501
 
General


502
 
Required Facilities


503
 
Toilet Rooms


504
 
Plumbing Systems and Fixtures


505
 
Water System


506
 
Sanitary Drainage System


507
 
Storm Drainage


601
 
General


602
 
Heating Facilities


603
 
Mechanical Equipment


604
 
Electrical Facilities


605
 
Electrical Equipment


606
 
Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters


607
 
Duct Systems


701
 
General


702
 
Means of Egress


703
 
Fire-Resistance Ratings


704
 
Fire Protection Systems


of the "2006 International Property Maintenance Code" as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., as same may be amended from time to time
hereafter. Violations of the provisions therein shall be deemed a nuisance
enforceable by any and all provisions of this chapter.




 



   (B)   Unsafe structure; imminent danger. Pursuant to the notice and
citation provisions of this chapter, when, in the opinion of the Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger of failure or
collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any
structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the structure, or when there is actual danger to the building
occupants or those in proximity of any structure because of explosive fumes
or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of
defective or dangerous equipment, the Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require occupants to vacate the
premises forthwith. The Enforcement Officer shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to the structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is
Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Property Maintenance Code
Enforcement Officer." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making repairs,
removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.



   (C)   Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
code, whenever, in the opinion of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Officer, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition as set forth in
division (B) above, the Enforcement Officer shall order the necessary work to
be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render the structure
temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause other action to be taken as the Enforcement
Officer deems necessary to meet the emergency.



   (D)   Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer shall temporarily close
structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close,
sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and
prohibit same from being utilized.



   (E)   Emergency repairs. For the purpose of this section, the
Enforcement Officer shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform
the required work as expeditiously as possible. Cost incurred in the
performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction (city). The
legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against
the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is located for the
recovery of the costs.



   (F)   Demolition general. Pursuant to notice and citation provisions
herein, the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer shall order the
owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the
Officer's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as
to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation
or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove the structure; or if the structure is capable of being
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and
remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal
construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to
demolish and remove the structure.



   (G)   Junked motor vehicles and appliances.



      (1)   Definitions for junked motor vehicles and appliances.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



         JUNKED APPLIANCES.  Any unit, or part thereof, of
machinery, furniture or equipment, whether functional or ornamental, and
whether mechanical or powered by some source of energy or not, including, but
not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, television sets, beds, lamps, tools,
objects of art and the like, the condition of which upon inspection, are
found to be in one or more of the following conditions:



            1.   Wrecked;



            2.   Dismantled;



            3.   Partially dismantled;



            4.   Inoperative;



            5.   Abandoned; and/or



            6.   Discarded.



         JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.  Any vehicle, device or other
contrivance, or parts thereof, propelled by human or mechanical power that if
operational, would be used for transportation of persons or property on
public streets and highways, which upon inspection, are found to be in one or
more of the following conditions:



            1.   Wrecked;



            2.   Dismantled;



            3.   Partially dismantled;



            4.   Inoperative;



            5.   Abandoned; and/or



            6.   Discarded.



      (2)   Declaration junked motor vehicles and appliances;
exceptions. The presence of any junked motor vehicle or appliance on public
property or on any private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof,
occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city shall be
deemed a public nuisance, and shall further be considered rubbish or refuse,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain the public
nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering
inoperable, abandoning or discarding any motor vehicle or appliance on the
real property of another or to suffer, permit or allow a junked motor vehicle
or appliance to be parked, left or maintained on his own real property,
provided that this provision shall not apply with regard to:



         (a)   Any motor vehicle or appliance in an enclosed
building;



         (b)   Any motor vehicle or appliance on the property of
a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the
operation of the business enterprise; or



         (c)   Any motor vehicle or appliance on property
occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles
or appliances in conformance with the Zoning Code of the city.



      (3)   Liability for damages to removed vehicle. Neither the
owner or occupant of the property from which any aforesaid junked motor
vehicles shall be removed, their servants or agents, or any department of the
city, or its agents, shall be liable for any loss or damage to the junked
motor vehicle while being removed or as a result of any subsequent sale or
other disposition.



      (4)   Compliance by removal of vehicle. The removal of a
junked motor vehicle from the property within the number of days required in
the notice of violation issued by the Property Maintenance Enforcement
Officer, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the provisions of this
article and no further action shall be taken against the owner of the junked
motor vehicle or appliance or the owner or occupant of the property.



      (5)   Right of entry. In the enforcement of this chapter, a
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer, and his or her duly authorized
agents, assistants, employees or contractors with the prior consent of the
owner, tenant or occupant, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction
may enter upon private or public property to examine a junked motor vehicle
or appliance, or obtain information as to the identity of a junked motor
vehicle or appliance and of the owner thereof, and to remove or cause removal
of a junked motor vehicle or appliance declared to be a nuisance pursuant to
this chapter.



      (6)   Chapter supplemental to other regulations.



         (a)   The provisions of this chapter are supplemental
and in addition to all other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances
heretofore enacted by the city, state or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.



         (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
cumulative of the provisions and regulations contained in the code of
ordinances, city, save and except that, where the provisions of this chapter
and the sections hereunder are in conflict with the provisions elsewhere in
this code, then the provisions contained herein shall prevail. Any and all
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of
the conflict, hereby repealed.



   (H)   Other miscellaneous nuisances. It shall be unlawful for the
owner, occupant or person having control or management of any real property
within the city to permit a public nuisance to develop thereon. The following
conditions are declared to be public nuisances:



      (1)   Accumulation of rubbish. An accumulation on any property
of filth, refuse, trash, garbage or other waste material which endangers the
public health, welfare or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger
that it will catch or communicate fire, attract and propagate vermin, rodents
or insects, or blow rubbish into any street, sidewalk or property of another;



      (2)   Storage of explosives. The storage of explosive material
which creates a safety hazard to other property or persons in the vicinity;



      (3)   Weeds and grass. The excessive growth of weeds, grass or
other vegetation, except flowers or other ornamental vegetation, which are
properly maintained. Unless otherwise provided, EXCESSIVE shall mean growth
to a height of 12 inches or more; and/or



      (4)   Open wells. The maintenance of any open, uncovered or
insecurely covered cistern, cellar, well, pit, excavation, basement or vault
situated upon private property in any open or unfenced lot or place.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.14  DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   Demolition permit required. It shall be unlawful to demolish
any building, structure or part thereof without filing a written application
for a demolition permit with the Building and Codes Department.



   (B)   Demolition permit fees. For the demolition of any building,
structure or part thereof, the permit fee shall be:



      (1)   Fifty dollars for all residential; and



      (2)   One hundred dollars for any commercial and industrial
structures.



   (C)   Double fee. Where work for which a permit is required by this
chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the required permit,
the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of the double fee
shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of
this chapter in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties
prescribed herein.



   (D)   Demolition or alteration of common or fire wall. When
demolition of any structure involves alterations to a common, party wall or a
fire wall or fire separation wall, the owner or contractor is:



      (1)   Required to submit detailed plans to the building
official detailing scope of work to correct any defects in the remaining
wall(s); and



      (2)   Post a bond with the city in an amount not less than
$20,000 to insure proper completion of the exposed, remaining wall to
building code standards.



   (E)   Liability insurance. Proof of liability insurance is required
to be submitted to the city by the contractor prior to issuance of demolition
permit for protection of adjoining properties and public right-of-way
improvements



   (F)   Time limit. The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer
may impose a time limit as an additional condition of a permit for completion
of demolition work once the work shall have commenced, provided that for
cause one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 30 days each,
may be allowed in writing by the Enforcement Officer.



   (G)   Standards. The following standards shall apply to demolition:



      (1)   Demolition work, having commenced, shall be pursued
diligently and without unreasonable interruption with due regard to safety.
It is the intent of this chapter to limit the existence of an unsafe
condition or nuisance on the premises during the period of demolition
operations;



      (2)   Any surface holes or irregularities, wells, septic
tanks, basements, cellars, sidewalk vaults or coal chutes remaining after
demolition of any building or structure shall be filled with material as
approved by the Enforcement Officer, and shall be graded in a manner that
will provide effective surface drainage. Any surface irregularities resulting
from the demolition process shall be leveled to match surrounding grade;



      (3)   All debris and accumulation of material resulting from
demolition of any building or structure shall be removed from all premises;
and



      (4)   All building sewers shall be effectively plugged with
concrete at the property line, or as may be required by the City Water and
Sewer Department.



   (H)   Inspections. The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer
shall make the following inspections upon notification from the permit holder
or his or her agent:



      (1)   Initial inspection is to be made after all utility
connections have been disconnected and secured in a manner that no unsafe or
unsanitary conditions shall exist during or remain after demolition
operations; and



      (2)   Final inspection is to be made after all demolition work
is completed.



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Citations issued by the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer that
are not appealed or which are upheld by the Board or any court of proper
jurisdiction, shall be subject to the following schedule of civil penalties
for each violation:



 

Violation
 
First Offense
 
Second Offense
 
Third + Offense


All violations
 
$100
 
$250
 
$500



 



(Ord. 08-07, passed 8-4-2008)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Sprinkler and fire alarm systems



   151.02   Uniform Statewide Building Code



   151.03   Permit fees



   151.04   Housing, Unsafe Building Code



   151.05   Kentucky Fire Prevention Code adopted



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  SPRINKLER AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   For any newly constructed or renovated business in the city which is
required to obtain a building permit for the construction or renovation and
if the new construction or renovation includes an automated response
mechanism for fire prevention (sprinkler and fire alarms), the owner of the
property shall install an electronic rapid entry key box system, such as the
TRACcess Electronic Rapid Entry Key Box System or equivalent equipment
approved in advance by the City Fire Department, in a location approved in
advance by the Fire Department. The City Fire Department Chief may waive this
requirement if keys to the premises are available on site on a 24-hour basis.



(Ord. 03-06, passed 10-6-2003)



§ 151.02  UNIFORM STATEWIDE BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of the Kentucky Building Code.



      (1)   The Kentucky Building Code, promulgated in 815 KAR 7:120
and the Kentucky Residential Code promulgated in 815 KAR 7:125 by the Board
of Housing, Buildings and Construction, Commonwealth of Kentucky, are hereby
adopted in full as an ordinance of the city as if set out at length herein.



      (2)   A copy of the Kentucky Building Code is on file in the
office of the City Clerk, and the Clerk shall at all times keep a copy of the
Building Code for reference.



      (3)   An attested copy of this section shall be transmitted to
the Office of Housing, Buildings and Construction of the state.



      (4)   All editions, revisions and amendments thereto are
likewise adopted on a continuing basis immediately upon the passage and
effective date of the edition and the like, as if same was fully set forth at
length herein.



      (5)   Further adopted and made a part hereof are all relevant
portions of the International Code Council (ICC) which may be incorporated by
the Kentucky Building Code and Kentucky Residential Code.



   (B)   Required contents of building plans. Required plan information
shall be as follows (unless items are waived by the Building Inspector):



      (1)   All plans shall be drawn to scale. The preferred scale
is an architectural drafting scale of one-quarter-inch;



      (2)   A title block shall be placed on the plan and shall
contain the plan name, the name and address of the developer and the
development address;



      (3)   The building use and the total square feet contained in
the building shall be noted;



      (4)   A footprint of the building showing the building size,
all exterior walls, interior space layout, egress doors and the distance to
the nearest property line;



      (5)   The use of each separate room and/or area;



      (6)   A wall detail, which shall include a cross-section
indicating the thickness, insulation, materials and interior/exterior
treatments;



      (7)   A roof detail, which shall include a cross-section
indicating depth and size;



      (8)   A foundation and footer detail which shall include a
cross-section indicating depth and size;



      (9)   A basement detail shall include the elevation of the
basement and the amount of basement that will be showing above ground level;



      (10)   Location and type of heating system;



      (11)   Location of plumbing and service entrance;



      (12)   Any other relevant information such as stair details,
sprinkler information, special needs requirements and window detail;



      (13)   A copy of worker's comp insurance policy or signed
affidavit if no employees;



      (14)   A copy of general liability insurance policy; and



      (15)   The permit application must be filled out completely or
the permit cannot be issued.



   (C)   Signs. Appendix H of the International Building Code is
expressly adopted and incorporated herewith as a part of this section. In
addition, signs shall be located at least ten feet off the front property
line, three feet from the side property line and shall not exceed 50 feet in
height. See Appendix H of the IBC.



   (D)   Permit fee schedule. The permit fee schedule is expressly
adopted and incorporated herewith as a part of this section.



   (E)   Penalties. Failure to pay fees and costs set forth herein,
including re-calculated fees, and/or the failure to adhere to the local and
state building code may result in the immediate termination of any permit
previously granted to an applicant and the issuance of a stop work order. The
applicant shall also be subject to other penalties which are more
specifically set forth in the adopted Kentucky Building Codes and Kentucky
Residential Codes, including monthly fines up to $1,000 per day.



(Ord. 07-10, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 151.03  PERMIT FEES.



   Building permit fees adopted by the City Council are adopted by
reference and made a part hereof and are on file in the City Clerk's office.
The permit fee shall be paid to the city at time application for a permit is
made.



(2000 Code, § 3-27)



§ 151.04  HOUSING, UNSAFE BUILDING CODE.



   The Housing and Unsafe Building Code for city, as revised August 7,
1989, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, as if fully set
forth herein. A copy of the code is on file in the City Clerk's office.



(2000 Code, § 3-28)



§ 151.05  KENTUCKY FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Adoption of the Kentucky Fire Prevention Code 1999 (Standards
of Safety). The Kentucky Fire Prevention Code 1999 (Standards of Safety) as
promulgated in 815 KAR 10:050 by the Commissioner of the Department of
Housing, Buildings and Construction on the advice and recommendation of the
state fire marshal, is hereby adopted in full as an ordinance of the city.
Copies of the code book are available through the Department of Housing,
Buildings and Construction, 1047 U.S. 127 South, Frankfort, Kentucky 40601.



   (B)   Designated enforcement officer. The City Fire Department shall
be designated as the local enforcement agency for the standards of safety as
appointed by the city.



   (C)   Permits and fees. The requirements for permits and required
fees shall be as provided by the local fire department.



   (D)   Appeal process. All final decisions of the fire code official
of the city, shall be appealable to a local appeals board or in other proper
manners pursuant to the procedures adopted by the City Council.



   (E)   Saving clause. Nothing in this section or in the Fire
Prevention Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in division (B) above; nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this section.



(2000 Code, § 3-29)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Statutory authorization



   152.02   Findings of fact



   152.03   Statement of purpose



   152.04   Objectives



   152.05   Definitions



   152.06   Lands to which this chapter applies



   152.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas



   152.08   Development permit required; application



   152.09   Compliance



   152.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   152.11   Interpretation



   152.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Administration



   152.25   Designation of Local Administrator



   152.26   Establishment of development permit



   152.27   Duties and responsibilities of the Local Administrator



   152.28   Variance procedures



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   152.40   General standards



   152.41   Specific standards



   152.42   Standards for streams without established base flood
elevation (unnumbered A zones) and/or floodways



   152.43   Standards for shallow flooding zones



   152.44   Standards for subdivision proposals



   152.45   Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning
with the letter ‘A’



   152.46   Critical facilities



 



   152.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky has in KRS Chapter 100
delegated to local government units the authority to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of Campbellsville, Kentucky, hereby
adopts the following floodplain management regulations.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of Campbellsville are subject to
periodic inundations which result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and
by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding
by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and properly due to water erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood height or velocity;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel
floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other areas.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas
in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by
flooding; and



   (G)   Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property
is in a special flood hazard area.



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area
assume responsibility for their actions.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE. Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the
principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a
combination of both. In A ZONES, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but
waves are usually not a significant threat to structures. Areas of 100-year
flood, base flood elevations and flood hazard factors are not determined.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure, the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human
habitation, and should be designed to have minimal flood damage potential.
Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage
sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.



   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common
load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition,
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   A1-30 AND AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1%
annual chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are
determined.



   AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between
one and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.



   AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is
between one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) Flood
depths are shown.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.



   AR/A1 - A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, AND AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored
to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration
is complete these areas will still experience residual flooding from other
flooding sources.



   A99 ZONE. That part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which
is to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction. No base flood elevations are determined.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to
three feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   B AND X ZONES (SHADED). Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year)
flood, areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than
one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile, and
areas protected by levees from the base flood.



   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD). BASE FLOOD is the term
used throughout this chapter.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, Al-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH,
and AR/AO that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood
that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all four sides.



   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally
aboveground; including a manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank, or
other human-made facility or infrastructure. See definition for STRUCTURE.



   C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the
regular program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements
to develop extra measures for protection from flooding.



   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by
the Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified
community official) from available technical studies, historical information,
and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic
inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety
and general welfare. Included are areas downstream from dams.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in
severe consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if
unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely
affect the health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but
are not limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently
mobile to avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing
homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle
and equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be
called upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility
facilities important to maintaining or restoring normal services before,
during and after a flood, and those facilities or installations which
produce, use or store volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or
water-reactive materials, hazardous materials or hazardous waste.



   D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, piling, columns (post and piers), shear walls, or breakaway
walls. (See freeboard requirements for residential and non-residential
structures.)



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the
time of certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other
related information to verify compliance with this chapter.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCLOSURE. That portion of a structure below the base flood elevation
(BFE) used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage, or access to the
structure.



   ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, structures, permanent structures or development
into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a
floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before
January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION
may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance
adopted by Campbellsville based on specific technical base flood elevation
data which established the area of special flood hazards.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FIVE HUNDRED (500) YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-YEAR FLOOD
have a moderate to low risk of flooding.



   FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOODWATER.



      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows). See MUDSLIDES.



      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having
special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing
flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), and/or the flood
boundary floodway map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by floodwaters from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP
participating community to administer and enforce the floodplain management
ordinances.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
ordinances, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other
applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.



   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification stating that a non-residential structure, together with
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified
design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and
anticipated debris impact forces.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional
hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis.



   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in § 152.28, means that the
variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In
examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that
every newly constructed structure adds to government responsibilities and
remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 hundred years. Structures that
are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject
during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future
owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the
costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood
damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the property,
unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only
at very high flood insurance rates.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be
applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level,
but also to the level of protection provided to all components of the
structure, such as building utilities, HVAC components, and the like.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure, or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The
term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.



   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality,
that is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.



   HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that
result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam
or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The HAZARD POTENTIAL
classification of a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of
a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity,
flood routing capacity).



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).



      (1)   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE coverage provides for the
payment of a claim for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain
management laws or ordinances after a direct physical loss by flood. When a
building covered by a standard flood insurance policy under the NFIP sustains
a loss and the state or community declares the building to be substantially
or repetitively damaged, ICC will help pay up to $30,000 for the cost to
elevate, floodproof, demolish, or remove the building.



      (2)   ICC coverage is available on residential and
non-residential buildings (this category includes public or government
buildings, such as schools, libraries, and municipal buildings) insured under
the NFIP.



   KRS 151.250— PLANS FOR DAMS, LEVEES, AND THE LIKE, TO BE APPROVED AND
PERMIT ISSUED BY KENTUCKY ENVIRONMENTAL AND PUBLIC PROTECTION CABINET.



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person
and no city, county or other political subdivision of the state, including
levee districts, drainage districts, flood control districts or systems, or
similar bodies, shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation
or improvement of any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other
obstruction (except those constructed by the Department of Highways) across
or along any stream, or in the floodway of any stream, unless the plans and
specifications for such work have been submitted by the person or political
subdivision responsible for the construction, reconstruction or improvement
and such plans and specifications have been approved in writing by the
Cabinet and a permit issued. However, the Cabinet by regulation may exempt
those dams, embankments or other obstructions, which are not of such size or
type as to require approval by the Cabinet in the interest of safety or
retention of water supply.



      (2)   No person, city, county, or other political subdivision
of the state shall commence the filing of any area with earth, debris, or any
other material, or raise the level of any area in any manner, or place a
building, barrier or obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to
a river or stream or in the floodway of the stream so that such filling,
raising, or obstruction will in any way affect the flow of water in the
channel or in the floodway of the stream unless plans and specifications for
such work have been submitted to and approved by the Cabinet and a permit
issued as required in division (1) above.



      (3)   Nothing in this definition is intended to give the
Cabinet any jurisdiction or control over the construction, reconstruction,
improvement, enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district,
ditch or system established for agricultural purposes, or to require approval
of the same except where such obstruction of the stream or floodway is
determined by the Cabinet to be a detriment or hindrance to the beneficial
use of water resources in the area, and the person or political subdivision
in control thereof so notified. The Department for Natural Resources through
KRS Chapter 350 shall have exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Chapter 151
concerning the regulation of dams, levees, embankments, dikes, bridges,
fills, or other obstructions across or along any stream or in the floodway of
any stream which structures are permitted under KRS Chapter 350 for surface
coal mining operations.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter,
to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs include the following
categories:



      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on
technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a
designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes
that a specific property is not located in a SFHA.



      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).- A revision based on
technical data that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to
flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and
planimetric features.



      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION - FILL (LOMR F). A determination
that a structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered
fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.



   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM.



      (1)   A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



      (2)   For a levee system to be recognized, the following
criteria must be met:



         (a)   All closure devices or mechanical systems for
internal drainage, whether manual or automatic, must be operated in
accordance with an officially adopted operation manual (a copy of which must
be provided to FEMA by the operator when levee or drainage system recognition
is being sought or revised).



         (b)   All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a
federal or state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an
agency of a community participating in the NFIP.



   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant material,
void of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck
support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the
completion of construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for
aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include
natural ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a
structure’s foundation system.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, structure access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a structure’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
and intended to be improved property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not
include a recreational vehicle. (See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE).



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MAP. The flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a
letter suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map
panel. The letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has
been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA; the letter “B” is
the first revision.)



   MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (actual
cash value) or adjusted assessed values.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of
the tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL
is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain as shown on a community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter,
the term is synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)
1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988.



   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
MITIGATION is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
costs of disaster response and recovery.



   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river,
flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a
dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of
water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained
rain. A MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a
landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain
Administrator only if the MUDFLOW, and not the landslide, is the proximate
cause of damage that occurs.



   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall
program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.



   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and
slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate
indicate a potential for mudflow.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older
FIRMs. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of Campbellsville’s floodplain
management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of Campbellsville’s adopted floodplain management ordinances.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation,
including but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools,
farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses,
recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial
structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for
less than six months’ duration.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRMs and digitally referenced FIRMs
(DFIRMs). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct datum.)



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction
and/or velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to
snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of
being carried downstream.



   ONE HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). (See BASE FLOOD.) The flood
that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the 100-YEAR
FLOOD. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of experiencing
such a flood with the SFHA.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31,1974, whichever is later.



   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities
of violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations. During periods of PROBATION, each
insurance policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.



   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management standards or of the standards
of 44 CFR 60.3, 60.4, 60.5, and/or 60.6.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot. (See BASE FLOOD.)



   REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure
or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain
management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of
non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure
or other development.



   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
structure.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
or more separate occasions during a ten-year period where the value of
damages equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the current value of the
structure, beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or, four or
more flood losses of $ 1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or,
three or more flood losses over the life of the structure that are equal to
or greater than the current value of the structure.



   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage
shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been
declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other
authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise
restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). That portion of the floodplain
subject to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards
as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, Al - A30, AH, AO, or AR.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development. The date a building permit is issued, provided the
actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit
date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure (including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the
installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; including manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, or other
man-made facilities or infrastructures. See BUILDING.



   SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease, or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels.



   SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid
out where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by
a community or other third party.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.



      (1)   Any damage to a building for which the cost of repairs
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building prior to the damage
occurring. This term includes structures that are categorized as repetitive
loss.



      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, “repair” is
considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences.



      (3)   The term does not apply to:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required
to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a “historic structure.”



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement to a building, taking place during a one-year period in which the
cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the current
market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an
IMPROVEMENT occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



      (2)   The term does not apply to:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required
to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a “historic structure;” or



         (c)   Any building that has been damaged from any source
or is categorized as repetitive loss.



   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR
SUBDIVISIONS. Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the
streets, utilities, and pads equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or
improvement commenced.



   SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for
failure to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required
for participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are no
longer available in suspended communities.



   UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment.



   VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.



   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply
with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required
in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.



   WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water,
sediments, dissolved materials, and other transportable materials drain or
are carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream,
lake, or underlying aquifer.



   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% probability of being equaled
or exceeded (the 500-year flood) in any year. Unshaded X ZONES (C Zones on
older FIRMS) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of
flooding is less than 0.2%.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in
the area.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA),
areas applicable to KRS 151.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official
as determined by the City Council of Campbellsville from available technical
studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources,
areas within the jurisdiction of the City Council of Campbellsville which may
be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
Campbellsville.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) for Taylor
County, dated May 24, 2011, with the accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRMs), other supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by
Campbellsville. and for those land areas acquired by Campbellsville through
annexation. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of
applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other
areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to
the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator and are enacted by City
Council pursuant to statutes governing land use management regulations. The
FIS and/or FIRM are permanent records of Campbellsville and are on file and
available for review by the public during regular business hours at City Hall.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.08  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See § 152.26 for
instructions and explanation.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein
shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.11  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City Council of
Campbellsville, any officer or employee, the Commonwealth of Kentucky, the
Federal Insurance Administration, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.25  DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.



   The City Council of Campbellsville hereby appoints the Mayor or
designee to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter
by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions,
and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.26  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development begins within any special flood hazard area established in §
152.07. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities, and may
include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement of local
administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can
be processed. Specifically, the following information is required:.



   (A)   Application stage.



      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL)
of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A
and elevation of highest adjacent grade; or



      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed;



      (3)   All appropriate certifications from a registered
professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed
structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in §§ 152.41(B) and
152.45(B);



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



   (B)   Construction stage.



      (1)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before
construction continues, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, it
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator and to the state a certification of the elevation of the lowest
floor or floodproofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In
AE, Al-30, AH, and A Zones where the community has adopted a regulatory base
flood elevation, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same.



      (2)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued
work undertaken prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest
floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately
and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall
be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.27  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed,
authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render
interpretations of this chapter which are consistent with its spirit and
purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.



   (B)   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure
that:



         (a)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied;



         (b)   All other required state and federal permits have
been obtained: review proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



         (c)   Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible
manner;



         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect
the carrying capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this chapter,
ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development
will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point.



      (2)   Review and use of any other base flood data.  When base
flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with § 152.07, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state
agency, or other source, in order to administer §§ 152.40 through 152.46.
Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption.



      (3)   Notification of other agencies.



         (a)   Notify adjacent communities, the Kentucky Division
of Water, and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or
regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the
watercourse; and



         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
and



         (c)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.



      (4)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and
maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:



         (a)   Certification required by § 152.41(A) (lowest
floor elevations) as shown on a completed and certified elevation
certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, in accordance with § 152.26(B);



         (b)   Certification required by § 152.41(B) (elevation
or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) as shown on a completed and
certified floodproofing certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved
structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with § 152.26(B);



         (c)   Certification required by § 152.41(C) (elevated
structures);



         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §
152.44(A) (subdivision standards);



         (e)   Certification required by § 152.41(E) (floodway
encroachments);



         (f)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished;



         (g)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



         (h)   Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations
of this chapter as specified in § 152.99.



      (5)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas,
for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions.



         (a)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
152.28(C)(2);



         (b)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data
have not been provided in accordance with § 152.26, then the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonable utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source,
in order to administer the provisions of §§ 152.40 through 152.46;



         (c)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a
registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
152.41(B), a floodproofing certificate;



         (d)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and
shall be open for public inspection.



      (6)   Right of entry.



         (a)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to
enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the administrator
has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon
any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building,
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may
enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect
the same or perform any duty imposed upon the Administrator by this chapter.



         (b)   If such structure or premises are occupied, he or
she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such
building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or
control of such structure or premises and request entry.



         (c)   If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.



         (d)   When the Administrator shall have first obtained a
proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no
owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any
building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request
is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the
Administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this
chapter.



      (7)   Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her
agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed.



      (8)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or
plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



      (9)   Liability. Any officer, employee, or member of the
Floodplain Administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of
his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally
liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage
that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against any
officer, employee, or member because of such act performed by him or her in
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the
Department of Law until the final termination of the proceedings.



      (10)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A
floodplain construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall
expire if the holder of a floodplain construction permit has not commenced
construction within 180 calendar days from the date of its issuance by the
Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.28  APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Nature of variances.



      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are
based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a
piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted
for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that
complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional
hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to
the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.



      (2)   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its
citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of
the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that
variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter
are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the
variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain
multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly
granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which
alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.



   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The City Council of
Campbellsville shall establish an Appeal Board consisting of the Board of
Zoning Adjustments.



   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeal Board.



      (1)   The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter and appeals of decisions or
determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the local District Court, as
provided in Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   (D)   Appeals/variance procedures. In passing upon such
applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter,
and the:



      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;



      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual
owner and future owners of the property;



      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by
the proposed facility;



      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront,
in the case of functionally dependent facility;



      (6)   Availability of alternative locations which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets, and
bridges.



   (E)   Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation
from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances
to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant
permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council
believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a determination shall be
made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not
destroy the historic character and design of the structure.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant (as defined in this
chapter); and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood height, additional threats to public
safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in §
152.05 under “public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization
of the public (as defined in § 152.05) or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.



      (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records
of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon
request.



      (7)   Variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of
division (D)(1) through (11) are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the
base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and
does not create a public nuisance.



   (F)   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is
granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community
official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Campbellsville Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land; and



      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
such variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (G)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures (see definition in § 152.05) upon
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.



   (H)   No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall
not be issued within any mapped or designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 152.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy;



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or fame ties to ground anchors. This standard
shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for
resisting wind forces;



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding;



   (F)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures;



   (G)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



   (H)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters;



   (I)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this
chapter; and



   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or
replaced.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have
been provided, as set forth in § 152.26, the following provisions are
required:



   (A)   Residential construction.



      (1)   New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork elevated no lower than
at or above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls
be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of division (C) below.



         (a)   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on
the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if
no depth number is specified.



         (b)   In an A Zone, where no technical data has been
produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, elevated at or above the
base flood elevation, as determined by this community. The Floodplain
Administrator will determine the method by which base flood elevations are
determined. Methods include but are not limited to detailed hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses, use of existing data available from other sources, use of
historical data, best supportable and reasonable judgement in the event no
data can be produced. Title 401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations)
Chapter 4, Regulation 060, states as a part of the technical requirements for
a state floodplain permit:



   “The applicant shall provide cross sections for determining floodway
boundaries (and thereby Base Flood Elevations) at any proposed construction
site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross sections shall be
referenced to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no
more than + five-tenths (0.5) foot. Cross sections elevations shall be taken
at those points which represent significant breaks in slope and at points
where hydraulic characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross
section shall extend across the entire base floodplain and shall be in the
number and at the locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure
that significant flood damage will not occur, the cabinet may require
additional cross sections or specific site elevations which extend beyond
those needed for making routine regulatory floodway boundary calculations.”



         (c)   In all other zones, elevated at or above the base
flood elevation.



      (2)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community Building
Inspection Department to be properly elevated. Such certification and
verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure
(including manufactured homes used for non-residential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with division (A) above or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities:



      (1)   Be floodproofed below an elevation at or above the level
of the base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;



      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;



      (3)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical
equipment, and ductwork, elevated no lower than at or above the level of the
base flood elevation; or



      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
152.26(A)(3).



      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division
(D) below.



      (6)   All new construction and substantial improvement with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which
are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials
below an elevation at or above the base flood elevation, and, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Opening sizes (FEMA
Technical Bulletin 1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect; or



         (b)   Have a minimum of two openings with a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwater.



   (C)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures on columns, posts, or pilings, for
example, that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude
finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls.



      (1)   Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation
or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions;



      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and



      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.



      (1)   (a)   All new or substantially improved manufactured
homes placed on sites located within A, Al-30, AO, AH, and AE on the
community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements
for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:



            1.   On individual lots or parcels;



            2.   In expansions to existing manufactured home
parks or subdivisions;



            3.   In new manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;



            4.   In substantially improved manufactured home
parks or subdivisions;



            5.   Outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision; or



            6.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as the result of a flood.



         (b)   All manufactured homes must be:



            1.   Elevated on a permanent foundation;



            2.   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than
at or above the level of the base flood elevation; and



            3.   Be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



      (2)   Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial
damage as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be
elevated so that the manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement, so that either the:



         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated no lower than at or above the level of the base flood elevation; or



         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent
grade.



      (3)   (a)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites
located within A, Al-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) must either:



            1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days;



            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
or



            3.   Meet the permit requirements for new
construction of this chapter, including anchoring and elevation requirements
for manufactured homes.



         (b)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is licensed and insured in accordance with the State of Kentucky motor
vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.



   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in § 152.07 are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply:



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other developments unless
certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood
discharge;



      (2)   If this division (E) is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.42  STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
(UNNUMBERED A ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.



   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 152.07
where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where
base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions
apply:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall
be located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical
data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.



   (B)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures
shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance
with § 152.07.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.43  STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.



   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 152.07
are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet, where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood
depth specified on the flood insurance rate map above the highest adjacent
grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet above the highest
adjacent grade.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential structures shall:



      (1)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth
specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent grade.
In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including
basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent
grade.



      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
be completely floodproofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in
Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so
that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in § 152.41(B).



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.44  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood
hazard area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;



   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not
available (Zone A or unmapped streams), base flood elevation and floodway
data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres,
whichever is the lesser, shall be provided; and



   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed
structure(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base
flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided
to the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.45  STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH
THE LETTER ‘A.’



   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated
‘A’ the following provisions shall apply:



   (A)   Structure must be non-habitable;



   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;



   (C)   Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above
grade, total openings are to be one square inch per one square foot of floor
area, at least two openings required on opposite walls;



   (D)   Built of flood resistant materials below a level at or above
the base flood elevation;



   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;



   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking;



   (G)   Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.46  CRITICAL FACILITIES.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain).
Construction of new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the
floodway; however, they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the level of
the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must
be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released
into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base
flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent
possible.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is
not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit
and any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil
offense.



   (B)   Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized
employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit
and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the
Floodplain Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for
the violation and/or the property owner, stating the facts of the offense or
violation, the section of this chapter and/or of the permit violated, when it
occurred, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into
conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what
period of time the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be
reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the violation and whether
or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an order to
stop work on the development. The notice shall also state that a citation may
be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and corrective
actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary fine and
shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed. See below.



   (C)   Notice of citation. If, at any time, a duly authorized
employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit
and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the
Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the offender stating the
violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be
remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with
the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur,
and what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued, the
person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the citation within
seven days of the date the citation is issued by either carrying out the
remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying the civil fine set
forth in the citation or requesting a hearing before the governing body. If
the person to whom the citation is issued does not respond to the citation
within seven days, that person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a
hearing and the determination that a violation occurred shall be considered
final.



   (D)   Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a
variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a civil offense. Any person
who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no less than $10, and in addition,
shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 11-05, passed 5-2-2011)



CHAPTER 153:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



   153.01   Purpose and declaration of public policy



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   Historic Preservation Commission



   153.04   Powers and duties of the Commission



   153.05   Nominations to the National Register of Historic Places



   153.06   Designation of landmark and landmark sites and historic
districts



   153.07   Approval of changes to landmarks, landmark sites and
property in historic districts



   153.08   Conformity with the certificate of appropriateness



   153.09   Emergency consideration



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY.



   (A)   The City Council finds that there is concern about the future
of the Central Business District and that the city has begun a Main Street
Program in cooperation with the state government to help the central business
district.



   (B)   The Council finds that many buildings having historic,
architectural, aesthetic or cultural interest and value have been neglected,
altered or destroyed, notwithstanding the feasibility and desirability of
preserving and continuing the use of the buildings and without adequate
consideration of the irreplaceable loss to the people of the city.



   (C)   The Council finds that neighborhoods and areas of the city
have been damaged and have deteriorated or are threatened because of new
construction, demolitions, alterations and relocations that have harmed or
will harm the historic and architectural character of these neighborhoods and
areas notwithstanding the feasibility and desirability of preserving and
improving these neighborhoods and areas through appropriate changes.



   (D)   The Council finds that the historic and architectural
character of the Central Business District is of vital importance in
maintaining the integrity and economy of the city.



   (E)   The Council finds that the city has played an important role
in the development of the state, and that this growth is shown today through
buildings representing the activity as a governmental, agricultural and
commercial center. The Council finds that the city has buildings, historic
sites and areas that represent the persons who live and work or have lived
and worked in the city during its history. It is the finding of the City
Council that the distinctive and significant character of this city can only
be maintained by protecting and enhancing its historic, architectural,
aesthetic and cultural heritage and by preventing unnecessary injury or
destruction of its landmarks and historic districts which are civic and
community assets.



   (F)   The Council finds that the federal and state governments have
passed laws to protect and preserve landmarks and historic districts, that
some of these laws provide incentives for historic preservation, and that the
National Historic Preservation Act being 16 U.S.C. §§ 470 et seq., was
amended in 1980 to establish a certified local government program creating a
new federal-state-local partnership to encourage the efforts by cities to
protect and preserve their landmarks and historic districts.



   (G)   The Council finds that this chapter benefits all the residents
of the city and all the owners of property.



   (H)   The City Council declares as a matter of public policy that
the preservation, protection, perpetuation and use of landmarks and historic
districts is a public necessity because they have a special or distinctive
character or a special historic, architectural, aesthetic or cultural
interest and value and thus serve as visible reminders of the history and
heritage of this city, state and nation. The Council declares as a matter of
public policy that this chapter is required in the interest of the health,
prosperity, safety, welfare and economic well-being of the people.



   (I)   The purpose of this chapter is to effect the goals as set
forth in the above findings and declarations of public policy and
specifically, but not exclusively, to:



      (1)   Effect and accomplish the preservation, protection,
perpetuation and use of historic districts, landmarks and landmark sites
having a special or distinctive character or a special historic,
architectural, aesthetic or cultural interest and value to the city, state
and nation;



      (2)   Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the people and safeguard the city's history and heritage as
embodied and reflected in the landmarks, sites and districts;



      (3)   Stabilize and improve property values in the districts
and in the city as a whole;



      (4)   Foster civic pride in the value of notable
accomplishments of the past;



      (5)   Strengthen the economy of the city;



      (6)   Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents,
tourists and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus to business and
industry; and



      (7)   Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity
and interest of the city.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERATION.  Any construction, replacement or change to the exterior
of a building or structure when it is visible to the public. An ALTERATION
shall include a proposed sign or changes to any existing sign. Painting and
ordinary maintenance and repairs shall not be considered ALTERATIONS.



   BUILDING.  Any structure designed or constructed for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural or other use.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  The permit, issued by the Commission,
which gives its approval for work or demolition to be done in a historic
district or on a landmark.



   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  A government meeting the requirements of
the National Historic Preservation Amendments Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-515)
being 16 U.S.C. §§ 470 et seq., and the implementing regulations of the
United States Department of the Interior and the Kentucky Heritage Council.



   COMMISSION.  The Campbellsville Historic Preservation Commission.



   DEMOLITION.  Any act that destroys in whole or in part a landmark or a
building or structure or which results in the moving of any landmark,
building or structure.



   DESIGN CRITERIA.  A standard of appropriate activity as referenced in
"The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation" that will
preserve the historical and architectural character of a structure, object or
area.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area meeting one or more of the criteria
contained in § 153.07(D) below and which has been designated by the city.



   LANDMARK.  A building, structure or site meeting one or more of the
criteria contained in § 153.07(D) below and which has been designated by the
city.



   LANDMARK SITE.  The land on which a landmark and related buildings and
structures are located and land that provides the grounds, the premises, or
the setting for a landmark.



   MAJOR STRUCTURAL CHANGE.  Structural alterations and structural
repairs made within any 12-month period costing in excess of 50% of the
physical value of the structure, as determined by comparison of the
extent/value of the alterations involved and the replacement value of the
structure at the time the plans for the alteration are approved, using the
Building Officials Conference of America (BOCA) chart for construction cost.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  An addition to an existing building or structure or
the construction of a new building or structure.



   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS.  Any work, the purpose of which is
to correct deterioration or to prevent deterioration of a designated historic
property. The work shall restore the property to its appearance prior to
deterioration or shall result in the protection of its present appearance.
The work shall involve the use of the same building materials or available
materials that are as close as possible to the original. Work that changes
the external appearance of a property shall be considered an alteration for
purposes of this chapter.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of the ground,
including (but without limiting the generality of the foregoing) barns,
smokestacks, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts,
bridges, fences, pergolas, gazebos, radio and television antennae, solar
collectors, microwave antennae, including the supporting towers, roads, ruins
or remnants (including foundations, swimming pools or walkways).



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



§ 153.03  HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment.



      (1)   There is hereby established the City Historic
Preservation Commission. The Commission shall consist of nine members
appointed by the Mayor and approved by City Council. The members shall have
demonstrated interest in historic preservation, community development,
entrepreneurship and civic involvement. At least two members shall have
framing or experience in a preservation-related profession: architecture,
history, archaeology, architectural history, planning or related fields. When
one or two professional members are not available, the Mayor may appoint
other persons interested in historic preservation to serve. When the
Commission reviews an issue that is normally evaluated by a professional
member and that field is not represented on the Commission, the Commission
shall seek expert advice before rendering its decision.



      (2)   Members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, but they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties in accordance with the rules adopted by the
Commission. Each member shall attend at least one educational meeting on
historic preservation per year approved by the State Historic Preservation
Officer.



   (B)   Terms of office. The terms of office of the members shall be
three years, except the terms of two members of the original Commission shall
expire after two years and the terms of two members of the original
Commission shall expire after one year. Each member shall serve until the
appointment and qualification of his or her successor. Vacancies on the
Commission shall be filled within 60 days. When a vacancy occurs during a
term of office, it shall be filled within 60 days, and the person selected
shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.



   (C)   Officers. The Commission shall elect a member to serve as
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall preside at
the meetings of the Commission and shall be the spokesperson for the
Commission. In his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall perform these
duties. The Secretary shall prepare the minutes of the Commission's meetings
which shall be available for public inspection. Regular monthly meetings
shall be scheduled by the Chairperson and special meetings may be called at
the request of the Chairperson or any two other Commission members. All
Commission decisions shall be by majority vote of the entire Commission.



   (D)   Conflict of Interest. No member of the Commission shall vote
on any matter that may affect the property, income, or business interests of
that member.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



§ 153.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   Specific powers. In addition to the powers and duties stated
elsewhere, the Commission shall take action necessary and appropriate to
accomplish the purpose of this chapter. These actions may include, but are
not limited to the following:



      (1)   Conducting a survey of historic buildings and areas and
preparing a plan for their preservation;



      (2)   Recommending to the City Council the designation of
historic districts and individual landmarks;



      (3)   Regulating changes to designated property including
proposed alterations that are visible to the public, demolitions, relocations
and new construction;



      (4)   Adopting written guidelines for making exterior changes
to designated property and for undertaking new construction on designated
property;



      (5)   Working with and advising the federal, state and county
governments and other parts of city government;



      (6)   Advising and assisting property owners and other persons
and groups, including neighborhood organizations who are interested in
historic preservation;



      (7)   Initiating plans for the preservation and rehabilitation
of individual historic buildings; and



      (8)   Undertaking educational programs including the
preparation of publications and the placing of historic markers.



   (B)   Rehabilitation of buildings. The Commission may encourage
plans for the preservation and rehabilitation of individual historic
buildings. The Commission shall, on a regular basis, give recognition to
owners and tenants who maintain or rehabilitate their historic buildings with
care and thus contribute to the preservation of the history of the city.



   (C)   Survey of historic buildings. In making its survey of historic
buildings and areas, the Commission shall conduct this work in accordance
with the guidelines of the State Heritage Council. The Commission shall
provide that its survey and preservation plan shall be maintained and
continued. The Commission shall use the preservation plan to assist the city
in its overall planning efforts.



   (D)   Meetings of the Commission. The Commission shall adopt and
make public rules for the transaction of its business and shall hold monthly
public meetings and special public meetings when necessary. All meetings
shall have a previously available agenda and shall comply with the State Open
Meeting Statute, KRS 61.805. A simple majority of the membership shall be
required for decisions involving historic buildings and areas.



   (E)   Annual report. The Commission shall prepare and keep on file,
available for public inspection, a written annual report of its activities,
cases, decisions, qualifications of members and other work.



   (F)   Right to receive and spend funds. The Commission, in addition
to any appropriations made by the city, shall have the right to receive, hold
and spend funds which it may legally receive from any and every source both
in and out of the commonwealth for the purpose of carrying out the provisions
of this chapter.



   (G)   Other duties under the certified local government program. In
the development of the certified local government program, the city may ask
the Commission to perform other responsibilities that may be delegated to the
city under the National Historic Preservation Act being 16 U.S.C. §§ 470 et
seq.



   (H)   Assistance for the Commission. The Commission shall receive
assistance in the performance of its responsibilities from a city staff
member or designee whose assigned duties shall include this work with the
Commission who shall have expertise in historic preservation or a closely
related field. Other city staff members may be asked to assist the Commission
by providing technical advice or helping in the administration of this
chapter.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



§ 153.05  NOMINATIONS TO THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES.



   (A)   Initiation of nominations. The Commission will submit
nominations for all applicable buildings to be designated on the National
Register of Historic Places.



   (B)   Review of nominations. If either or both the Mayor and the
Commission agree that a property should be nominated, the nomination will be
scheduled for review by the State Historic Preservation Review Commission.
The opinion or opinions of the Commission and the Mayor will be presented to
them for their consideration. The State Historic Preservation Review Board
after considering all opinions, shall make its recommendation to the State
Historic Preservation Officer who decides whether to forward the nomination
to the United States Secretary of the Interior who shall make the decision on
listing the property on the National Register. The Mayor, the Commission or
the property owner may appeal the final decision by the State Historic
Preservation Officer.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



§ 153.06  DESIGNATION OF LANDMARK AND LANDMARK SITES AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Recommendations and designations. The Commission shall
recommend to the City Council the designation of individual landmarks and
landmark sites and historic districts, and the City Council may make these
designations by the enactment of ordinances. Consideration of the designation
of a landmark and landmark site or a historic district may be originated by
the Commission or by the filing of an application for designation by a
property owner, any resident of the city or any organization in the city. A
person or an organization proposing a designation shall give the Commission
the names and addresses of the owners of the affected property and the owners
of all adjoining property as listed on the tax rolls of the city.



   (B)   Public hearing and notice. The Commission shall assemble
information about a property or district being considered for the designation
and shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed designation. Advertised
notice of the hearing shall be given, including conspicuous posting on the
property or in the proposed district. This notice shall be published not
earlier than 21 days and not later than seven days before the public hearing.
At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, written notice shall be given
by registered mail to owners of property under consideration and the owners
of all adjoining property. Written notice shall be considered sufficient when
it is mailed to the person listed on the tax rolls of the city.



   (C)   Guidelines. Before its first public hearing on a designation,
the Commission shall adopt general guidelines that will apply to the city's
landmarks and historic districts and will assist owners in the preservation
and rehabilitation of their property. The guidelines shall be submitted to
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for their approval.
The general guidelines shall include "The Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings" and other guidelines that will apply to all designated property in
the city. Before each public hearing on a designation the Commission may
adopt additional guidelines that will supplement the general guidelines and
will apply to the property under consideration if it is designated. The
guidelines shall not limit new construction to any one architectural style
but shall seek to preserve the character and integrity of the landmark or the
historic district. The guidelines shall suggest changes that would be
appropriate for landmarks or for property in historic districts. After a
designation, the Commission may expand or amend the guidelines it has adopted
provided it holds a public hearing on the changes and submits the proposed
changes to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for their
approval.



   (D)   Criteria for designation. A landmark or historic district
shall qualify for designation when it meets one or more of the following
criteria which shall be discussed in a Commission report making its
recommendations to the City Council:



      (1)   Its value as a reminder of the cultural or
archaeological heritage of the city, state or nation;



      (2)   Its location as a site of a significant local, state or
national event;



      (3)   Its identification with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the development of the city, state or nation;



      (4)   Its identification as the work of a master builder,
designer or architect whose individual work has influenced the development of
the city, state or nation;



      (5)   Its value as a building that is recognized for the
quality of its architecture and that retains sufficient elements showing its
architectural significance;



      (6)   Its distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style valuable for the study of a period, method of construction or use of
indigenous materials;



      (7)   Its character as a geographically definable area
possessing a significant concentration or continuity of sites, buildings,
objects or structures united by past events or aesthetically by plan or
physical development; or



      (8)   Its character as an established and geographically
definable neighborhood, united by culture, architectural style, or physical
plan and development.



   (E)   Report to the City Commission. After evaluating the testimony
at its public hearing, survey information and other material it has
assembled, the Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council
with a written report on the property or area under consideration. The report
shall contain information about the buildings, sites and structures which
have been identified for inclusion in the proposed designation.



   (F)   Report by the Planning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall then report on the relationship between the proposed
designation and existing and future plans for the development of the city. If
the Planning and Zoning Commission approves of the proposed designation, it
shall amend the Comprehensive Plan to include the proposed designation and
shall recommend a change in the zoning map to show the proposed historic
designation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its comments,
the Comprehensive Plan amendment, and the zoning map change to the City
Council. If the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve of the
proposed designation, it shall forward its comments to the City Council.



   (G)   Action by the City Council. The City Council shall approve,
modify or disapprove the proposed designation and the map amendment within 60
days after receiving the recommendation of the Commission and the material
from the Planning and Zoning Commission. If the City Council decides to make
a designation and no Comprehensive Plan amendment has been adopted and no
zoning map change has been recommended, the City Council shall request the
Planning and Zoning Commission to reconsider its earlier decisions and shall
provide that the designation shall take effect after these preliminary steps
have been approved.



   (H)   Notification of designation. The Commission shall notify each
owner of the decision relating to his or her property and shall arrange that
the designation of a property as a landmark or as a part of a historic
district be recorded in the land records of the county. The Commission shall
ask that fees be waived for the city documents recording the designations.
The Commission shall also give notice of the decision to the government
offices in the City and County which shall retain them for future reference.



   (I)   Amendment or rescission of a designation. The amendment or
rescission of any designation shall be accomplished through the same steps as
were followed in the original designation.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



§ 153.07  APPROVAL OF CHANGES TO LANDMARKS, LANDMARK SITES AND PROPERTY IN
HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Requirement for certificate of appropriateness. A certificate
of appropriateness from the Commission shall be required before a person may
undertake the following actions affecting a landmark, a landmark site or a
property in a historic district:



      (1)   Alteration of the exterior part of a structure that is
visible to the public;



      (2)   New construction;



      (3)   Demolition; or



      (4)   Relocation.



   (B)   Application to the Commission.



      (1)   When a person wishes to undertake an exterior alteration
visible to the public affecting a landmark, a landmark site or a property in
a historic district that does not require a building permit, that person
shall apply directly to the Commission for a certificate of appropriateness.



      (2)   The Building Inspector shall forward to the Commission
every application for a permit that would authorize an exterior alteration
visible to the public, new construction, demolition or relocation affecting a
landmark, a landmark site or a property in a historic district. The Building
Inspector shall give the applicant a form from the Commission requesting
additional information from the applicant. The applicant shall provide, where
applicable, drawings of the proposed work, photographs of the existing
building or structure or site and adjacent properties and information about
the building materials to be used.



   (C)   Stop work order; injunction. In the event work is being
performed without the required certificate of appropriateness, the Commission
shall ask that a stop work order be issued. In the event work requiring a
certificate of appropriateness but not a building permit is being performed
without the required certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall ask
that a stop work order be issued. In the event work is being performed which
is not in accordance with such certificate, the Police Chief, Codes
Enforcement Officer, or the Commission shall issue a stop work order and any
law enforcement officer may cite violators in District Court. All work shall
cease on the designated property. No additional work shall be undertaken as
long as such stop work order shall continue in effect. The city may apply in
Circuit Court for an injunction to enforce its stop work order.



   (D)   Action by the Commission; notice. The Commission shall hold a
public hearing on each certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after a
completed application is received by the Commission. The Commission shall
make a decision on the application within 45 days after the receipt of a
completed application, provided that the Commission may extend the time for
decision an additional 60 days when the application is for demolition or new
construction. The Commission shall approve or disapprove each application,
and it shall give its reasons for its decision using the criteria contained
in this section and in its guidelines. The Commission may suggest
modifications to an application and may then approve a certificate of
appropriateness providing for revisions in the plans submitted. If the
Commission fails to decide on an application within the specified time
period, the application shall be deemed approved. Applicants shall be given
notice of the public hearings and meetings relating to their application and
shall be informed of the Commission's decision. When an application has been
approved, the applicant shall be given a certificate of appropriateness.
Notice of the hearing shall be given by conspicuous posting on the property
for five consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing.



   (E)   Criteria in deciding on applications.



      (1)   In making a decision on an application, the Commission
shall use the general guidelines and the guidelines it has adopted for that
landmark or historic district. The Commission shall consider:



         (a)   The effect of the proposed work on the landmark or
the property in the historic district upon which the work is to be done; and



         (b)   The relationship between the work and other
adjacent or nearby buildings and property.



      (2)   In evaluating the effect and the relationship, the
Commission shall consider historical and architectural significance,
architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, materials and color. The
certificate of appropriateness from the Commission shall not relieve the
property owner from complying with the requirement of other state and local
laws and regulations.



   (F)   Consulting with applicants. In making a decision on an
application, the Commission shall be aware of the importance of finding a way
to meet the current needs of the applicant. The Commission shall also
recognize the importance of approving plans that will be reasonable for the
applicant to carry out. Before an applicant prepares his or her plans, he or
she may bring a tentative proposal to the Commission for its comments.



   (G)   Routine alterations; ordinary maintenance and repairs.



      (1)   The Commission shall prepare a list of routine
alterations that shall receive immediate approval without a public hearing
when an applicant complies with the written guidelines of the Commission.



      (2)   At each meeting the Commission shall be informed of the
certificates of appropriateness that have been issued under this provision.
The Commission may regulate the color of paint used on designated property.



      (3)   Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken
without a certificate of appropriateness provided this work on a landmark, a
landmark site or a property in a historic district does not change its
exterior appearance that is visible to the public.



      (4)   Every person in charge of a landmark or a property in a
historic district shall keep it in good repair:



         (a)   All of the exterior portions of the buildings or
structures; and



         (b)   All interior portions thereof which, if not so
maintained, may cause the buildings or structures to deteriorate, or to
become damaged, or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. The purpose
of this provision is to prevent a person from forcing the demolition of his
building by neglecting it and by permitting damage to the building because of
weather or vandalism.



      (5)   No provision in this chapter shall be interpreted to
require an owner or tenant to undertake an alteration or to restore his or
her building to its original appearance.



   (H)   Meetings with owners about condition of buildings.



      (1)   The Commission shall request a meeting with a property
owner when his or her landmark or his or her building in a historic district
is in poor repair, and the Commission shall discuss with the owner ways to
improve the condition of his or her property.



      (2)   After this step, the Commission may request the Building
Inspector to take action to require correction of defects in any building or
structure designated under this chapter, so that the building or structure
shall be preserved in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. The
action taken by the city may include boarding up the doors, windows and other
parts of the building and additional steps to stabilize walls, roofs and
other parts of the building.



      (3)   The Commission shall request a meeting with the owner of
each vacant lot in a historic district, and the Commission shall discuss with
each owner ways to maintain the vacant lot so that it will contribute to the
preservation of the historic district. The Commission may prepare plans to
improve the appearance of a vacant lot in the historic district.



      (4)   The provisions of this section shall be in addition to
all other provisions of the State Building Code requiring buildings and
structures to be kept in good repair.



   (I)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   When a property is damaged by fire, storm or other
unexpected events, the owner or tenant may receive approval from the
Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission for the work to be done in
response to this emergency. At its next meeting, the Commission shall be
informed of the certificates of appropriateness that were issued. In
situations requiring temporary action, an owner may do work in order to
temporarily protect the property from further damage provided the owner
reports this work to the Commission within two business days.



      (2)   An owner shall immediately notify the Building Inspector
of emergency conditions dangerous to life, health or property affecting a
landmark, a landmark site, or a property in a historic district, and the
owner shall promptly provide evidence of the dangerous conditions that has
been prepared by a person with professional qualifications in evaluating
buildings and structures.



      (3)   In any case where the Building Inspector determines that
there are emergency conditions dangerous to life health, or property
affecting a landmark, a landmark site, or a property in a historic district,
he or she may order remedying of these conditions without the approval of the
Commission. The Code Enforcement Officer shall promptly notify the
Chairperson of the Commission of the action being taken.



   (J)   Demolition of a landmark or a building or structure in a
historic district. When an applicant wishes to demolish a landmark, a
building or structure on a landmark site or a building or structure in a
historic district, the Commission shall negotiate with the applicant to see
if an alternative to demolition can be found. The Commission may ask
interested individuals and organizations for assistance in seeking an
alternative to demolition and in obtaining estimates on rehabilitation costs
for the threatened building. After its public hearing, the Commission may
decide that a building or structure in a historic district or on a landmark
site may be demolished because it does not contribute to the historic
district or to the landmark. On all other demolition applications, the
Commission shall study the question of economic hardship for the applicant
and shall determine whether the landmark or the property in the historic
district can be put to reasonable beneficial use without the approval of the
demolition application. In the case of an income-producing building, the
Commission shall also determine whether the applicant can obtain a reasonable
return from his or her existing building. The Commission may ask applicants
for additional information to be used in making these determinations. These
determinations shall be in addition to the points contained in division (E)
above. If economic hardship or the lack of a reasonable return is not proved,
the Commission shall deny the demolition application unless the Commission
finds grounds to grant the demolition application under the points contained
in division (E) above.



   (K)   Moving a landmark or a building or structure in a historic
district.



      (1)   When the applicant wishes to move a landmark, a building
or structure on a landmark site, or a building or structure in a historic
district, or wishes to move a building or structure to a landmark site or to
a property in a historic district, the Commission shall consider:



         (a)   The contribution the building or structure makes
to its present setting;



         (b)   Whether there are definite plans for the site to
be vacated;



         (c)   Whether the building or structure can be moved
without significant damage to its physical integrity; and



         (d)   The compatibility of the building or structure to
its proposed site and adjacent properties.



      (2)   These considerations shall be in addition to the points
contained in division (E) above.



   (L)   Length of validity of certificate of appropriateness. A
certificate of appropriateness shall remain valid for one year after it is
issued. Work is required to start before the end of the one-year period. If
actual work has not commenced within one year the certificate is invalid.
Actual work is hereby defined to include the placing of construction
materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where
excavation or demolition is required preparatory to rebuilding, the
excavation or demolition shall be deemed to be actual work provided that it
shall be carried out diligently.



   (M)   Appeal of the Commission’s decision. The applicant shall
have an appeal to the Taylor Circuit Court from a decision of the Commission
on an application for a certificate of appropriateness. Such appeal must be
filed in writing with the Taylor Circuit Clerk within 30 days after the
decision of the commission.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005; Am. Ord. 15-02, passed 1-8-2015)



§ 153.08  CONFORMITY WITH THE CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   All work performed pursuant to a certificate of
appropriateness shall conform to the provisions of such certificate. It shall
be the responsibility of the Building Inspector to inspect from time to time
any work being performed to assure such compliance.



   (B)   All work performed pursuant to a certificate of
appropriateness shall conform to the provisions of such certificate. It shall
be the responsibility of the Building Inspector to inspect from time to time
any work being performed to assure such compliance. In the event work is
being performed which is not in accordance with such certificate, the Police
Chief or the city codes enforcement officer shall issue a stop work order and
any law enforcement officer may cite violators in District Court. All work
shall cease on the designated property. No additional work shall be
undertaken as long as such stop work order shall continue in effect. The city
may apply in Circuit Court for an injunction to enforce its stop work order.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005; Am. Ord. 15-02, passed 1-8-2015)



§ 153.09  EMERGENCY CONSIDERATION.



   In the case of unusual circumstances whereby the normal process for
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness as set forth in this chapter
creates undue hardship for the health, safety and welfare of an applicant,
the Commission may at its discretion waive the normal process and give
immediate approval for a certificate of appropriateness. The Commission shall
site its reasons in writing for the immediate approval.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $50, nor more than $500 for each offense. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 05-12, passed 9-6-2005)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   154.01   Purpose, authority and jurisdiction



   154.02   Definitions



   154.03   Advisory meeting with Planning Commission



   154.04   General requirements and minimum standards of design



   154.05   Preliminary plat approval



   154.06   Development prerequisite to final approval



   154.07   Final plat approval



   154.08   Variances



   154.09   Enforcement



 



   154.99   Penalty



§ 154.01  PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   Land subdivision is the first step in the process of
community development. Once land has been segmented into streets, lots and
blocks, and publicly recorded, the correction of defects is costly and
difficult. Subdivision of land sooner or later becomes a public
responsibility, in that, roads and streets must be maintained and various
public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare and
tax burden of the entire community is thereby affected in any important
respects. It is therefore to the interest of the public, the developer and
the future owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed and developed in
accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards.



      (2)   The following subdivisions regulations guiding the
Planning and Zoning Commission are designed to provide for the harmonious
development of the planning region; to secure a coordinated layout and
adequate provision for traffic and also to secure adequate provision for
light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewer and other
sanitary facilities.



   (B)   Authority. These subdivision standards are adopted under the
authority granted by the KRS Chapter 100. The City Planning and Zoning
Commission, which was established in accordance with the KRS Chapter 100, has
fulfilled the requirements set forth in the applicable sections of Kentucky
Revised Statutes as prerequisites for the adoption of the regulations.



   (C)   Jurisdiction. These regulations shall govern all subdivision
of land within the corporate limits of the city, as now or hereafter
established and additionally, the subdivision control jurisdiction of the
city subdivision regulations shall apply within the area within a one mile
radius of the city limit boundary nearest the appropriate development. Any
owner of land within this area who wishes to subdivide the land or a portion
thereof shall submit a plat of the proposed subdivision to the City Planning
and Zoning Commission according to the requirements set forth in these
regulations.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. I)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, which shall be known as and which may
be cited as "Subdivision Regulations of Campbellsville, Kentucky", the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   ACCESS.  Provision for, or means of vehicular entrance to or exit
from, a street:



      (1)   Limited access is access only at specified intervals
provided for in the design of a street, usually an interchange; and/or



      (2)   Controlled ACCESS is access at points to be designated
by the Planning Commission as to type, number and location along a street.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  Written and graphic material for the provision of a
development, including any or all of the following: location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of development,
streets, ways, parking facilities, signs, drainage of surface water, access
points, a plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing human-made and
natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to by the applicant.



   STREET.  A way set aside for vehicular traffic whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated.



      (1)   ALLEYS.  Minor ways which are used primarily for
vehicular service access to the backs or to the sides of properties which
otherwise abut on streets.



      (2)   ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.  Those designed or
utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic.



      (3)   COLLECTOR STREETS.  Those which carry or will carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from minor streets to arterial streets.



      (4)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS.  Minor streets which are
parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which serve to
reduce the number of access points to the arterial streets and thereby
increase traffic safety.



      (5)   MINOR STREETS.  Those which are used or will be used
primarily for access to abutting properties and which carry or will carry
limited volumes of traffic.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate or other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing
to divide land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as defined herein.
The term SUBDIVIDER shall include any agent of any subdivider.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots
or parcels; for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or
building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a
parcel of land; provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not
involving a new street shall not be deemed a SUBDIVISION.



      (2)   The term includes RESUBDIVISION, and when subdivision or
to the land subdivided; any division or redivision of land into parcels of
less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a division of the
same land shall be deemed a SUBDIVISION within the meaning of this section.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. I)



§ 154.03  ADVISORY MEETING WITH PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Over-all procedure for plat approval. The procedure for review
and approval of a subdivision plat consists of two separate steps. The
initial step is the preparation and the submission to the Planning Commission
of a final plat together with the required certificates. This final plat
becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the County Clerk when
duly signed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission.



   (B)   Procedure for advisory meeting with the Planning Commission.



      (1)   Any owner of land lying within the area of jurisdiction
of the Planning Commission who wishes to divide the land into two or more
lots, sites or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
sale or building development, or who wishes to resubdivide for this purpose,
shall submit a plan of the proposed subdivision to the Planning Commission
for approval and shall obtain the approval prior to the filing of the
subdivision plat for record. No plat of a subdivision of land within the area
of planning jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded by the County Clerk
without the approval of the Planning Commission as specified herein.



      (2)   In order to secure review and approval by the Planning
Commission of a proposed subdivision, the prospective subdivider shall, prior
to the making of any street improvements or installations of utilities,
submit to the Planning Commission a preliminary sketch plat as provided in §
154.05 below, on approval of the preliminary sketch plat and other documents
required in connection with the development.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. II)



§ 154.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN.



   The Planning Commission shall impose the following general requirements
and compel all subdividers to comply with the following principles of design
in the layout of subdivision.



   (A)   Suitability of the land.



      (1)   Public agency approval. The Planning Commission shall
not approve the subdivision of land, if, from adequate investigations
conducted by all public agencies concerned it has been determined that the
best interest of the public that the site is not suitable for platting and
development purposes of the kind proposed.



      (2)   Land subject to flooding.



         (a)   Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be
topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy,
nor for other uses as may not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for
the other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate erosion or flood hazard. The land within the plat shall be set
aside for the uses as shall not be endangered by periodical or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.



         (b)   If a stream flows through or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision, the plat plan shall provide for an easement or
right-of-way along the stream for a floodway. For the smaller stream the plan
shall also provide for channel improvement to enable them to carry all
reasonable floods within banks. The lowest floor elevations of houses shall
be high enough to be free from the danger of flooding. The floodway easement
shall be wide enough to provide for future enlargement of the stream channel
as adjacent areas become more highly developed and runoff rates are increased.



         (c)   Fill may not be used to raise land within areas
subject to flood unless the fill proposed does not restrict the flow of water
or unduly increase flood heights.



      (3)   Safety and adequacy. The Planning Commission shall
require the developer to obtain an opinion from a state licensed engineer as
to safety and adequacy of any fill to be placed on land subject to flood. In
applying these provisions, land subject to flood and floodways shall be
described as follows.



         (a)   Floodway is the channel of the watercourse and
these portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge the flood waters.



         (b)   Land subject to flood is of two types. One type is
the area along streams, watercourse, and low areas identified as having
special flood hazard by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
Second, land lying within 15 feet of the top of the bank of the channel
(measured horizontally) along small streams and drainage channels unless the
developer demonstrates adequately that the property is free from danger of
inundation by the 100-year flood, or that adequate remedial measures have
been taken to safely accommodate the 100-year flood.



   (B)   Drainage system standards. The following standards shall be
addressed in designing and constructing subdivision drainage systems:



      (1)   Curb and gutter system:



         (a)   Curb and gutter drainage systems shall be allowed;



         (b)   The curb and gutter system shall be designed to
handle a 25-year storm.



            1.   The systems shall be designed so that there
will be no water in roadway, six feet on either side of the center line, with
a 25-year storm.



            2.   The design engineer shall show on his or her
drainage plan that the water cross-sectional area of the curb and gutter
street at all points of evacuation is not in violation of the water no closer
than six feet from center line standard for a 25-year design storm.



         (c)   The curb and gutter system shall be contained
within the right-of-way. The drop boxes and other required infrastructure
will be contained either in the right-of-way or easements designated for this
purpose;



         (d)   The curb and gutter system shall consist of rolled
or vertical-face curb. However, rolled curb is normally more desirable;



         (e)   The curb and gutter system may be constructed of
either concrete or asphalt. However, both types must be back-filled so that
the shoulders are flush with the back top edge of the curbing; and



         (f)   Curb and guttering system shall have the following
dimensions:



            1.   Approximately two feet from front of curb to
back of curb (both types);



            2.   Approximate depth (at deepest point) six
inches, (both types);



            3.   Approximately six inches thick where it abuts
the roadway (front of curb), and 12 inches thick where it abuts the earthen
shoulder (rear of curb); and



            4.   The curb and gutter system shall blend
smoothly into the roadway.



      (2)   Ditch lines:



         (a)   Ditch lines shall be allowed as drainage systems;



         (b)   All ditches and driveway tiles shall be designed
to handle a 25-year storm;



         (c)   The ditch line shall be cut so that it is deep
enough to have the required driveway tile plus six inches of cover;



         (d)   All ditches along local streets shall be contained
in an 11-foot area of right-of-way which starts at the back of the shoulder
and ends at the front of the sidewalk. Ditch lines along collector streets
shall be contained in a 14-foot area of the right-of-way;



         (e)   The sides of a ditch shall have a maximum slope of
two to one unless they are paved or covered with rock or stone or stabilized
in some manner approved by the City Engineer.



            1.   Ditch lines with side slopes of three to one
or less may be vegetated by normal seeding procedures.



            2.   Ditch lines with side slopes between three to
one and two to one shall be vegetated by sodding.



         (f)   All ditch lines which will have a water velocity
of over five feet per second with a 25- year storm, shall be covered with a
hard surface, or stabilized in some manner approved by the City Engineer;



         (g)   All vegetated ditches shall have the type of
vegetation and the method of planting approved by the City Engineer. Note:
the type and method of vegetation will change with the side slope grade and
weather conditions;



         (h)   The city shall not release the financial security
of a development until the ditch has been properly cut and vegetated; and



         (i)   Standardized flared head walls shall be required
where two or more ditch lines are channeled into a culvert or when a ditch
line deflects at an angle of 135 degrees or less.



      (3)   Driveway culverts:



         (a)   If ditches are being used then the developer's
engineer shall size the driveway culverts for all lots. The tiles shall be
designed to handle a 25-year storm;



         (b)   All driveway tiles shall have a minimum of eight
inches of total cover (earth plus pavement);



         (c)   The flow-line of all driveway tiles shall be
placed at the same grade as the ditch line;



         (d)   If head walls are used then the driveway culvert
shall be total of five feet (two and five tenths foot on either side) wider
than the apron pavement, and shall have six inches of cover. The culvert
shall be flush with the head wall. The head wall material and construction
design shall be approved by the City Engineer;



         (e)   If head walls are not used then the driveway
culvert shall be eight feet longer four feet on either side than the apron
pavement. The first two feet of pipe on both sides of the apron shall have
six inches of fill on top of it, after this point the pipe shall be covered
with fill to at least a three to one slope;



         (f)   The type of driveway culvert shall be approved by
the City Engineer. The diameter of the drainage tile shall be large enough to
allow for the unrestrictive flow of storm water run-off (minimum diameter of
12 inches required); and



         (g)   Before driveway swales are incorporated into any
drainage plan, prior approval of the City Engineer will be obtained. Driveway
swales shall not exceed six inches in maximum depth nor drastically vary from
the contour of the ditch line. A connecting three feet wide surfaced channel
may be required between driveway swales to facilitate the movement of run-off
water.



      (4)   Sidewalk culverts:



         (a)   When a sidewalk crosses a ditch line, a culvert or
other appropriate water channel shall be required;



         (b)   Sidewalk culverts shall have at least the same
water carrying capacity as the driveway culverts;



         (c)   The culvert shall be set in the bottom of the
ditch line and shall have at least six inches of cover (fill plus pavement);



         (d)   The ends of the culvert shall be protected in a
manner approved by the City Engineer;



         (e)   The culvert shall be long enough to clear both
ends of the sidewalk. The exact length will depend on the type of end
covering or protection that will be used; and



         (f)   Any time the tip of the sidewalk is greater than
24 inches from the bottom of the ditch line, a railing or some other type of
protective device shall be installed.



      (5)   Roadway culverts:



         (a)   All culverts shall be designed to handle a 25-year
storm;



         (b)   All culverts over 15 inches in diameter shall have
both ends protected with a hard surface: head walls or concrete collars may
be used.



            1.   Head walls may have a vertical face, the
culvert shall be flush with the head wall. The material and design of the
head wall shall be approved by the City Engineer.



            2.   Concrete collars shall have end slopes of a
minimum of two to one. The collar shall be back filled with earth, and the
earth stabilized and vegetated. The collars shall have a footer which is
below the grade of the bed of the stream or ditch. The material and design of
the collar shall be approved by the City Engineer.



         (c)   All culverts shall have a minimum of 12 inches of
total cover, to be measured from the top of the culvert to the top of the
pavement;



         (d)   The bottom of the culvert shall be at the same
grade as the bottom of the ditch line; and



         (e)   All culverts over 24 inches shall have protective
end grates. The grates shall be so designed so that they allow the smooth
flow of water but will stop the flow of debris or other large objects through
the culvert.



      (6)   Retention of storm water: all developments shall provide
for the retention of 100% of excessive storm water run-off resulting from the
development. Retain storm water at 100-year storm and release at 15-year
storm (see Chapters 154 and 155 for calculation methods). Any proposed
development that the ultimate receiver is a flood prone area shall not be
permitted unless the proposed development can store 100% of a four-inch storm
with a 100% run-off factor.



         (a)   The retention may be either on-site or off-site.



         (b)   The retention shall insure that no downstream
property owners, water courses or sinkholes will receive storm water run-off
at a higher peak flow rate than they were prior to the development.



         (c)   Excessive storm water run-off shall include the
increase in storm water resulting from:



            1.   An increase in the impervious surface;



            2.   Changes in soil absorption due to the
development; and/or



            3.   Filling of existing drainage, sinkhole or
storage areas.



         (d)   The retention area shall be calculated for the
total development. A development may have as many or as few retention areas
as is necessary to retain the required amount of water.



         (e)   The retention areas may be designed as either
semi-dry or wet retention areas. The Commission may require a protecting
barrier and/or safety devices for any retention area they feel will be a
threat to the health or safety of citizens.



         (f)   If the retention areas are to be vegetated then
they shall have side slopes not steeper than two to one. Covered areas may
have steeper slopes.



         (g)   All retention basins as well as the inflow and
outflow channels shall be contained within drainage easements and clearly
illustrated on both the preliminary and final plats.



         (h)   The city shall not release a developer's final
security until the storm water retention system is found to be in compliance
with these standards by the City Engineer. A developer may request that the
Planning and Zoning Commission approve a variance to this standard. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may consider granting variances to retain less
than 100% of the storm water created by the development if one or more of the
following conditions exist:



            1.   It is found that the increase in water flow
will in no way be injurious or detrimental to the downstream property owners,
water courses and/or sinkhole basins;



            2.   The developer has the expressed written and
legal consent from the ultimate downstream property owner, who will receive
the discharge, to channel the total storm water flow onto their property. The
flow shall be contained in a recorded drainage easement; and/or



            3.   The increase in storm water will not
significantly impact or adversely affect the downstream receivers.



      (7)   Drainage easements and grading: following are the
standards for the development of drainage easements.



         (a)   All developments shall provide adequate areas to
house the flow of the surface water, the areas shall be contained within a
drainage easement.



         (b)   All drainage easements shall be graded so that
they will carry the intended water flow. No partial grading shall be allowed.
If the design of a drainage system calls for an easement to be partially
housed on adjacent property the easement shall be recorded and graded prior
to the city's acceptance of the subdivision.



         (c)   All lots shall be graded so that they will drain
toward the platted drainage easements.



         (d)   The city shall not release a developer's financial
security until the drainage easements have been found to be in compliance
with these standards by the City Engineer.



         (e)   Builders shall be responsible for keeping drainage
ways open or for creating ones the developer has given them responsibility
for.



      (8)   Sinkhole drainage: sinkholes may be used as a means of
on-site disposal of storm water if the Commission and Council find that this
will not significantly increase the chance or frequency of subsidence or
flooding in the general area. However, sinkhole drainage systems shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards.



         (a)   The drainage and storage area shall be contained
within an easement.



         (b)   The storm water has direct access to an
underground passageway or stream via a rock, crevice or a pipe.



         (c)   Any exposed crevice or pipe shall have a grated
end.



         (d)   Provisions are provided for the maintenance of the
sinkhole drainage/storage area. Responsibility for maintenance shall be
clearly indicated.



   (C)   (1)   Streets.



         (a)   The widths and locations of all streets in a
proposed subdivision shall conform to state standards and local plans.



         (b)   Street extensions:



            1.   The street layout of the proposed subdivision
shall provide for the continuation of projection of streets already existing
in areas adjacent to the area being subdivided unless the Planning Commission
deems the continuation or extension undesirable for specific reasons of
topography or design;



            2.   Where, in the opinion of the Planning
commission, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining properties,
proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries of the
properties. Where the Planning Commission deems it necessary, the dead-end
streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a radius of at
least 40 feet; and



            3.   The street system for the proposed
subdivision shall provide for extending existing streets at the same or
greater width, but in no case shall a street extension be of less width than
the minimum width required in these regulations for a street in its category.



         (c)   The minimum width of right-of-way, measured from
lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on local street plans, or if not
shown on the plans, shall not be less than follows:



            1.   Arterial streets and highways: 80 feet as may
be required. Arterial streets and highways are those to be used primarily for
fast or heavy traffic. Minimum pavement: 22 feet or as required by KDOT;



            2.   Collector streets: 60 feet. Collector streets
are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of
arterial streets and highways and include the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and street for major circulation within such a
development. Minimum pavement: 22 feet;



            3.   Minor residential streets: 40 feet. Minor
streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting
residential properties and designed to discourage their use by through
traffic. Minimum pavement: 18 feet;



            4.   Marginal access streets: 40 feet. Marginal
access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to
arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic. Minimum pavement: 18 feet;



            5.   Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac): 100 feet.
Culs-de-sac are permanent dead-end streets or courts not to exceed 600 feet
or 15 dwelling units, designed to have one end permanently closed. At the
closed end, the turnaround radius must be at least twice the right-of-way
leading into the cul-de-sac. Minimum pavement: 18 feet;



            6.   Loop streets: 40 feet. Loop streets are
streets open at both ends and connected to only one residential street with a
maximum length of 1,200 feet or 25 dwelling units. Minimum pavement: 18 feet;



            7.   Alleys (if approved): 20 feet. Alleys are
minor public ways used primarily for service access to the back or side
properties otherwise abutting on a street. Minimum pavement: 18 feet;



            8.   Through proposed business areas, street
widths shall be increased ten feet on each side if needed to provide parking
without interfering with normal traffic movements; and



            9.   In cases where topography or other physical
conditions make a street of the required minimum width impractical, the
Planning Commission may modify the above requirements.



         (d)   Additional width on existing streets: subdivisions
that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet
the above minimum street width requirements.



            1.   The entire minimum right-of-way width shall
be dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street.



            2.   When the subdivision is located on only one
side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way width,
measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be dedicated.



            3.   Dedication of one-half of the rights-of-way
for proposed streets along the boundaries of land proposed for subdivision
shall be prohibited.



         (e)   Intersections:



            1.   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles;



            2.   Street curb intersections shall be rounded by
radii of at least 20 feet. When the smallest angles of street intersection
are less than 60 degrees, the Planning Commission shall require curb radii of
greater length. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb
having a desirable radius without reducing the sidewalk at a street corner to
less than normal width, the property line at the street corner shall be round
or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit the curb construction; and



            3.   No lot or other parcel of land which abuts on
and has access to either a collector or a minor street shall have a service
drive, 75 feet of the right-of-way of any street which intersects the
arterial street on the side on which the lot or parcel is located.



         (f)   Street curvatures.



            1.   Tangent. A tangent at least 100 feet long
shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.



            2.   Horizontal. Where a deflection angle of more
than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably
long radius shall be introduced. On streets 60 feet or more in width, the
centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than 300 feet; on other
streets, not less than 100 feet.



            3.   Vertical curves. Every change in grade shall
be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford a minimum sight
distance of 200 feet, the sight distance being measured from the driver's
eyes, which are assumed to be four and one-half feet above the pavement.
Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale
of not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontal, and one inch equals 20
feet vertical, may be required by the Planning Commission.



         (g)   1.   Street grades, elevations and drainage.



            2.   Street grades shall not exceed the following.



               a.   The Planning Commission shall not
approve streets which will be subject to inundation or flooding. All streets
must be located at elevations which will make them flood free in order that
portions of the subdivisions will not be isolated by floods. Where flood
conditions exist, the Planning Commission shall require profiles and
elevations of streets in order to determine the advisability of permitting
the proposed subdivision activity.



               b.   All streets shall be designed so as to
provide for the discharge of surface water from the pavement and from the
right-of-way by grading and drainage. For adequate drainage, the minimum
street grade shall not be less than one-half of 1%.



               c.   Where it is the opinion of the Planning
Commission that water cannot be adequately discharged by surface drainage,
the Planning Commission may require the installation of a storm sewer system.
Fill may be used in areas subject to flooding in order to provide flood-free
street if the fill does not unduly increase flood heights. Drainage opening
shall be designed so as not to restrict the flow of water and thereby unduly
increase flood heights.



         (h)   Marginal access streets: where the proposed
subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or
highway on which traffic volumes and vehicular speeds warrant special safety
considerations, the Planning Commission may require that marginal access
streets be provided in order that no lots will front on the existing or
proposed arterial street highway.



         (i)   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than
125 feet shall not be permitted.



         (j)   Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac): minor terminal or
dead-end streets or courts which are designed so as to have one end
permanently closed shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at
the closed end with a turnaround having a radius at the outside of the
pavement of at least 40 feet and a radius at the outside of the right-of-way
of at least 50 feet.



         (k)   Street names:



            1.   Proposed streets which are obviously in
alignment with others already existing named, shall bear the names of
existing streets; and



            2.   In no case shall the name for proposed
streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the
suffix street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place or court. Through its index
list of street names on file the Planning Commission can assist the
subdivider in avoiding duplication.



         (l)   Private streets and reserve strips:



            1.   There shall be no private streets platted
within a subdivision unless it shall be clearly shown that a road is intended
to be reserved and that no dedication is intended by the developer; and



            2.   There shall be no reserve strips in a
subdivision except where their control is definitely vested in the city or
county under conditions approved by the Planning Commission as authorized in
these regulations.



         (m)   Alleys shall be provided to give access to the
rear of all lots used for business and industrial purposes. Alleys shall not
be provided in residential blocks except in cases where the subdivider
produces evidence of the need for alleys which is satisfactory to the
Planning Commission.



      (2)   Blocks.



         (a)   Length. Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet nor
more than 1,200 feet in length, except as the Planning Commission consider
necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street
pattern. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the Planning Commission may
require one or more public crosswalks of not less than ten feet in width to
extend entirely across the block and at locations deemed necessary.



         (b)   Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two
tiers of lots of minimum depth. However, where this would require lots to
front on an arterial street or highway or where topographical conditions or
the size of the property prevent two tiers or lots, the Planning Commission
may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth.



   (D)   Lots.



      (1)   Relationship to streets. All lots shall front on a
public street or road for a minimum distance of 75 feet except that lots
which front on the turnarounds of permanent dead-end streets shall front on
the turnarounds for a minimum distance of 40 feet.



      (2)   Arrangement. Each lot in a subdivision shall contain a
building site determined to be free from the danger of flooding. Wherever
practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines
and radical to curved street lines.



      (3)   Dimensions. The size, shape and orientation of lots
shall be such as the Planning Commission deems appropriate for the type of
development and use contemplated.



         (a)   Lot dimensions within the corporate limits of the
city shall conform to the requirements of the City Zoning Ordinance, except
that residential lots not served by public sewer shall be at least 75 feet
wide at the building setback line and 15,000 square feet in area or the
minimum lot width and area determined by the City (or County) Health Officer,
whichever width and area are larger.



         (b)   In areas where no zoning ordinance is in effect,
residential lots served by public sewer shall be at least 75 feet wide at the
building setback line and 7,500 square feet in area.



         (c)   In areas where no zoning ordinance is in effect,
residential lots not served by public sewer shall be at least 75 feet wide at
the building setback line and 7,500 square feet in area.



         (d)   In areas where no zoning is in effect, residential
lots not served by public sewer shall a have a minimum lot width at the
building setback line and a minimum lot area as determined by the County
Health Officer. However, in no case shall a lot not served by public sewer be
less than 75 feet in width at the building setback line and less than 15,000
square feet in area.



         (e)   The minimum width and minimum area of residential
lots to be served by individual private wells shall be determined by the
County Health Officer after investigation of soil conditions, the proposed
sewerage system, and the depth of ground water.



         (f)   When property is to be developed for commercial
uses, it is usually most desirable that the design or layout scheme provide
for an over-all or unified development such as a planned commercial or
shopping center and that the platting of individual and separate lots for
each business establishment be avoided.



         (g)   In industrial subdivisions, it is generally
desirable that very rigid lot sizes and a very rigid arrangement of minor
streets, railroad service tracks and service lines for utilities be avoided
in order that the special needs of particular industries may more easily be
met.



         (h)   Greater lot widths and lot areas than those
specified above may be required for residential lots if, in the opinion of
the City (or County) Health Officer, there are factors of drainage, soil
conditions or other conditions to cause potential health problems.



      (4)   Building set back line. All the requirements shall
conform to the City Zoning Ordinance. The building setback line shall not be
located closer to the street right-of-way than a distance equal to one-half
of the total width of the street right-of-way on which the building will
front.



      (5)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient extra
width to meet the building setback lines established on both the front street
and side street.



      (6)   Yard requirements. Yard requirements for residential
subdivisions shall be in accordance with applicable requirements set forth in
the City Zoning Ordinance.



      (7)   Flood hazards. Note: refer to earlier statements on land
suitability, division (A) above.



   (E)   Off-street loading and parking facilities. In commercial and
industrial subdivisions and in the portions of residential subdivisions
reserved for commercial or industrial uses, the lots or parcels platted for
commercial or industrial sites shall be large enough to provide for the
off-street loading and unloading facilities and the off-street parking
facilities required by the City Zoning Ordinance.



   (F)   Utility and drainage easements.



      (1)   Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the
Planning Commission shall require easements at least 12 feet in width
centered along all lines for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, gas mains, water mains, heat mains and other utility facilities.
Where necessary or advisable in the opinion of the Planning Commission,
similar easements shall be provided along side lot lines or across lots.



      (2)   If the Planning Commission deems it necessary for proper
drainage within or through a subdivision, it shall require that a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way be provided.



   (G)   Community assets. In all subdivisions, due regard shall be
shown for natural features such as large trees, unusual rock formations, and
water courses; for sites which have historical significance; and for similar
assets which if preserved will add attractiveness and value to the
subdivision and to the community. The Planning Commission may prepare a list
of all the features within its area of subdivision jurisdiction which it
deems worthy of preservation.



   (H)   Conformance with zoning and other regulations. No final plat
of land within the area of force and effect of an existing zoning ordinance
will be approved unless it conforms with the ordinance. Whenever there is a
discrepancy between the minimum standards set forth in these regulations and
those contained in the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code or other official
regulations, the highest standard shall apply.



   (I)   Public open spaces. Due consideration shall be given to the
allocation of areas suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds and
parks for local and neighborhood use as well as for use as public service
areas. Where a school, neighborhood park or recreation area or public access
to water frontage, shown on an official map or in a plan made and adopted by
the Planning Commission, is located in whole or in part in the applicant's
subdivision, the Planning Commission may require the dedication or
reservation of the open space within the subdivision up to a total of 10% of
the gross area or water frontage of the plot, for park, school or recreation
purposes.



   (J)   Large tracts or parcels. When land is subdivided into larger
parcels than ordinary building lots, the parcels shall be arranged so as to
allow for the opening of future streets and logical resubdivision.



   (K)   Storm sewers. See division (B) above.



   (L)   Water supply and sewerage connections. Where a development of
a subdivision lies within the current service area of the community's water
utility district, but immediate connection is not possible, the subdivider
shall extend the appropriate size water and sewer lines to the development.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. III)



§ 154.05  PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.



   After meeting informally with the Planning Commission as recommended in
§ 154.03 above, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat
prior to the making of any street improvements or the installation of any
utilities.



   (A)   Preliminary plat data. At least ten days prior to the meeting
at which it is to be considered, the subdivider shall submit to the Planning
Commission 16 copies of a preliminary sketch plat of the proposed
subdivision. A written application for conditional approval shall be
submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Commission. The preliminary plat
shall meet the minimum standards of design set forth in § 154.04 above and
shall give the following information:



      (1)   A scale of one inch equals 100 feet;



      (2)   The proposed subdivision name and location, the name and
address of the owner(s), and the name and seal of the designer of the plat
who shall be a state licensed engineer or registered surveyor;



      (3)   Date, approximate north point and graphic scale;



      (4)   Acreage of land to be subdivided with lot lines and
numbers;



      (5)   Contours at intervals of not greater than five feet or
at a lesser interval if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission;



      (6)   The location of existing and platted property lines,
streets, buildings and water courses;



      (7)   The present zoning classification, if any, on the land
to be subdivided and on the adjoining land, and the names of adjoining
property owners of subdivisions;



      (8)   Existing and proposed easements and their locations,
widths and distances;



      (9)   The names, locations, widths and other dimensions of
proposed streets and alleys;



      (10)   Plans of proposed utility layouts showing feasible
connections to the existing or any proposed utility systems. Rear easements
for utility poles and wires shall be required wherever possible;



      (11)   Sites, and their acreages, if any, to be reserved or
dedicated for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public uses. Sites, if
any, for semi-public, commercial or multi-family uses;



      (12)   Minimum building setback lines;



      (13)   Copies of proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall be
attached to the preliminary plat;



      (14)   Location sketch map showing relationship of subdivision
site to area; and



      (15)   A construction plan which shall include a complete
drainage plan showing all improvements including all proposed streets,
easements, storm sewers, swales, ditches and lot drainage. All the
improvements shall be designed by an engineer registered in the state.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   The Chairperson or Secretary of the Planning Commission
shall notify the subdivider by certified mail of the time and place of the
hearing not less than five days before the date fixed for the hearing.
Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining
the area proposed to be platted as shown on the proposed subdivision.



      (2)   The preliminary plat shall receive the approval of the
City/County Health Officer prior to consideration by the Planning Commission.
A certificate of approval by the Health Officer shall appear on the
preliminary plat.



      (3)   Within 30 days after submission of the preliminary plat,
the Planning Commission will review it and indicate its approval, disapproval
or approval subject to modifications on a basis for the preparation of the
final plat. Failure of the Planning Commission to act on the preliminary plat
within 30 days shall be deemed approval of the plat. If a plat is disapproved
reasons for the disapproval will be stated in writing. If approved subject to
modifications, the nature of the modifications will be indicated in writing.



      (4)   The approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning
Commission will not constitute acceptance of the final plat.



      (5)   The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on
two copies of the preliminary plat with any notations made at the time of
approval or disapproval of the specific changes required.



      (6)   One copy of the preliminary plat will be returned to the
subdivider with any notations at the time of approval or disapproval, and the
specific changes, if any, required.



      (7)   The approval of the preliminary plan expires unless a
final plat based thereon is submitted within one year from the date of the
approval unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Planning Commission.



   (C)   Subdivision of a portion of a larger tract. Whenever part of a
tract is proposed to be subdivided and it is intended to subdivide additional
parts of the tract in the future, a sketch plan for the entire tract shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission at the same time the preliminary plat
for the first part of the tract to be platted is submitted.



   (D)   Plat review charge. A charge shall be made for the examination
and approval or disapproval of every plat reviewed by the Planning
Commission. At the time preliminary plats are filed with the Planning
Commission, the subdivider shall deposit with the Planning Commission in the
amount of two $200 for each plat and $10 for each lot shown on the plat. Fee
schedule follows:



 

City Planning and Zoning Fee Schedule




Zoning change
 
$300


Variance request
 
$100


Special exception
 
$100


Final plat approval
 
$50


Final plat amendment
 
$50


Preliminary plat
 
$200, plus $10 per lot, 2 to 20 lots, $5 per lot over 20


Lot line adjustment
 
$10 per line


Recording of plats
 
Responsibility of owner




 



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. IV)



§ 154.06  DEVELOPMENT PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL.



   (A)   A perfectly prepared and recorded subdivision or plat means
little to a prospective lot purchaser until he or she can see actual physical
transformation of raw acreage into lots suitable for building purposes and
human habitation.



   (B)   Improvements by the subdivider spare the community a potential
tax liability.



   (C)   The following tangible improvements are required before final
plat approval in order to assure the physical reality of a subdivision which
approval and recording will establish legally.



      (1)   Required improvements.



         (a)   Concrete monuments at least 36 inches in length
and four inches in diameter or four inches square shall be set at all corners
on the plat. The top of the monument shall be flat and shall have an indented
cross to properly identify the location. These monuments shall be described
on the final plat in relation to the located section corners of the
coordinate system of the commonwealth.



         (b)   Iron pin or iron pipe monuments not less than
one-half-inch in diameter and not less than 18 inches in length shall be set
at all lot corners not marked by concrete monuments, at all street corners,
at all points where street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, and at all intersections of curves and tangents along street
lines.



      (2)   Grading.



         (a)   Grading specifications. All streets, roads and
alleys shall be graded to their full widths by the subdivider so that
pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. Deviation
from this standard due to special topographical conditions will be allowed
only with the special approval of the Planning Commission. Preparation of the
subgrade. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be
first cleared of all tree stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable
materials and of all trees not intended for preservation. The subgrade shall
be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the
accepted cross section and grades.



         (b)   Pavement specifications for streets. The
subdivision shall give the zoning office at least three days' notice prior to
installing any road construction materials.



            1.   Subdivision developer shall provide copies of
invoices showing volume of road construction materials used prior to release
of any road construction bond.



            2.   The subdivider shall provide for the complete
construction of streets, curbs and gutters constructed to standards approved
by the Planning Commission when ordered. Where streets are proposed to be
dedicated to the county or city, that government is not required to accept
the street until it has been inspected by the City Engineer and has been
determined that the construction was in accordance with the requirements set
forth herein.



            3.   The following minimum standards are hereby
presented.



               a.   Pavement base shall consist of not less
than two courses of dense grade aggregate or equivalent laid and rolled
separately to at least 84% solid volume, each having a compacted thickness of
two to four inches for the full width of pavement. Subgrade shall have been
graded and rolled to 95% of maximum density prior to placement of the first
course of aggregate.



               b.   A binder course or base course with a
minimum thickness of two inches shall be laid prior to bituminous being laid.
A surface or wearing course of bituminous concrete, Class I, Type "A" or
equivalent, shall be applied, the thickness at the thinnest point being one
and one-half inches or more.



               c.   Concrete pavement shall be minimum of
six inches of reinforced concrete (six by six-sixths mesh) with minimum
flexural strength of 650 psi, or compressive strength.



               d.   Gravel roads may be permitted by the
Commission where very large lots (three acres or more) are proposed. In those
cases the same specifications as in the installation of pavement base shall
apply as a minimum. The subdivider shall be required to cut drainage ditches
in subdivision to a depth below the subgrade of the road.



               e.   Collector, arterial or industrial or
other type roads expected to convey heavy loads may require special design
based on the loads to be carried. In those cases, the design criteria
established by the State Department of Transportation will be used.



               f.   Each pavement contractor must provide
certifications to the city from an independent testing agency or state
inspector that the plant mix meets the state specifications. Only those who
have submitted the certification are allowed to lay material for streets in
subdivisions under the jurisdiction of the City Planning Commission.



            4.   Subdivision regulations certifications of
paving materials: the following is a list of the requirements for
certification, however this list is not all inclusive. Each contractor must
provide certification that his or her plant has been inspected and meets the
State Department of Highways Specifications. The certifications shall be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Director in the spring of each year
prior to the paving season:



               a.   Bituminous concrete mix designs as
approved by the state;



               b.   Statement that plants which provide
material have been approved by the State Department of Highways for projects
in the year which he or she is proposing to do work;



               c.   Certifications of inspections from a
scale company which is the likely source of hot mix material to be used in
the city;



               d.   Copy of contractor's quality control
plan/checklist as submitted to the State Department of Highways for material
produced at the plant;



               e.   Sample daily report of inspection of
the product with attached work sheet; and



               f.   Sample wet sieve analysis of DGA
materials for roadway base.



         (c)   Sidewalks.



            1.   The Planning Commission reserves the right to
require installation of sidewalks, i.e., paved and drained walkways, where
the safety of pedestrians and children at play demand them.



            2.   For the safety of pedestrians in residential
and commercial subdivisions, the subdivider shall build Portland cement
concrete sidewalks on both sides of the street to meet the following
specifications.



               a.   Single-family or duplex housing
developments: four feet wide and four inches thick.



               b.   Multi-family or group housing
developments: five feet wide and four inches thick.



               c.   Commercial developments: 12 feet wide
and four inches thick.



               3.   The Planning Commission may waive the
requirements for sidewalks in predominantly single-family residential
developments.



      (3)   Utilities and drainage facilities.



         (a)   General requirements for installation of utilities.



            1.   Utilities shall be provided in rear lot
easements wherever possible.



            2.   When it is necessary to install utilities in
street rights-of-way, the following requirements shall apply: after grading
is completed and approved and before any pavement base is applied, all in
street underground work: water mains, gas mains and the like, and all service
connections shall be completely installed and approved throughout the length
of the street and across the flat section. Where the utility mains are
outside the pavement area, the subdivider may be allowed to omit the
installation of service connections provided that at a time as these service
connections are needed, they may be jacked across the street without breaking
or weakening the existing pavement. Where rock is known to exist beneath the
pavement area and at depth as to interfere with the jacking of service
connections, the Planning Commission shall require the complete installation
of service connections before any base is applied. In cases where underground
utilities must be provided within the right-of-way of streets, they should
not be installed under the paved portions of the streets.



         (b)   Water supply system. Where, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, the public water supply is reasonably accessible or
available to the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall construct a
complete water distribution system which shall adequately serve all lots and
which shall include appropriately spaced fire hydrants, and this system shall
be properly connected with the public water supply. An alternate water
distribution system will be required in cases where a public water supply is
not within a reasonable distance. Any new water distribution system or
extension of an existing one shall be submitted and approved by the State
Division of Water before installation begins.



         (c)   Sanitary sewers.



            1.   When the subdivision is located within the
service area of a public sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be installed
in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the
public system. Any new sewer system or extension of existing system shall be
submitted and approved by the State Division of Water and Sewer.



            2.   Where lots cannot be economically connected
with a sewerage system, they must contain adequate area for the installation
of approved septic tank and disposal field and must be approved in writing by
the County Health Officer.



      (4)   Street name signs. Appropriate street signs should
appear at all intersections. Upon request, the Planning Commission will aid
the subdivider with specifications for the construction, placing and setting
of the signs.



      (5)   Street trees.



         (a)   Although not required by these subdivision
regulations, the planting of street trees is considered a duty of the
subdivider as well as good land use practice. Street trees protect against
excessive heat and glare, and they also enhance the attractiveness and value
of abutting property.



         (b)   It is recommended that street trees be planted
inside the property lines where they will be less subject to injury where
chances of motor accidents will be decreased, and where they will enjoy more
favorable conditions for growth. If trees are to be planted within a planting
strip in the street right-of-way, their proposed locations and the species to
be used must be submitted for the Planning commission's approval since the
public inherits the care and maintenance of the trees.



      (6)   Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. No final
subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission or accepted for
recordation by the County Clerk until one of the following conditions has
been met.



         (a)   All required improvements have been constructed in
a satisfactory manner and approved by the Planning Commission.



         (b)   The Planning Commission has accepted a security or
performance bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of installation of
the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and utilities
installed without cost to the city in the event of default of the subdivider.



            1.   The conditions of the security or performance
bond shall provide for the installation of the improvements covered by the
bond within a period not to exceed 18 months; provided, however, that the
period may be extended by the Planning Commission with the consent of the
parties thereto if the Planning Commission finds that the public interest
will not be adversely affected by the extension.



            2.   Performance bonds which are submitted in lieu
of the installation of required improvements shall be in cash or with a
surety approved by the Planning Commission.



         (c)   Any owner or agent of any land may sell, transfer
or agree to sell any lot or lots shown on a plat having been given
preliminary approval by the Planning Commission, provided, the owner or agent
post an acceptable performance or security bond guaranteeing to the public
the actual construction and installation of the necessary improvements within
the specified time period. Sale of subdivision by auction does not exempt the
subdivider from posting acceptable security in lieu of completed
improvements; however, only if a parcel is sold as a whole, the security or
performance bond will be immediately released by the Planning Commission.



         (d)   A certified check in the full amount of the
established cost of installing all required improvements has been posted with
the Planning Commission.



         (e)   An escrow account in the full amount of the
estimated cost of installing required improvements has been established.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. V)



§ 154.07  FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.



   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved; and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that a
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he or she proposed to record
and develop at the time, provided however, that the portion conforms to all
requirements of these standards.



   (A)   Final plat data. The final plat shall give the following
information:



      (1)   The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals
100 feet on sheets not larger than 22 by 34 inches. When more than one sheet
is required an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire
subdivision with the sheets lettered in alphabetical order as a key;



      (2)   Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic
scale, and true north line;



      (3)   All dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the
plat shall be tied to primary control points as approved by a registered,
professional engineer to be selected by the Planning Commission. Locations
and descriptions of the control points shall be given. Except where deemed
clearly unreasonable or infeasible by the Planning Commission, these control
points shall be the located section corners of the coordinate system of the
commonwealth;



      (4)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets,
easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines or residential lots and
other sites with accurate dimensions to the nearest one-one- hundredth of a
foot; bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs and central angles of all
curbs with dimensions to the nearest second;



      (5)   Name and right-of-way width of each street, easement or
other right-of-way;



      (6)   Lot numbers, lot lines and frontage dimensions;



      (7)   Purposes for which sites other than residential lots,
are dedicated or reserved;



      (8)   Minimum building setback lines;



      (9)   Location and description of monuments;



      (10)   Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and
streets, the locations of adjoining unplatted properties, and the names and
addresses of the owners of adjoining unplatted properties;



      (11)   Cross-sections, profiles and grades of streets, curbs,
gutters and sidewalks showing locations of in-street utilities, and drawn to
local (city or county) standards scales and elevations shall be attached to
the final plat;



      (12)   Protective covenants shall either be placed directly on
the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording; and



      (13)   The following certificates shall be presented with the
final plat:



         (a)   Certification showing the applicant as the land
owner and dedicated streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public use;



         (b)   Certification by surveyor or engineer to accuracy
of survey and plat and placements of monuments;



         (c)   Certification by County Health Officer when
individual sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed;



         (d)   Certification by the approving agent named by the
Planning Commission that the subdivider has complied with one of the
following:



            1.   Installation of all improvements in
accordance with the requirements of the standards; or



            2.   Posting of a security bond in sufficient
amount to assure the completion of all required improvements.



         (e)   Certification of approval to be signed by the
secretary of the Planning Commission; and



         (f)   Acknowledgment with owner's signature.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   At least ten days prior to the meeting at which it is to
be considered, the subdivider shall submit the original drawing and ten
copies, together with any street profiles or other plans that may be required
by the Planning Commission.



      (2)   One copy of the final plat shall be transmitted to the
engineer to be selected by the Planning Commission who will check the plat as
to computations, certification, monuments and the like, and that all the
required improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the city (or
county) officials having jurisdiction, or, in the case a security bond or
certified check has been posted in lieu of completing the improvements, that
the amount posted is sufficient to cover the cost of the required
improvements. If found satisfactory, he or she will return the copy of the
final plat to the Planning Commission with his or her approval certified
thereon within ten days of receipt thereof.



      (3)   One copy shall be transmitted to the County Health
Officer. If the plat meets the approval of the Health Officer, he or she
shall return the copy with his or her approval certified thereon within ten
days of receipt thereof.



      (4)   The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove this
final plat within 30 days after its submission. Failure of the Planning
Commission to act on the final plat within these 30 days shall be deemed
approval of it. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall
be stated upon the records of the Planning Commission.



      (5)   Approval by the Planning Commission shall not constitute
acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street, other public way or
ground.



      (6)   When the final plat has been approved by the Planning
Commission, one copy shall be returned to the subdivider, with the approval
of the Planning Commission certified thereon, for filing with the County
Clerk as an official plat of record. Another copy certified by the Planning
Commission will be transmitted to the city (or county) legislative body for
necessary action on any proposed dedication.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. VI)



§ 154.08  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Exceptional conditions. Variances may be granted under the
following conditions:



      (1)   Where the subdivider can show that strict adherence to
these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship (financial disadvantage to
the property owner is not proof of hardship within the purpose of these
regulations); or



      (2)   Where the Planning Commission decides that there are
topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site and a departure from
these regulations will not destroy their intent, nor cause detriment to the
public good.



   (B)   Group housing developments.



      (1)   The following provisions, as well as other provisions of
these regulation shall apply to group housing developments:



         (a)   Although the developer will be allowed to deviate
from the lot area requirements for the individual lots on which residential
structures are located, the complex itself must meet the overall minimum lot
density requirements. This may be accomplished through the provision of open
spaces, open type recreational areas and consolidated parking areas;



         (b)   No parcel of land without an adequate public water
supply shall be approved;



         (c)   No group housing development will be approved
unless an adequate sanitary sewer system is included in the plans and
approved by the County Health Department;



         (d)   The exterior yards of the complex must meet the
minimum setback requirements; and



         (e)   All roads must be constructed to standards as set
forth in these regulations.



      (2)   The following additional plans and schedules shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission:



         (a)   The location and legal description of the proposed
development;



         (b)   Site plan showing location of all building, lot
lines yard sizes, setbacks, recreation and open space areas, utilities,
parking and common-use facilities;



         (c)   The location and dimensions of all points of entry
and exit for cars, pedestrians and complete interior circulation pattern;



         (d)   Other architectural, engineering and geographic
data as may be required to permit the Planning Commission to determine if the
above regulations are being complied with; and



         (e)   A time schedule for development.



   (C)   Mobile home subdivisions.



      (1)   The Planning Commission may approve a subdivision for
the exclusive use of mobile homes.



      (2)   A mobile home subdivision is a subdivision where
residence is in mobile homes exclusively.



      (3)   A mobile home is a detached single-family dwelling unit
with the following characteristics:



         (a)   Designed for long-term occupancy and containing
sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen
facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment
to outside systems;



         (b)   Designed to be transported after fabrication on
its own wheels, or on a flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels; and



         (c)   Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as
a dwelling complete, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations,
location on foundation supports, connection to utilities. Mobile home
subdivision shall meet the following standards:



            1.   The minimum tract size of the mobile home
subdivision shall not be less than two acres and shall not contain less than
ten mobile home spaces; and



            2.   Each mobile home space provided at the site
shall not be less than 3,000 square feet. This space will include access
roads, automobile parking, accessory building space and recreational area.



   (D)   Procedural variance. Where a proposed subdivision would
contain five or less parcels or plots of land and no new streets, the
procedure of preparing a preliminary plat may be waived by the Planning
Commission.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. VII)



§ 154.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   No plat or plan of a subdivision of land located within the
jurisdiction of the Planning Commission shall be admitted to the records of
the county or received or recorded by the County Clerk until the plat has
received final approval in writing by the Planning Commission as provided in
the KRS 100.329. Admission to the records shall not be construed as approval.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. VIII)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS
100.201 to 100.347 or any of the regulations adopted pursuant hereunder for
which no other penalty is provided, shall upon conviction be fined not less
than $10 but no more than $500 for each conviction. Each day of violation
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person, owner or agent who violates this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each lot
or parcel which was the subject of sale or transfer, or a contract for sale
or transfer.



(2000 Code, App. A, Art. VIII)



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   155.001   Title



   155.002   Purpose



   155.003   Definitions



   155.004   Zoning affects every building and use



   155.005   Nonconforming uses



   155.006   Nonconforming buildings and structures



   155.007   Discontinuance of nonconforming uses



   155.008   Rear dwellings prohibited



   155.009   Reductions in lot area



   155.010   Off-street automobile parking and storage



   155.011   Off-street loading and unloading space



   155.012   Planning and Zoning Agency



Establishment of Districts



   155.025   Use districts



   155.026   Boundaries of districts



Provisions Governing Residential Districts



   155.040   General provisions for residential districts



   155.041   R-1 Districts (Low Density Residential)



   155.042   R-2 Districts (Medium Density Residential)



   155.043   R-3 Districts (High Density Residential)



   155.044   R-4 Districts (Multi-Family Residential)



   155.045   Townhouses



   155.046   R-1 Agriculture



Provisions Governing Business Districts



   155.060   Neighborhood Business Districts (B-1)



   155.061   General Business District (B-2)



   155.062   Central Business District (B-3)



   155.063   Highway Business District (B-4)



Provisions Governing Industrial Districts



   155.075   Light Industrial Districts (I-1)



   155.076   Heavy Industrial District (I-2)



Exceptions and Modifications



   155.090   Lot of record



   155.091   Group housing



   155.092   Exceptions to height limitations



   155.093   Exceptions, modifications, and provisions as to location
of liquor and malt beverage sales/production



Enforcement



   155.105   Enforcing Officer



   155.106   Building permits and certificates of occupancy



   155.107   Duties of Building Inspector, Board of Zoning Adjustment,
City Council and courts on matters of appeal



   155.108   Remedies



Board of Zoning Adjustment



   155.120   Creation and appointment



   155.121   Procedure



   155.122   Appeals; how taken



   155.123   Stay of proceedings



   155.124   Powers



Amendment



   155.140   Procedure



   155.141   Public hearing



   155.142   Approval of the Planning Commission



 



   155.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.001  TITLE.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Campbellsville, Kentucky".



   (B)   The zoning map herein referred to, which is identified by the
title "Zoning Map of Campbellsville, Kentucky" originally dated April 4,
1983, and all explanatory matter thereon are hereby adopted and made a part
of this chapter. Text amendments shall be made as necessary.



(2000 Code, App. B, Art. I)



§ 155.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have
been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of
promoting the public health, safety and morals and the convenience, order,
prosperity and general welfare of the community. They have been designed to
lessen congestion in the streets to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding
of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other
public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among
other things, as to the character of each district and its peculiar
suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
city.



   (B)   As a result of a local option election on September 20, 2016,
the zoning regulations and districts as set forth herein are also to provide
for appropriate locations for the sale of liquor and malt beverages whether
through retail package liquor sales and retail malt beverage sales in stores,
taverns, or table restaurants serving alcohol or in lawful form in
micro-breweries, small farm wineries, distilleries, breweries or wineries as
may be licensed under all applicable law for such sales. Regulation of the
locations for such sales is founded on the goals and objectives of the 2016
Campbellsville comprehensive plan updates, the zoning ordinance as a whole, a
rational basis, and is in the interests of the health, safety and welfare of
the city of Campbellsville. This section is a text amendment to the zoning
ordinance and is intended to be severable so that should any portion of this
text amendment be declared invalid, inoperative or void for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision, opinion, or judgment shall in
no way impair the remaining portions, sections, or parts of sections of this
which ordinance, which said remaining sections shall be and remain in full
force and effect.



(2000 Code, App. B, Art. II)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 155.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense include the future. Words used in the singular
number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A detached building which is subordinate to the
principal or main building on the lot and which is used for purposes
customarily incidental to those of the principal building.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use customarily incidental to the use of a building
for dwelling purposes and including the office or studio of a physician or
surgeon, dentist, artist, musician, lawyer, architect, teacher or similar
professional person residing on the premises; workshops not conducted for
profit and equipped with power not exceeding one-half rated horsepower; and
customary home occupations such as millinery, dressmaking and hairdressing
conducted by a person or persons residing on the premises.



   AGRICULTURAL USE.  All forms of agriculture, the growing of crops in
the open, dairying, grazing, the raising and maintaining of poultry and other
livestock, horticulture, viticulture, enclosed and open plant nursery,
nursery sales and forestry uses, provided, however, that the land shall
consist of at least one acre in one parcel under common ownership or
operation. The solid waste disposal sites, commercial feed lots, boarding
stables or dog kennels shall be deemed an AGRICULTURAL USE regardless of the
size of the tract of land used, small farm wineries licensed under KRS
243.155, and farm wineries licensed under the provisions of KRS 243.156.



   AGRICULTURAL USE AND STRUCTURES, ACCESSORY.  Those structures and/or
use which are normally required in the operation of permitted agricultural
uses. The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall determine all questions regarding
the uses and structures.



   ALLEY.  Any public or private way less than 20 feet in width which is
set aside as a permanent right-of-way for public travel and which serves as a
secondary means of access to abutting property. In the event a public or
private way is designated as an alley by name, its width shall determine
whether it is an ALLEY or a “street” within this definition.



   ALTERATION OF BUILDING.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns and girders except a change as may be
required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from
that of one district classification to another; or any movement of a building
from one location to another.



   APARTMENT HOUSE.  See DWELLING, MULTIPLE.



   APPEAL. A request for a review by the Board of Zoning Adjustment
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA, BUILDING.  The total area taken of a horizontal plane at the
average ground elevation of the principal building and all accessory
buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps. That area shall
be calculated to determine “maximum lot coverage”.



   BLOCK.  The length of a street between two street intersections or,
where the distance between street intersections is greater than 1,400 feet, a
street length of not less than 1,000 feet.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  A commercial dwelling other than a hotel where, for
compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals are provided.
Those uses are permitted only in those zones permitting hotels or motels.



   BREWERY. Any place or premises where malt beverages are manufactured
for sale, including all offices, granaries, mash rooms, cooling rooms,
vaults, yards and storerooms connected with the premises; or where any part
of the process of the manufacture of malt beverages is carried on; or where
any apparatus connected with the manufacture is kept or used or where any of
the products of brewing or fermentation are stored or kept.



   BUFFER.  A buffer strip is a landscaped area required in commercial
and industrial zones. The areas lie on the periphery of the commercial or
industrial zones where they adjoin residentially zoned property. The buffer
strips are intended to provide visual separation between the adjoining zones
and depending on the anticipated noise levels, a buffer or reduction of noise
entering the residential zone. The BUFFER, in addition to evergreen
plantings, may include combinations of vegetative and structural barriers.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattels. The word BUILDING shall include lunch wagons, house trailers and
similar structures whether stationary or movable. Includes the word STRUCTURE.



   BUILDING AREA OF A LOT.  The portion of a lot bounded by the required
rear and side yards and the building setback line.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from average grade at the
building plane facing the public road or right-of-way to the highest line of
the roof surface. HEIGHT as applied to a story, means the vertical distance
from top to top of two successive finished floor surfaces.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or his or her duly
authorized representative.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  A line delineating the minimum allowable
distance between the street right-of-way and the front of a structure. The
BUILDING SETBACK LINE is parallel to or concentric with the street
right-of-way. The area between the street right-of-way and the front of the
structure is the front yard.



   BUSINESS SERVICES.  Any activity conducted for gain which renders
services primarily to other commercial and industrial enterprises, or which
services and repairs appliances and machines used in a home or business.



   CENTER LINE OF STREET.  The line surveyed and monumented by the
governing body as the center of the street right-of-way. If the CENTER LINE
has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be the line running midway
between the outside curbs or ditches of the street.



   CLINIC.  See PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.



   CLUB.  A private organization catering exclusively to members and
their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes
which are not conducted primarily for gain, providing that any vending
stands, merchandising or commercial activities are conducted only as required
generally for the membership of the CLUB.



   CLUSTERED HOUSING UNITS.  Housing which may be permitted by the Board
to have reduced (potentially zero) side and rear yards within a single
development. The permission, if granted, shall be based on a development plan
of a tract in single ownership at the time of development.



   CONDOMINIUM.  A clustered or multifamily dwelling designed for
individual ownership of dwelling units, but joint ownership and/or
responsibility for maintenance and upkeep of buildings, grounds, and
recreational facilities.



   COVERAGE.  The lot area covered by all buildings located therein,
including the area covered by all overhanging roofs.



   COUNTRY CLUB.  A chartered, non-profit membership club, with or
without dining facilities and lounge, catering primarily to its membership,
providing one or more of the following recreational and social amenities:
golf, riding, outdoor recreation, clubhouse, locker room.



   DAY NURSERIES, PRIVATE.  Any place, home or institution on which
receives six or more young children conducted for cultivating the normal
aptitude for exercise, play and observation.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.



   DISTILLERY. Any place or premises where distilled spirits are
manufactured for sale, and which are registered in the office of any
collector of internal revenue for the United States. It includes any United
States government bonded warehouse.



   DISTRICT.  Any section or sections of the city for which the
regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and
coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.  A commercial restaurant which caters primarily
to vehicular trade by providing the delivery of food to the person within a
vehicle for consumption on site.



   DWELLING.  A building designed, arranged or used for permanent living
quarters for one or more families and including but not limited to residences
and apartment buildings. The word DWELLING shall not include hotels or motels
or other structures designed or used for transient residence, house trailers
used for transient residence, the portions of tourist homes used for
transient residence or the portions of boarding or rooming houses used for
transient residence.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED.  A dwelling with one or more party walls, or one
party wall in the case of a dwelling at the end of a group of attached
dwellings.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE.  Two or more attached dwelling units, including
but not limited to condominiums and row houses.



   FAMILY.  An individual, two or more persons related by blood or
marriage, or a group of not more than five persons who need not be related by
blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit. The word FAMILY shall not include groups of more than five
persons occupying nursing homes, club houses, fraternity houses, sorority
houses, dormitories or nursing homes although a portion of a building in this
category may consist of one or more dwelling units occupied by a FAMILY or
FAMILIES.



   FLOODPLAIN.  The area in the community subject to a 1% or greater
chance of flooding in any given year.



   GARAGE.  A structure used for, or designed, arranged or intended to be
used for, housing or caring for automobiles, other self-propelled vehicles
and trailers.



   GOVERNING BODY.  Mayor and City Council.



   GRADE.  A reference plane representing the average of finished ground
level adjoining the building at a specific exterior wall.



   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  The vertical distance measured from the
established average sidewalk grade or street grade or finished grade at the
building line, whichever is highest, to the highest point of the building.



   HISTORICAL MONUMENTS AND/OR STRUCTURES.  Any antique structure or
building existing contemporaneously with and commonly associated with an
outstanding event or period of history, and any structure or building in
which the relics and/or mementos of the event or period are housed and
preserved.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  An occupation or profession for gain or support
conducted entirely within a dwelling by a member or members of a family
residing on the premises and which provides regular employment for not more
than one person who does not reside on the premises.



   HOTEL.  A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding
place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which there
are more than 12 sleeping rooms usually occupied singly and no provision is
made for cooking in any individual room or apartment and which maintains an
inner lobby for registration through which all tenants must pass to gain
access.



   HOUSE TRAILER.  Any vehicle, trailer, or similar portable structure,
with or without its own motive power, having no foundation other than wheels,
jacks or skirtings, used or designed or constructed to be used as a
conveyance on the public streets and designed or constructed to permit
occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes. The term HOUSE TRAILER shall
include the terms MOBILE HOME, TRAILER COACH, TRAILER CABIN and similar terms.



   LIQUOR. Brewed, fermented, or distilled spirits for human consumption,
including beer, wine and/or distilled liquor.



   LOT.  A portion, parcel or plot of land devoted to a common use or a
portion, parcel or plot of land occupied by a single building, a single
building with customary accessory buildings, or a group of buildings devoted
to a common use, including the open spaces required under this chapter, and
having its principal frontage on a dedicated street.



      (1)   CORNER LOT.  A lot which abuts on two intersecting
streets at their intersections.



      (2)   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT.  Any lot other than a corner lot
which abuts on two streets.



      (3)   INTERIOR LOT.  Any lot other than a corner lot and
including double frontage lots.



   LOT DEPTH.  The distance from the mid-point of the front lot line to
the rear lot line measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



   LOT LINE. The boundary dividing a given lot from a street, an alley, an
adjoining lot, or an adjoining tract of unsubdivided land.



      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE.  The boundary between an interior lot
and the right-of-way of a street. In the case of a corner lot or a double
frontage lot, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be the boundary between the lot and
the right-of-way of the street determined to be the front street as
distinguished from the street determined to be the side street or rear street
respectively.



      (2)   REAR LOT LINE.  The lot line opposite the front lot
line, or the lot line opposite the lot line determined to be the front lot
line in the case of a double frontage lot. In the case of a triangular lot or
other non-rectangular lot, the REAR LOT LINE shall mean a line within the
lot, ten feet long, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front
lot line.



      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE.  Any lot line other than the front and
rear lot lines.



   LOT OF RECORD.  Any lot within the present incorporated limits of the
city which is duly recorded and on file in the office of the County Clerk as
a separate unit of land at the time of the enactment of this chapter, or any
lot in any area annexed by the city after the enactment of this chapter which
is duly recorded and on file in the office of the County Clerk as a separate
unit of land at the time of annexation.



   LOT WIDTH.  The distance between side lot lines measured from points
on the side lot lines at a distance from the front lot line equal to the
front yard depth required in the district in which the lot is located.



   MICROBREWERY. Any place or premises where malt beverages are
manufactured for sale, either on premises or off premises, in quantities not
to exceed 50,000 barrels in one year.



   MOTEL.  A building or group of buildings used for the temporary
residence of motorists or travelers.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  A use of a building, structure or land which was
lawful at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter but which
does not conform with the permitted use provisions of this chapter for the
district in which it is located.



   OPEN SPACE.  An unoccupied space open from the ground to the sky.



   PARKING LOT.  An off-street facility including parking spaces along
with adequate provision for drives and aisles for maneuvering and giving
access, and for entrance and exit, all laid out in a way to be usable for the
parking of more than six automobiles.



   PARKING SPACE.  An area required for parking one automobile which
shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 20 feet long, not including
passageways.



   PERSON.  Includes a firm, copartnership or corporation.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  Campbellsville Planning and Zoning Commission.



   PLAT.  A map, plan or layout of a city, town, section or subdivision
indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING.  A building, including covered porches, carports
and attached garages, in which is conducted the main or principal use of the
lot on which the building is located. In any residential district, a dwelling
shall be deemed to be the PRINCIPAL BUILDING on the lot on which it is
located.



   PRINCIPAL USE.  The specific primary purpose for which land or a
building is used.



   PRIVATE GARAGE.  A garage used by persons residing on the premises for
storage only and in which no industry or business is conducted.



   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.  Those activities include: medical, legal,
architectural, engineering, financial and business consulting services and
accounting offices. All the on-site activities shall be conducted within an
office and generally within normal working hours.



   PUBLIC GARAGE.  Any garage which is open to the public, operated for
profit, and used for storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing or
equipping of automobiles, other motor vehicles and trailers.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department
or board duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under state or municipal
regulations, to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communication,
telegraph, transportation or water.



   RECREATIONAL AREAS.  Country clubs, riding stables, golf courses and
similar non-commercial recreation areas and facilities or recreation centers,
including swimming pools.



   REQUIRED SETBACK.  A distance required to obtain the minimum front,
side and rear yards required in this chapter.



   RETAIL MALT BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT or RETAIL MALT BEVERAGE SALES
STORE/FACILITY. Any place ore premises where malt beverages are sold to
consumers for consumption off premises and not on site and which is not a
retail package liquor sales store or facility.  For example, a retail malt
beverage establishment or retail malt beverage sales store/facility might
sell malt beverages such as beer, but the definition does not contemplate
such store/facility selling fermented beverages such as wine or distilled
spirits such as whiskey, bourbon, gin, vodka, etc.



   RETAIL SALES.  The commercial transfer of merchandise which is subject
to state and local sales taxation including: pharmaceuticals, gardening
supplies, landscaping supplies, building supplies, hardware, housewares,
clothing, cloth, appliances, furniture, sporting goods and grocery supplies.
The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall determine any questions of use.



   ROADSIDE STAND.  A temporary farm structure used or intended to be
solely used by the owner or tenant for the sale of a seasonal farm product(s)
of the farm on which it is located.



   ROOMING HOUSE. A building where lodging only is provided for
compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 12 persons. A building which
has accommodations for more than 12 persons shall be defined as a HOTEL under
the terms of this chapter.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A municipal or community sewage disposal system of a
type approved by the appropriate local and state agencies.



   SCHOOL, PRIVATE.  An institution of learning, including colleges and
universities, that is not tax-supported.



   SCHOOL, PUBLIC.  A tax-supported institution of learning, including
colleges and universities.



   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY.



      (1)   An establishment providing home type washing, drying and
ironing machines and/or customer operated type dry cleaning machines.



      (2)   The establishment may be provided to residents of
cluster or multi-family housing if no advertisement or general solicitation
is undertaken and where the Board determines the scale of operation to be
accessory to the dwelling units.



   SERVICE STATION.  A building, buildings, premises or portions thereof
which are used or arranged, designed or intended to be used for the retail
sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle, motor boat or aircraft fuels.



   SHALL.  Always mandatory and not merely directory.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  A group of commercial establishments planned,
developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on
the property, and related in its location, size and type of shops to the
trade area which the unit serves.



   SMALL FARM WINERY. A winery producing wines, in an amount not to exceed
50,000 gallons in a calendar year.



   STORY.  The part of a building included between any floor and the
floor or roof next above.



   STREET.  Any public or private way 20 feet or more in width set aside
as a permanent right-of-way for vehicular travel by the general public and
affording the principal means of access to abutting property. The word STREET
shall include the words HIGHWAY, ROAD, PIKE, AVENUE, BOULEVARD, LANE, PLACE,
DRIVE, COURT and similar terms, but it shall not include “limited-access
highway”, “controlled-access highway” or similar terms used to
designate highwayswhich do not afford direct access to abutting property. In
the event a public or private way is designated as an “alley” by name,
its width shall determine whether it is a STREET or an alley within this
definition.



   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The dividing line between a lot and the
right-of-way of a public street, or the dividing line between a lot and the
right-of-way of a private street over which two or more dominant estates have
the right-of-way.



   STREET GRADE.  The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing
grade of the street at the midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.



   STREET, INTERSECTING.  Any street which joins another street at an
angle, whether or not it crosses the other.



   STREET LINE.  A lot line dividing a lot from a street.



   STRUCTURE.  Any constructed or erected material or combination of
materials, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the
ground. The term STRUCTURE includes, but is not limited to, buildings, sheds,
storage bins, fences, billboards and signs, stadiums, swimming pools and
tents.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   For a structure built prior to the enactment of this
chapter, any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the costs
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the total replacement cost of the structure
either:



         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or



         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.



      (2)   The term does not include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.



   TABLE RESTAURANT SERVING ALCOHOL (“TABLE RESTAURANT SA”).Any place
or premises where malt beverages or liquor are sold to consumers for
consumption on site and which derives more than 50% of its revenue from other
than aggregate sales of malt beverages and/or liquor.



   TAVERN. Any place or premises where malt beverages or liquor are sold
to consumers for consumption on site which is not a table restaurant.



   TOTAL FLOOR AREA.  The area of all floors of a building including
finished attics, finished basements and covered porches.



   TOURIST HOME.  A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are
provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.



   TRAILER PARK.



      (1)   An area of land upon which two or more house trailers,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and including any building, structure,
vehicle or enclosure used or intended to be used as a part of the facilities
or equipment of the trailer park.



      (2)   The term TRAILER PARK shall include the term TRAILER
COURT and similar terms.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which a building, structure or land
is occupied, designed, constructed or maintained.



   USED or OCCUPIED.  As applied to any land or building shall be
construed to include the words INTENDED, ARRANGED OR DESIGNED TO BE USED OR
OCCUPIED.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would prohibit the reasonable use of the
property. To provide a VARIANCE, the Board shall determine that the property
in question differs significantly from other parcels in the same district in
terms of slope or size or shape.



   WINERY. Any place or premises in which wine is manufactured from any
fruit, or brandies are distilled as a by-product of wine or other fruit, or
cordials are compounded.



   YARD.  An open space on the same lot with a principal building,
unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground to the
sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly
permitted by the provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   FRONT YARD.  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot
with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and measured
between the front lot lines and the nearest part of the principal building.



      (2)   REAR YARD.  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot
with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and measured
between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.



      (3)   SIDE YARD.  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot
with a principal building, measured between the side lot line and the nearest
part of the principal building and extending from the rear line of the front
yard to the front line of the rear yard.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 31)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 155.004  ZONING AFFECTS EVERY BUILDING AND USE.



   No building, structure, land or portion thereof shall hereafter be used
and no building, structure or portion thereof shall hereafter be constructed,
erected, reconstructed, altered, repaired or moved unless for a use expressly
permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 32)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.005  NONCONFORMING USES.



   Lawful nonconforming uses existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter or any amendment thereto may be continued subject to the following
provisions.



   (A)   A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any but a
conforming use. When a nonconforming use has been changed to conforming use,
it shall not be changed again to any nonconforming use.



   (B)   A nonconforming use of a building or buildings shall not be
materially expanded in its scope or extended to include either additional
land or buildings after the enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter.



   (C)   Normal maintenance or alteration may be performed on
nonconforming structures.



   (D)   When a nonconforming use of building, structure or land has
been discontinued for a period of 60 consecutive months, it shall not be
re-established or changed to any use not in conformity with the provisions of
the district in which it is located. Non-operative status or vacating of the
premises or building shall be evidence of a discontinued use. Sixty
consecutive months shall constitute the irrefutable presumption of voluntary
discontinued use.



   (E)   No building or structure designed or intended to be utilized
for a nonconforming use shall be constructed or allowed unless construction
is already underway at the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of
this chapter and is being diligently prosecuted so that the building or
structure will be completed within 18 months from the time of the enactment
or subsequent amendment of this chapter. All outstanding building permits for
construction which does not meet these requirements shall be rendered null
and void by the enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 33)



§ 155.006  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   Lawful nonconforming buildings and structures existing at the time of
the passage of this chapter or any amendment thereto shall be allowed to
remain subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be extended or
enlarged unless the extension or enlargement complies with all of the
requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located; and



   (B)   Any nonconforming building or structure which is damaged by
fire, flood, wind or other act of God or humans to the extent of 50% or more
of its fair sales value immediately prior to damage shall not be repaired or
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 34)



§ 155.007  DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   All nonconforming junk yards, lumber yards, coal and fuel
yards, used automobile sales lots, machinery and equipment and similar uses
of open land not involving an investment in permanent buildings and
facilities of 50% or more of the assessed valuation for tax purposes of the
land on which they stand shall be torn down, altered or otherwise made to
conform with the provisions and regulations of this chapter within one year
of the date of its enactment.



   (B)   All nonconforming signs and awnings attached to buildings or
other structures shall be removed, altered or otherwise made to conform with
the provisions and regulations of this chapter by [(sic)].



(2000 Code, App. B, § 35)



§ 155.008  REAR DWELLINGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Only one principal building and its customary accessory
buildings shall hereinafter be erected on any lot except as provided in §
155.091 below for group housing.



   (B)   No dwelling or house trailer to be used for dwelling or
sleeping purposes shall be erected or placed on a lot which does not abut on
at least one public street for at least 40 feet.



   (C)   No building in the rear of a principal building on the same
lot may be used for residential purposes unless the use is approved as a
special exception by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. The Board shall
determine that adequate vehicular access will be provided by a public street
and that the criteria for group housing set forth in § 155.091 below are met.



   (D)   The equipping of an accessory building with a sink, cooking
stove or other kitchen facilities shall be prima facie evidence that the
building is not an accessory building but is a separate dwelling which must
meet all minimum standards of lot area, lot width and yard sizes of the
district in which it is located.



   (E)   No house trailer intended for dwelling or sleeping purposes
shall be placed on any lot on which a structure used for dwelling purposes
already exists unless the house trailer is so placed that it meets all of the
requirements for a dwelling located in the district. Specifically, a house
trailer must be located so that the portion of the lot assigned to it and on
which it is located abuts on at least one public street for a distance of not
less than 40 feet; the portion of the lot on which the house trailer is
located must meet the lot area, lot width and yard requirements of the
district in which it is located; the house trailer shall not be placed in the
required lot area or in a yard or open space required for any other
structures; and the house trailer may not be connected to electric, gas,
telephone, water, sewer or any other utility or service in, through or at
another structure as all utility and service connections must be made
directly to the house trailer from regular utility service lines in the same
manner that connections are provided to other dwelling structures in the area.



   (F)   A house trailer owned by a resident of a dwelling unit on a
particular lot may be located on the lot provided it is parked at the rear of
the lot, it meets the setback or distance from lot lines requirements for an
accessory building in the district in which it is located, it has no utility
or service connection, and it is not used for dwelling or sleeping purposes.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 36)



§ 155.009  REDUCTIONS IN LOT AREA.



   No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of
record, shall be reduced in area so that lot width, lot area per dwelling
unit, building area, yard sizes or other requirements of this chapter are not
maintained. The provisions of this section shall not apply when a portion of
a lot is required for a public purpose.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 37)



§ 155.010  OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Permanent off-street automobile storage, parking or standing
space shall be provided as set forth below at the time of the erection of any
building or structure, at the time any principal building or structure is
enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms,
seats or floor area, or before conversion from one zoning use or occupancy to
another. The space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or
alley. This space shall be deemed to be required open space associated with
the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in
any manner. No required front yard or portion thereof in any residential
district shall be utilized to provide parking space required in this chapter.
These parking space requirements shall not apply in the Central Business
District (B-3). At least the following minimum parking space requirements for
specific uses shall be provided.



      (1)   Bowling alleys, recreation centers, swimming pools,
skating rinks and other recreation and amusement facilities: one parking
space for every five customers computed on the basis of maximum servicing
capacity at any one time plus one additional space for every two persons
regularly employed on the premises.



      (2)   Clubhouses and permanent meeting places of veterans,
business, civic, fraternal, labor and similar organizations: one parking
space for every 50 square feet of aggregate floor area in the auditorium,
assembly hall and dining room of the building plus one additional space for
every two persons regularly employed on the premises.



      (3)   Dormitories, fraternity houses and sorority houses: one
parking space for every two beds occupied at maximum capacity. This
requirement is in addition to the parking space requirements for educational
establishments set forth in division (A)(27) below.



      (4)   Funeral homes and undertaking establishments: parking or
storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business
plus one parking space for every two persons regularly employed on the
premises and one space for every six seats in the auditorium or chapel of the
establishment. If the establishment does not have a chapel or auditorium, the
additional parking to be required for funeral visitors shall be determined by
the Board based on the number of funerals that can be handled at one time,
the size of the facilities and other relevant factors.



      (5)   Hospitals: one parking space for every two beds intended
for patients, excluding bassinets.



      (6)   House trailers: one parking space for each trailer used
for dwelling or sleeping purposes.



      (7)   Indoor retail businesses: parking or storage space for
all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus four parking
spaces for the each 1,000 square feet of total floor area.



      (8)   Industrial plants and facilities: parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the industrial use
plus one parking space for every three employees on the premises at maximum
employment on a single shift.



      (9)   Junior and senior high schools: one parking space for
every five seats occupied at maximum capacity in the assembly hall,
auditorium, stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity on the school grounds
of campus. If the school has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or
gymnasium, one parking space shall be provided for each person regularly
employed at the school plus two additional spaces for each classroom.



      (10)   Libraries, museums, post offices, civic centers and
similar establishments: parking or storage space for all vehicles used
directly in the operation of the establishments plus four parking spaces for
the first 1,000 square feet of total floor area and one additional space for
every additional 150 square feet of floor area.



      (11)   Medical and dental clinics: three parking spaces for
each doctor plus one additional space for every two regular employees.



      (12)   Nurses homes: one parking space for every two beds
occupied at maximum capacity. This requirement is in addition to the parking
space requirements of hospitals set forth in division (A)(5) above.



      (13)   Offices: one parking space for every 200 square feet of
office space.



      (14)   Outdoor retail businesses: parking or storage space for
all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus two parking
spaces for each person employed on the premises based on maximum seasonal
employment, and additional space as may be required by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment based on the nature of the business and other relevant factors.



      (15)   Public and private elementary schools: one parking
space for each person regularly employed at the school, plus one additional
space for each classroom.



      (16)   Public garages: indoor or outdoor parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus
three parking spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises.



      (17)   Repair shops, plumbing shops, electrical shops, roofing
shops and other service establishments: parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus two parking spaces
for each person regularly employed on the premises.



      (18)   Residences and apartment houses: one parking space for
each dwelling unit or apartment.



      (19)   Restaurants and other eating and drinking
establishments: one parking space for every 100 square feet of total floor
area.



      (20)   Rooming and boarding houses: one parking space for each
sleeping room occupied by roomers or boarders plus one space for each
dwelling unit on the premises, and plus one additional space for every two
persons regularly employed on the premises.



      (21)   Self-service laundries: one parking space for every two
washing machines.



      (22)   Service stations: parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus one parking space
for each gas pump, three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility, and
one space for every two persons employed on the premises at maximum
employment on a single shift.



      (23)   Theaters, auditoriums, churches, stadiums, and other
places of public assembly: one parking space for every five seats occupied at
maximum capacity.



      (24)   Tourist homes, tourist courts, motels and hotels: one
parking space for each sleeping room offered for tourist accommodation plus
one space for each dwelling unit on the premises and plus one additional
space for every two persons regularly employed on the premises.



      (25)   Trailer parks: one parking space for each trailer space
plus one additional space for every two persons regularly employed on the
premises.



      (26)   Transportation terminals: one parking space for every
100 square feet of waiting room space plus one additional space for every two
persons regularly employed on the premises.



      (27)   Universities, colleges, academies and similar
institutions of higher learning: one parking space for every five seats
occupied at maximum capacity in the assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or
gymnasium of greatest capacity on the campus. If the institution has no
assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium, one parking space shall be
provided for each person regularly employed at the institution plus five
additional spaces for each classroom.



      (28)   Warehouses, freight terminals and trucking terminals:
parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the
business plus two parking spaces for each person regularly employed on the
premises.



      (29)   Wholesale businesses: parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus two parking spaces
for each person employed on the premises based on maximum seasonal employment.



   (B)   If the vehicle storage space or standing space required above
cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is
conducted, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may permit the space to be provided
on other off-street property provided the space lies within 400 feet of the
main entrance to the principal use. The vehicle parking space shall be deemed
to be required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not
thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.



   (C)   Vehicle parking or storage space maintained in connection with
an existing and continuing principal building, structure or land use on the
effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto up to the number required
by this chapter shall be continued and may not be counted as serving a new
building, structure, addition or land use; nor shall any required parking
space be substituted for an off-street loading and unloading space, nor any
required loading and unloading space substituted for a parking space.



   (D)   The required parking space for any number of separate uses may
be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be
assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking
space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance
will be at night or on Sunday may be assigned to a use which will be closed
at night or on Sunday.



   (E)   No off-street automobile parking or storage area shall be used
or designed, arranged or constructed to be used in a manner that will
obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, alley or adjoining
property.



   (F)   The parking spaces provided along with their necessary
driveways and passageways shall be paved in a manner adequate to eliminate
dust and mud problems. Plans for the parking spaces are to be included with
the plans for construction of buildings and other structures and are to be
presented to the Building Inspector at the time applications for building
permits are filed. The parking areas are to be kept free of obstructions and
unsightly objects. Intersections of parking areas with sidewalks or street
pavements must be made in an approved manner. Provision must be made for the
adequate drainage of parking areas.



   (G)   No commercial motor vehicle of more than one ton capacity
shall be parked or stored overnight either on or off the street in any
residential district.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 38)



§ 155.011  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.



   (A)   Every building or structure used for business, trade or
industry shall provide space as herein indicated for the loading and
unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley.



   (B)   The space shall have access to a public alley or, if there is
no alley, to a street; off-street loading and unloading space shall be in
addition to and not considered as meeting a part of the requirements for
off-street parking space.



   (C)   Off-street loading and unloading space shall not be used or
designed, intended or constructed to be used in a manner to obstruct or
interfere with the free use of any street, alley or adjoining property.



   (D)   At least the following off-street loading and unloading space
requirements for specific uses shall be provided:



      (1)   Retail businesses and service establishments: one
off-street loading and unloading space at least 12 feet by 35 feet for every
3,000 square feet of total floor area;



      (2)   Industrial plants: one off-street loading and unloading
space at least 12 feet by 50 feet for every 10,000 square feet of total floor
area;



      (3)   Warehouses and wholesale storage facilities: one
off-street loading and unloading space at least 12 feet by 50 feet for every
7,500 square feet of total floor area; and



      (4)   Freight terminals and trucking terminals: one off-street
loading and unloading space at least 12 feet by 50 feet for every 5,000
square feet of total floor area.



   (E)   (1)   Obstructions to vision at street intersections
prohibited. Within the triangular or other shaped area formed on a lot by a
straight line connecting the right-of-way lines of an intersecting street and
a railroad or the right-of-way lines of two intersecting streets at points 20
feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, there shall be no
obstructions to vision between a height of three and one-half feet and a
height of ten feet above the average grade of each street or railroad. This
requirement applies to fences, walls, shrubbery, signs, marquees and other
obstructions to vision, but it does not prohibit a necessary retaining wall.
The provisions of this section do not apply within the Central Business
District (B-3).



      (2)   Front yard requirements for corner lots. Corner lots
shall meet the front yard requirements of the district or districts in which
they are located on both the street considered as the front street and the
street considered as the side street.



      (3)   Front yard requirements for double frontage lots. Double
frontage lots shall meet the front yard requirements of the district or
districts in which they are located on both of the streets upon which they
front.



      (4)   Required yard not to be used by another building. No
part of a yard required about any building for the purpose of complying with
the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard required
by this chapter for another building.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 39)



§ 155.012  PLANNING AND ZONING AGENCY.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Planning and Zoning Agency of
the city. The agency shall be charged with all duties, functions and
responsibilities more particularly set forth in KRS 100, including, but not
limited to the responsibility of overseeing the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Board of Adjustments and the issuance of building permits.



   (B)   The agency shall also collect fees for building and sign
permits, city engineer services and plan review fees, including other
required fees currently associated with planning and zoning. The agency shall
further maintain and update the Comprehensive Plan, and administer all other
planning and zoning duties and responsibilities which are currently
administered by the City Housing Authority, including those which may now or
hereafter become necessary.



   (C)   There is further established the position of Director of the
Planning and Zoning Agency, who shall oversee and administer all services,
activities and responsibilities of the Planning and Zoning Agency. The
Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and his or her appointment and
salary shall be confirmed by the City Council. The Director shall serve an
indefinite term at the pleasure and discretion of the Mayor.



   (D)   There may be implemented a more detailed outline of the
policies, procedures, requirements and the like, of the Planning and Zoning
Agency and/or the position of Director of the Planning and Zoning Agency.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 4-1-2002)



ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS



§ 155.025  USE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into 11
districts designated as follows:



      (1)   R-1 Residential District (Low Density);



      (2)   R-2 Residential District (Medium Density);



      (3)   R-3 Residential District (High Density);



      (4)   R-4 Residential District (Multi-Family District);



      (5)   B-1 Neighborhood Business District;



      (6)   B-2 General Business District;



      (7)   B-3 Central Business District;



      (8)   B-4 Highway Business District;



      (9)   I-1 Light Industrial District;



      (10)   I-2 Heavy Industrial District; and



      (11)   M-1 Municipal District.



   (B)   Provisions governing each use district are provided in the
following sections except M-1 which shall be reserved exclusively for
property owned by the city.  Any property so zoned and sold by the city
shall be rezoned upon transfer by the city.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 41)  (Ord. 12-04, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 155.026  BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as
shown on the zoning map, which is a part of this chapter and which is on file
in the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as
approximately following the center lines of streets, alleys, highways,
railroads or railroad right-of-way lines or the lines extended, the center
lines or railroad right-of-way lines or the lines extended shall be construed
to be the boundaries.



      (2)   Where a district boundary line is indicated as
approximately following the corporate limits line of the city, the corporate
limits line shall be construed to be the boundary line.



      (3)   Where a district boundary line is indicated as
approximately following a stream bed, the stream bed shall be construed to be
the district boundary line.



      (4)   Where a district boundary line is indicated as
approximately following a rear or side lot line or the line extended, the
rear or side lot line or the line extended shall be construed to be the
boundary line.



      (5)   Where district boundary lines are so indicated that they
are approximately parallel to the right-of-way lines of streets, the district
boundary lines, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be construed
as being parallel thereto and at a distance of 150 feet from the right-of-way
lines of the street.



      (6)   Where a district boundary line as appearing on the
zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the enactment of
subsequent amendment of this chapter or at the time the area in which the lot
is located is annexed to the city, if the portions of the lot lying in both
zoning districts have street frontage, the requirements to the district in
which the portion of the lot with the greatest street frontage lies shall
apply to the entire lot.



         (a)   If the lot is divided by the district boundary
line so that the portion of the lot in one zoning district has street
frontage and the portion of the lot in the other zoning district does not
have street frontage, the requirements of the district in which the portion
of the lot having street frontage lines shall apply to the entire lot.



         (b)   In the event that a double frontage lot is divided
by a district boundary line so that the portion of the lot fronting on one
street is in a different district from the portion of the lot fronting on the
other street, the requirements of the district in which each portion of the
lot is located shall apply to that portion.



         (c)   In the event one or both portions of a double
frontage lot divided by a zoning district boundary line are too small to meet
the area and yard requirements of the zoning districts in which they are
located, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may allow the requirements of one
district to apply to the entire lot.



         (d)   The Board shall make every effort to ensure that
the intent and spirit of this chapter are carried out and the public welfare
protected by its decision. Regardless of whether it lies in one or two zoning
districts, a double frontage lot must meet the front yard requirements on
both of the streets upon which it abuts.



      (7)   In any case not covered by the above rules or where
there is disagreement over the interpretation of the above rules, the exact
location of a district boundary line shall be determined by the Board of
Zoning Adjustment.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 42)



PROVISIONS GOVERNING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 155.040  GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Within all residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4), the following
regulations shall apply.



   (A)   Uses permitted:



      (1)   Single and multiple family dwellings including apartment
houses, customary general horticultural uses and buildings incidental thereto
including noncommercial greenhouses. In an R-1 District, the only dwelling
structures allowed shall be single-family dwellings;



      (2)   The following uses are special exceptions and require
approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment; nursery schools and
kindergartens; churches and other places of worship; parish houses; public
libraries; schools offering general educational courses and institutions of
higher learning; public parks and other public recreational facilities;
electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and other public
utility facilities; municipal, county, state and federal uses; cemeteries;
nursing homes; hospitals for human care; philanthropic institutions; radio,
telephone and television transmission towers and facilities; and clubs,
except a club the chief activity of which is customarily carried on as a
business. The Board of Zoning Adjustment may deny approval or attach certain
conditions and requirements to its approval which it feels are necessary in
order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the
proposed use would locate;



      (3)   Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to
any aforementioned permitted use, under the following conditions:



         (a)   The taking of boarders or tourists or the leasing
of rooms by the family resident on the premises. Not more than three rooms
shall be used for those purposes. For the purpose of advertising the use, one
sign not over two square feet in area may be used provided that it is
attached to the house. This use is prohibited in an R-1 District except with
the permission of the Board of Zoning Adjustment;



         (b)   Professional offices, studios or customary home
occupations conducted within the principal building but only by a person or
persons resident in the dwelling, provided not more than one person who does
not reside on the premises is employed regularly, and provided not more than
25% of the total floor area of any dwelling unit is devoted to the use. For
the purpose of advertising the use, one sign not over two square feet in area
may be used provided that it is attached to the house. No displays or change
in facade shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than a dwelling. This use
is prohibited in R-1 District except with the permission of the Board of
Zoning Adjustment; and



         (c)   One sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the building, furnishings or land upon which it is posted. This sign shall
not be more than 12 square feet in area.



      (4)   Private swimming pools, when they meet yard depth and
width requirements for principal buildings in the district in which they are
located, and when the swimming pool or the property on which it is located is
adequately fenced to prevent the free access of small children.



      (5)   Licensed family child care homes as defined in KRS
199.894 and as regulated by 922 KAR 2:100 shall be a permitted use in R-2,
R-3 and R-4 Districts.



   (B)   Uses prohibited:



      (1)   Advertising signs and billboards with the exception of
the signs specifically permitted under division (A)(3)(a) through (c) above
and a sign or signs already existing on the premise of a nonconforming use at
the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter or at the
time the area in which the nonconforming use is located is annexed to the
city provided the sign or signs advertise goods actually sold or services
actually rendered on the premises of the nonconforming use; and



      (2)   Any other use not specifically permitted under division
(A)(1) above or permitted as a special exception under this section.



   (C)   Height: no building or structure shall exceed two stories or
30 feet in height unless each side yard is increased over the required
minimum by five feet for every five feet, or fraction thereof, of additional
height over 30 feet. In no case shall the height exceed 50 feet.



   (D)   Front, side and rear yards: all buildings, except unattached
one-story buildings of accessory use shall meet at least the following yard
space requirements.



      (1)   (a)   Front yard depth:



            1.   R-1 District: 50 feet;



            2.   R-2 District: 40 feet;



            3.   R-3 District: 30 feet; and



            4.   R-4 District: 30 feet.



         (b)   In any residential district, if 50% or more of the
area of lots on the same side of a street between any two intersecting
streets have permanent dwelling structures on them at the time of the
enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter or at the time of
annexation of the area, all buildings constructed on or moved to the
remaining vacant lots or vacant area on the same side of the street and
between the two intersecting streets shall have front yard depths that are at
least as great as the average front yard depth of the existing dwelling
structures. However, in no case shall the front yard depth required under the
provisions of this division be less than 50% of the front yard depth required
in the district by the provisions of division (D)(1) above. A street which
enters from the opposite side and dead-ends into the street upon which the
area or lots in question front shall be considered an intersecting street for
the purposes of this division. The length of the area along the front street
to be considered in determining the front yard depth to be required shall be
measured between the right-of-way lines or the right-of-way lines extended of
the two intersecting streets which delineate the area. If the distance
measured along the front street between the right-of-way lines or
right-of-way lines extended of the nearest intersecting streets is greater
than 1,200 feet, the length of the area to be considered in determining the
front yard depth to be required shall include:



            1.   The width of the lot or area in question;



            2.   The distance from a lot line of the lot or
area in question to the nearest street right-of-way or a distance of 600 feet
whichever is less; and



            3.   The distance from the opposite lot line of
the lot or area in question to the nearest street right-of-way or a distance
of 600 feet whichever is less.



         (c)   Front yard on corner lots: all buildings and
structures placed on corner lots shall observe front yard requirements on
both streets.



      (2)   Rear yard depth:



         (a)   R-1 District: 25 feet;



         (b)   R-2 District: 25 feet;



         (c)   R-3 District: 25 feet; and



         (d)   R-4 District: 25 feet.



      (3)   Side yard width:



         (a)   R-1 District: 12 feet;



         (b)   R-2 District: ten feet;



         (c)   R-3 District: eight feet;



         (d)   R-4 District: eight feet for semi-detached; and



         (e)   R-4 District: zero feet for attached.



   (E)   Accessory buildings: no accessory building shall be erected in
any required front or side yard. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than 30% of any required rear yard, and they shall be at least five feet from
all lot lines and from any other building on the same lot.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 51)  (Ord. 14-01, passed 2-3-2014)



§ 155.041  R-1 DISTRICTS (LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL).



   (A)   Required lot area and lot width: minimum required lot area:
12,000 square feet; minimum required lot width at the building line: 100 feet.



   (B)   Building area: on any lot, the total area occupied by all
buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 30% of the total
area of the lot.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 52)



§ 155.042  R-2 DISTRICTS (MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL).



   (A)   Required lot area and lot width.



      (1)   Minimum required lot area for a single-family dwelling:
7,500 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum additional lot area required for each additional
dwelling unit in excess of one on the same lot: 3,500 square feet.



      (3)   Minimum required lot width at the building line for a
single-family dwelling: 75 feet.



      (4)   Minimum additional lot width required for each
additional dwelling unit in excess of one on the same lot: 15 feet.



   (B)   Building area. On any lot, the total area occupied by all
buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 35% of the total
area of the lot.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 53)



§ 155.043  R-3 DISTRICTS (HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL).



   (A)   Required lot area and lot width.



      (1)   Minimum required lot area for a single-family dwelling:
6,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum additional lot area required for each additional
dwelling unit in excess of one on the same lot: 3,000 square feet.



      (3)   Minimum required lot width at the building line for a
single-family dwelling: 60 feet.



      (4)   Minimum additional lot width required for each
additional dwelling unit in excess of one on the same lot: ten feet.



   (B)   Building area. On any lot the total area occupied by all
buildings including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 40% of the total
area of the lot.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 54)



§ 155.044  R-4 DISTRICTS (MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL).



   (A)   Required lot area and lot width: minimum required lot area:
6,000 square feet. Additional units shall have a minimum lot area of 1,000
square feet; minimum frontage for attached dwelling shall be 18 feet; minimum
lot width shall be 60 feet.



   (B)   Building area: on any lot, the total area occupied by all
buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 80% of the total
area of the lot.



   (C)   Proof of compliance with property laws:



      (1)   In order to maintain the integrity of R-4 Districts,
compliance with one of the following entities is required:



         (a)   Horizontal Property Law being KRS 381.805 et seq.;
or



         (b)   Mutual covenants incorporated in the deeds of the
properties as sold.



      (2)   These covenants shall be submitted to Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval prior to the endorsement of the development of
lots for multi-family residential use.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 55)



§ 155.045  TOWNHOUSES.



   (A)   Single-family attached or semi-detached units shall be
permitted in the residential R-2 and R-3 Districts provided that each
dwelling is located on a separate lot and complies with the following
specifications.



      (1)   A minimum area of two acres, exclusive of streets and
single ownership or control shall be developed.



      (2)   Development involving new or additional streets or any
public dedication of land shall be subject to the Planning and Zoning
Commission review and approval as provided in the subdivision regulations.



      (3)   Minimum yard requirements:



         (a)   Front yard:



            1.   R-2: 40 feet; and



            2.   R-3: 30 feet.



         (b)   Side yard:



            1.   Attached dwelling: none; and



            2.   End dwelling of attached or semi-detached:
ten feet.



         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet.



      (4)   Height: maximum building height: 30 feet.



      (5)   Minimum area requirements: no lot shall contain less
than 1,450 square feet of land. However, there shall be a minimum open area
or play area of one-half acre per two acres or a fraction thereof developed
exclusive of street, public ways, parking areas and other nonresidential
uses. It should be the responsibility of the developer to make necessary
provisions for the perpetual maintenance of the open area and parking lot,
subject to approval of the Planning Commission.



      (6)   Lot size:



         (a)   Minimum frontage for attached dwellings: 18 feet;
and



         (b)   Minimum depth: 80 feet.



      (7)   The total dwelling unit in any group of attached
dwelling shall not exceed ten units.



   (B)   Provided, however, that the foregoing does not make an
automatic redesignation of all R-2 and R-3 zones to accept this proposed use,
as same might in some cases result in hardship to the adjoining or
surrounding landowners, that this use be only permitted where it is found to
be preferable within the discretion of the Board of Zoning Adjustment. The
Board shall study each case on an individual basis and, where no undue
hardship will be the result of their action, shall permit the proposed use in
R-2 and R-3 areas only with conditions to the use as the Board of Zoning
Adjustment may in its discretion feel applicable in any particular case.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 56)



§ 155.046  R-1 AGRICULTURE.



   (A)   The following uses are permitted in the R-1 AG District: all
uses and prohibitions of an R-1 District, provided that if three acres or
more, then the land may be used as small farm permitting the following uses:



      (1)   No livestock or poultry except horses and cattle not to
exceed one head per acre;



      (2)   Agricultural uses including gardens for personal use but
excluding any agricultural use for profit (commercial agriculture);



      (3)   Accessory buildings including barns and outbuildings are
permitted;



      (4)   It will be permissible that in this zone privately
maintained and owned access roads to serve the district; and



      (5)   Public utilities may be omitted with the consent of the
public utilities, i.e., water, sewer and the like.



   (B)   Wineries, small farm wineries and microbreweries. See §
155.093 for specific requirements for conditional use permit approval for
small farm wineries and/or microbreweries small farm wineries and/or
microbreweries are not permitted in R-1 Agricultural District if in a
showcase area distilleries, breweries which are not microbreweries, and
wineries which are not small farm wineries are permitted in the Light
Industrial (I-2) and Heavy Industrial (I-2) district, but not in the
Agricultural District (R-1).



(2000 Code, App. B, § 57)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



PROVISIONS GOVERNING BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 155.060  NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICTS (B-1).



   Within Neighborhood Business District, the following regulations shall
apply.



   (A)   Uses permitted:



      (1)   Grocery stores, restaurants, delicatessens, ice cream
stores, jewelry stores, dancing schools, florist shops, telephone and
telegraph offices, banks, insurance offices, self-service laundries, notions
and dry goods stores, variety stores, drug stores, real estate offices,
hardware stores, meat markets, professional offices, fruit markets, dress
shops, barber shops, beauty shops, local utility offices, shoe repair shops,
medical and dental clinics, men's stores, hobby shops, branch laundries and
dry cleaning establishments where no laundering or cleaning is to be done on
the premises and bakeries where all products baked are sold on the premises
and not more than two persons are employed in the actual baking process;



      (2)   Any accessory use or building customarily incidental to
the above permitted uses;



      (3)   Retail businesses, retail service establishments and
offices not specifically permitted above including stores and shops for
special or custom work or for the manufacture of articles, the major portion
of which are to be sold on the premises; electric transformer stations, gas
regulator stations, telephone exchanges and other public utility facilities;
and radio, telephone and television transmission towers and facilities shall
be considered special exceptions and will require approval of the Board of
Zoning Adjustment. The Board shall grant the approval if it determines that
the proposed use is essential to the convenience of the neighboring
residents; and



      (4)   Business signs indicating the name and type of business
conducted on the premises only. The business shall not project more than one
foot beyond the building.



      (5)   Added commercial uses:



         (a)   Retail malt beverage sales (but not permitted in
showcase area);



         (b)   Retail package liquor sales (but not permitted in
showcase area and only otherwise permitted  in B-1 as part of retail store
of 10,000 or more square feet space and more than 50% of revenue in
non-alcohol sales per text provisions of ordinance); and



         (c)   Table restaurant SA (but not permitted in showcase
area).



         (d)   Note potential application of special
compatibility standards as set forth herein if adjoining certain property in
residential zone classification.



   (B)   Uses prohibited:



      (1)   Residents (except those located over business as a
second story), coal yards, lumber yards, junk yards, automobile salvage and
wrecking yards, bulk storage of gasoline and other inflammable materials,
bottling plants, laundries and dry cleaning establishments, other than
self-service and pickup stations, manufacture of articles of which the major
portion will not be sold on the premises, and garages for storage or repair
of automobiles or other types of automotive equipment;



      (2)   Free standing billboards and signs on land or building
roofs; and



      (3)   Any use or trade which, though properly and safely
operated with ordinary care according to good and reasonable practice, causes
noxious or offensive odors, fumes, smoke, dust, vibrations or noises which
substantially interfere with other uses of property permitted in the district.



   (C)   Required yard areas:



      (1)   Front yard depth: all buildings and structures shall
have front yard depths of at least 25 feet; all buildings and structures
placed on corner lots shall observe front yard requirements on both streets;



      (2)   Rear yard depth: all buildings and structures shall have
a rear yard depth of at least 20 feet; and



      (3)   Side yard width: all buildings and structures on lots
adjacent to residential districts shall be located so as to conform on the
adjacent side with the side yard requirements of the residential district.



   (D)   Height: all buildings and structures shall conform with the
height limitations for residential districts.



   (E)   Off-street parking and loading space:



      (1)   The requirements of §§ 155.010 and 155.011 above shall
be observed.



      (2)   Retail package liquor sales and retail malt beverage
sales require at least one space of parking per 400 square feet.



   (F)   Obstruction of streets and alleys: facilities and
installations utilized in the operation of a business establishment shall be
set back from any street or alley so that any service rendered by the
business establishment will not obstruct the street or alley.



   (G)   For parcels on which malt beverage sales or production is
otherwise authorized:



      (1)   Minimum side yard setback - 30 feet; and



      (2)   Minimum rear yard setback - 30 feet.



      (3)   Same setbacks would apply in B-1 if liquor sale is
otherwise authorized in 10,000 square feet or more retail facility with more
than 50% revenue from non-alcohol per text of ordinance.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 61)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 155.061  GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-2).



   (A)   Uses permitted:



      (1)   Any use permitted in a Neighborhood Business District
(B-1);



      (2)   Theaters, assembly halls and commercial recreation
establishments; public and private parking lots and parking garages including
commercial parking lots and parking garages; restaurants, lunch counters,
cafeterias; hotels, motels, residential hotels, apartment-hotels and
apartment houses; hospitals, nursing homes; funeral homes and undertaking
establishments; business schools and institutions of higher learning; banks,
financial and lending institutions; professional and business offices and
office buildings; medical and dental clinics and clinical laboratories;
newspaper offices and printing establishments; new and used motor vehicle
sales including used car lots; home and farm appliance stores and furniture
stores; furniture and household moving establishments not involving
warehousing and storage; and clothing stores and tailor shops, variety, dry
goods, notions and department stores; jewelry stores, art stores and book
stores; public buildings; transportation terminals; churches and other places
of worship; wholesale uses not requiring warehousing; private clubs and
meeting places of civic, fraternal, veterans, business, labor, agricultural
and professional organizations; utility offices, telephone exchanges, gas
regulator studios, and other utility facilities; and radio and television
studios, transmission towers and facilities; business establishments whose
principal function is the fabrication of manufactured products into
commercial or residential facade design for delivery and installation;
mini-warehouses with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission;



      (3)   Service stations, public garages and other motor vehicle
services provided no repair work is performed out of doors; oil pumps,
underground storage tanks, lubricating and other devices are located at least
25 feet from any street right-of-way; all fuel, oil or similar substances are
stored inside or underground; and all automobile parts, dismantled vehicles
and similar articles are stored within a building;



      (4)   Trailer parks when approved by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment and provided that the lot to be used for that purpose is not less
than one acre in area, that not less than 3,000 square feet of area is
provided for each trailer space, that no trailer is located closer than ten
feet to any residential district, that at least one off-street parking space
is provided for each trailer space, and that no trailer is parked closer than
12 feet to another trailer. In addition, the trailer park must be designed,
used and maintained in conformity with the provisions and regulations of any
other state or local laws applying to trailer parks, with the regulations of
state and local health authorities and with any special conditions stated in
the Board of Zoning Adjustment's approval;



      (5)   Any retail business or retail service not prohibited in
division (B) below, including the manufacturing of articles to be sold on the
premises. Any like manufacturing or processing shall be incidental to a
retail business or service, shall not occupy more than 40% of the total floor
area of the business or service establishment;



      (6)   Any accessory use or building customarily incidental to
the above permitted uses; and



      (7)   Attached and free-standing business signs, billboards
and other advertising structures provided they are not located closer than
ten feet to any street right-of-way or three feet to any side lot line.



      (8)   Added commercial uses:



         (a)   Retail malt beverage sales (but not permitted in
showcase area);



         (b)   Retail package liquor sales (but not permitted in
showcase area);



         (c)   Tavern (but not permitted in showcase area). Note:
potential application of special compatibility standards as set forth herein
if adjoining certain property in residential zone classification;



         (d)   Small farm winery or microbrewery (upon CUP
approval per Zoning Ordinance except not allowable in showcase area); and



         (e)   Table restaurant SA (but not permitted in showcase
area).



   (B)   Uses prohibited: single-family dwellings; truck terminals;
animal hospitals; stock yards and slaughterhouses; dairies; live animal and
poultry sales; grist, flour and feed mills; bottling works; dry cleaning
plants; coal and lumber yards; machine shops; welding shops; sheet metal
shops; plumbing shops; automobile salvage and wrecking establishments; ice
plants; laundries and bakeries employing more than five persons; junk, scrap
paper and rag storage and baling establishments; gasoline, oil and alcohol
storage above ground in excess of 500 gallons; and any similar uses which in
the opinion of the Board of Zoning Adjustment would be detrimental to the
development of the General Business District as a retail shopping area.



   (C)   Required yard areas:



      (1)   Front yard depth: all buildings and structures shall
have front yard depths of at least 25 feet; front yards on corner lots: all
buildings and structures placed on corner lots shall observe front yard
requirements on both streets;



      (2)   Rear yard depth: all buildings and structures shall have
rear yard depths of at least 20 feet; and



      (3)   Side yard width: all buildings and structures on lots
adjacent to a residential district shall be located so as to conform on the
adjacent side with the side yard requirements of the residential district.



   (D)   Height: no building or structure shall exceed four stories or
50 feet in height.



   (E)   Off-street parking and loading space:



      (1)   The requirements of §§ 155.010 and 155.011 above shall
be observed.



      (2)   Parking standards:



         (a)   The tavern requires a minimum parking availability
of one space per 60 square feet;



         (b)   The retail package liquor sales and retail malt
beverages sales requires a minimum required parking of one space per 400
square feet; and



         (c)   Table restaurants SA require a minimum require the
same parking as an other restaurant of the same size.



   (F)   Obstruction of streets and alleys: facilities and
installations utilized in the operation of a business establishment shall be
set back from any street or alley so that any service rendered by the
business establishment will not obstruct the street or alley.



   (G)   For parcels on which liquor and/or malt beverage sales or
production is otherwise authorized:



      (1)   Minimum frontage - 150 feet frontage.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback - 40 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback - 30 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback - 30 feet.



      (5)   The city has an interest in preserving the character of
the area and older buildings in the General Business District which sometimes
have zero lot lines or are otherwise in close proximity to each other based
on historical construction patterns in the downtown area. Accordingly, for
good cause shown as to lack of material adverse impact on adjoining
properties, pedestrians, or traffic patterns, a variance from the above
frontage or setbacks for liquor and/or malt beverage sales or production may
be granted in the General Business District (B-2) by the Board of Zoning
Adjustments.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 62)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 155.062  CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-3).



   (A)   Uses permitted:



      (1)   Any use permitted in a General Business District (B-2)
with the exception of the uses prohibited in division (B) below; and



      (2)   Signs, awnings or marquees projecting beyond the street
right-of-way line provided the following conditions are met:



         (a)   They do not extend more than four and one-half
feet into the street right-of-way or closer than one foot to the carriage way;



         (b)   The vertical distance from the sidewalk to any
portion of a projecting sign or marquee is at least nine feet and to any
portion of an awning is at least seven feet;



         (c)   They are not fixed or supported by a beam, post or
pier into the sidewalk or carriage-way; and



         (d)   A building permit is obtained to erect or install
the sign, marquee or awning.



      (3)   Added commercial uses:



         (a)   Retail malt beverage sales (but not permitted in
showcase area);



         (b)   Retail package liquor sales (but not permitted in
showcase area);



         (c)   Tavern (but not permitted in showcase area). Note
potential application of special compatibility standards as set forth herein
if adjoining certain property in residential zone classification;



         (d)   Table restaurant SA (but not permitted in showcase
area); and



         (e)   Small winery or microbrewery (upon CUP approval
per zoning ordinance, except not allowable in showcase area).



   (B)   Uses prohibited:



      (1)   Any use prohibited in a General Business District (B-2);



      (2)   Trailer parks, free standing billboards, wholesale
businesses, hospitals and nursing homes, funeral homes and undertaking
establishments, service stations and public garages, and new and used motor
vehicle sales and services including used car lots; apartment houses (except
units located over a business as a second story); and



      (3)   Similar uses which in the opinion of the Board of Zoning
Adjustment would be detrimental to the development of the Central Business
District as a retail shopping area.



   (C)   Required yard areas:



      (1)   Rear yard depth: all buildings and structures shall have
rear yard depths of at least 12 feet; and



      (2)   Side yard width: all buildings and structures on lots
adjacent to residential districts shall be located so as to conform on the
adjacent side with the side yard requirements of the residential district.



   (D)   Height: no building or structure shall exceed four stories of
50 feet in height.



   (E)   Off-street loading space:



      (1)   The requirements of § 155.011 above shall be observed.



      (2)   Parking standards:



         (a)   The tavern requires a minimum parking availability
of one space per 60 square feet;



         (b)   The retail package liquor sales and retail malt
beverages sales requires a minimum required parking of one space per 400
square feet; and



         (c)   Table restaurants SA require a minimum require the
same parking as an other restaurant of the same size.



   (F)   Obstructions of streets and alleys: facilities and
installations utilized in the operation of a business establishment shall be
set back from any street or alley so that any service rendered by the
business establishment will not obstruct the street or alley.



   (G)   For parcels on which liquor and/or malt beverage sales or
production is otherwise authorized:



      (1)   Minimum frontage - 150 feet each street frontage.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback - 40 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback - 30 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback - 30 feet.



      (5)   The city has an interest in preserving the character of
the area and older buildings in the Central Business District which sometimes
have zero lot lines or are otherwise in close proximity to each other based
on historical construction patterns in the downtown area. Accordingly, for
good cause shown as to lack of material adverse impact on adjoining
properties, pedestrians, or traffic patterns, a variance from the above
frontage or setbacks for liquor and/or malt beverage sales or production may
be granted in the Central Business District (B-3) by the Board of Zoning
Adjustments.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 63)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 155.063  HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-4).



   (A)   Uses permitted:



      (1)   Any use permitted and as regulated in General Business
Districts (B-2) except as hereinafter modified;



      (2)   Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and kennels
provided that any structure or area used for those purposes, including pens
and exercise runways, shall be at least 30 feet from any residential district
and that permanent evergreen plant material or a solid wall or fence shall be
provided along any property line adjoining a residential district to screen
the uses from view;



      (3)   Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, including
offices and sales yards, provided that no building for any like use shall
have a heating plant or a ventilating flue or other opening except stationary
windows within 30 feet of any residential district;



      (4)   Ice storage facilities of three tons or less capacity;



      (5)   Drive-in eating and drinking establishments provided the
requirements of division (A)(2) above are met;



      (6)   Outdoor and indoor display and sales of farm implements,
contractors' equipment and house trailers;



      (7)   Poultry hatcheries when conducted within a completely
enclosed building provided that no building for the use shall have a heating
plant or a ventilating flue or other opening except stationary windows within
30 feet of any residential district;



      (8)   Trailer parks when approved by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment and provided that the lot to be used for that purpose is not less
than one acre in area, that not less than 3,000 square feet of area is
provided for each trailer space, that no trailer is located closer than ten
feet to any residential district, that at least one off-street parking space
is provided for each trailer space and that no trailer is parked closer than
12 feet to another trailer. In addition, the trailer park must be designed,
used and maintained in conformity with the provisions and regulations of any
other state or local laws applying to trailer parks, with the regulations of
state and local health authorities and with any special conditions stated in
the Board of Zoning Adjustment's approval;



      (9)   Any necessary use or building customarily incidental to
the above permitted uses provided all general and special requirements for
principal buildings are met; and



      (10)   Any other uses which are determined by the Board of
Zoning Adjustment to be of the same general character as the above permitted
uses, which will not be detrimental to the district in which they are located
and which will not be objectionable by reason of odors, dust, smoke, cinders,
gas, fumes, noise, vibrations and refuse matter.



      (11)   Added commercial uses:



         (a)   Retail package liquor sales (but not permitted in
showcase area);



         (b)   Retail malt beverage sales (but not permitted in
showcase area);



         (c)   Tavern (but not permitted in showcase area). Note:
potential application of special compatibility standards as set forth herein
if adjoining certain property in residential zone classification;



         (d)   Table restaurant SA (but not permitted in showcase
area); and



         (e)   Small winery or microbrewery (upon CUP approval
per zoning ordinance, except not allowable in showcase area).



   (B)   Uses prohibited:



      (1)   Any use prohibited in a General Business District (B-2)
unless it is expressly permitted in division (A) above; and



      (2)   Similar uses which in the opinion of the Board of Zoning
Adjustment would be detrimental to the development of the Highway Business
District as a retail business and service area.



   (C)   Required yard areas:



      (1)   Front yard depth: all buildings and structures shall
have a front yard depth of at least 25 feet;



      (2)   Rear yard depth: all buildings and structures shall have
a rear yard depth of at least 20 feet; and



      (3)   Side yard width: all buildings and structures on lots
adjacent to residential districts shall be located so as to conform on the
adjacent side with the side yard requirements of the residential district.



   (D)   Height: no building or structure shall exceed four stories or
50 feet in height.



   (E)   Off-street parking and loading spaces: the requirements of
§§ 155.010 and 155.011 above shall be observed.



   (F)   Obstruction of streets and alleys: facilities and
installations utilized in the operation of a business establishment shall be
set back from any street or alley so that any service rendered by the
business establishment will not obstruct the street or alley.



   (G)   For parcels on which liquor and/or malt beverage sales or
production is otherwise authorized:



      (1)   Minimum lot frontage, assembly and commercial - 100
feet. Exception: corner lots, minimum frontage - 150 feet each street
frontage.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback, assembly and commercial - 30
feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback, assembly and commercial - 20
feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback, assembly and commercial - 20
feet.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 64)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



PROVISIONS GOVERNING INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS



§ 155.075  LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (I-1).



   The purpose of Light Industrial Districts is to designate areas for the
exclusive use of non-objectionable industries. Within Light Industrial
Districts, the following regulations shall apply:



   (A)   Uses permitted:



      (1)   Wholesale businesses; storage firms; warehouses;
contractors' yards; sheet metal shops; welding shops; machine shops; fruit
canning and packing establishments; animal hospitals; bakeries; bottling
works; building material yards where no mill work is done; cabinetmaking
establishments and carpenter shops which use no motors larger than ten
horsepower; clothing factories; dairies; ice plants; laundries; milk
distribution stations; optical goods factories; paper box factories; pencil
factories; printing, publications and engraving plants; dyeing plants; dry
cleaning plants; feed yards; and trucking terminals; and



      (2)   The following uses are classified as special exceptions
and may be either permitted or prohibited by the Board of Zoning Adjustment:
gasoline, oil or alcohol storage above ground in excess of 500 gallons; any
industrial process not listed in division (A)(1) which can be shown not to
emit noise, smoke, dust, vibrations, heat, bright light or odor beyond the
limits of its lot. Applications for these uses shall be referred to the Board
of Zoning Adjustment for action. The Board may approve location of these uses
in a Light Industrial District only if it finds that the proposed use will
not be obnoxious or detrimental to neighboring property.



      (3)   Breweries, distilleries, wineries, microbreweries, and
small farm wineries are permitted.



   (B)   Uses prohibited:



      (1)   Residences; churches and other places of worship; clubs
and meeting places of civic, fraternal, veterans, business, labor,
agricultural and professional organizations; public and private schools,
colleges, academies, universities, business schools, nursery schools and
kindergartens; nursing homes and hospitals for human care; cemeteries;
private and public recreation and amusement establishments and facilities;
trailer parks; and any retail business or service unless it is incidental to
and on the same site with an industry; and



      (2)   Stockyards and slaughter houses; automobile salvage and
wrecking establishments; and junk, scrap paper and rag storage and baling
establishments.



   (C)   Required yard areas:



      (1)   Front yard depth: all buildings and structures shall
have front yard depths of at least 25 feet;



      (2)   Rear yard depth: all buildings and structures shall have
rear yard depths of at least 20 feet;



      (3)   Side yard width: all buildings and structures shall have
side yard widths of at least ten feet;



      (4)   Yards adjacent to residential districts: all buildings
and structures on lots adjacent to residential districts shall be located so
as to provide side yard widths or rear yard depths of at least 25 feet
adjacent to the residential districts; and



      (5)   Railroad siding frontage: no yards shall be required for
those portions of lots which front on railroad sidings.



   (D)   Height: no building or structure shall exceed 50 feet in
height except with the permission of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.



   (E)   Off-street parking and loading space:



      (1)   The requirements of §§ 155.010 and 155.011 above shall
be observed.



      (2)   Breweries, distilleries, wineries, microbreweries and
small farm wineries require one parking space per employee and twenty
additional spaces if they permit public tours, during a maximum shift. 
Microbreweries and small farm wineries may, for good cause shown, request
variance for fewer non-employee spaces if small facility and only limited
tourism is expected.



   (F)   Obstruction of streets and alleys: facilities and
installations utilized in any industrial operation shall be set back from any
street or alley so that the operation will not obstruct the street or alley.



   (G)   For parcels on which liquor and/or malt beverage sales or
production is otherwise authorized.



      (1)   Minimum lot frontage, assembly and commercial - 100
feet. Exception: corner lots, minimum frontage - 150 feet each street
frontage.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback, assembly and commercial - 30
feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback, assembly and commercial - 20
feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback, assembly and commercial - 20
feet.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 71)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 155.076  HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2).



   Within a Heavy Industrial District, the following regulations shall
apply:



   (A)   Uses permitted:



      (1)   Any use permitted in a Light Industrial District (I-1);
and



      (2)   Any industrial or manufacturing activity not in conflict
with any other ordinance of the city, provided, however, that the following
uses shall be considered special exceptions and shall require the approval of
the Board of Zoning Adjustment: bag cleaning plants; boiler and tank works;
central mixing plants for cement, mortar, plaster or paving materials; coke
ovens; establishments which cure, tan or store raw hides and skins;
distillation plants for bones, coal, wood or tar; fat rendering plants; forge
plants; foundries and metal fabrication plants; aboveground storage
facilities for gasoline, oil and alcohol in excess of 500 gallons;
slaughterhouses and stockyards; smelting plants; plants for the manufacture
of acetylene, acid, alcohol, alcoholic beverages, ammonia, bleaching powder,
chemicals, brick, pottery, terra-cotta, tile, candles, disinfectants,
dye-stuffs, fertilizer, illuminating or heating gas (or storage of same),
linseed oil, paint, oil turpentine, varnish, soap and tar products; or any
other industrial or manufacturing activity which in the opinion of the Board
of Zoning Adjustment will not emit detrimental or obnoxious noise,
vibrations, smoke, odor, dust, heat or light or create other objectionable
conditions beyond the limits of the Heavy Industrial District in which it is
located.



      (3)   Breweries, distilleries, wineries, microbreweries and
small farm wineries are permitted.



   (B)   Uses prohibited:



      (1)   All uses prohibited in a Light Industrial District (I-1)
by § 155.075(B)(1) above; and



      (2)   Automobile salvage and wrecking establishments; and
junk, scrap paper and rag storage and baling establishments.



   (C)   Required yard areas:



      (1)   Front yard depth: all buildings and structures shall
have front yard depths of at least 25 feet. Front yards on corner lots: all
buildings and structures placed on corner lots shall meet front yard
requirements on both streets.



      (2)   Rear yard depth: all buildings and structures shall have
rear yard depths of at least 20 feet.



      (3)   Side yard width: all buildings and structures shall have
side yard widths of at least ten feet.



      (4)   Yards adjacent to residential districts: all buildings
and structures on lots adjacent to residential districts shall be located so
as to provide side yard widths or rear yard depths of at least 50 feet
adjacent to the residential districts.



      (5)   Railroad siding frontage: no yards shall be required for
those portions of lots which front on railroad sidings.



   (D)   Height: no building or structure shall exceed 50 feet in
height except with the permission of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.



   (E)   Off-street parking and loading space:



      (1)   The requirements of §§ 155.010 and 155.011 above shall
be observed;



      (2)   The following parking standards are also applicable:
breweries, distilleries, wineries, microbreweries and small farm wineries
require one parking space per employee and twenty additional spaces if they
permit public tours, during a maximum shift.  Microbreweries and small farm
wineries may, for good cause shown, request variance for fewer non-employee
spaces if small facility and only limited tourism is expected.



   (F)   Obstruction of streets and alleys: facilities and
installations utilized in any industrial operation shall be set back from any
street or alley so that the operation will not obstruct the street or alley.



   (G)   For parcels on which liquor and/or malt beverage sales or
production is otherwise authorized.



      (1)   Minimum lot frontage, assembly and commercial - 100
feet. Exception: corner lots, minimum frontage - 150 feet each street
frontage.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback, assembly and commercial - 30
feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback, assembly and commercial - 20
feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback, assembly and commercial - 20
feet.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 72)  (Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS



§ 155.090  LOT OF RECORD.



   (A)   The owner of a lot of official record, which lot at the time
of the adoption of this chapter does not include sufficient land to conform
to the yard or other requirements of this chapter, may submit an application
to the Board of Zoning Adjustment for a variance from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the provisions of §§ 155.120 through 155.124.
The lot may be used as a building site, provided, however, that the yard and
other requirements of the district are complied with as closely as is
possible in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.



   (B)   If two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous
frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this
chapter and the lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width and
area requirements of the district in which they are located, the group of
lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted
size, and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 81)



§ 155.091  GROUP HOUSING.



   In the case of group housing of two or more buildings to be constructed
on a plot of ground, not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and
which will not be so subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street
and lot layout make it impractical to apply the requirements of this chapter
to the individual building units in the group housing, the application of the
terms of this chapter may be varied by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in a
manner which will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood.
However, in no case shall the Board of Zoning Adjustment authorize a use
prohibited in the district in which the housing is to locate, or a smaller
lot area per family than the minimum required in the district, or a greater
height, or a smaller yard area than the requirements of this chapter permit
in such a district.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 82)



§ 155.092  EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy or to
monuments, water towers, observation towers, power transmission towers,
windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles and radio
and television towers, masts and aerials.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 83)



§ 155.093  EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS, AND PROVISIONS AS TO LOCATION OF
LIQUOR AND MALT BEVERAGE SALES/PRODUCTION.



   These provisions are applicable to sales of liquor and malt beverages
not set forth in detail above:



   (A)   The owner and/or operator of any licensed facility selling
and/or producing liquor or malt beverages shall, maintain at the facility
copies of current licensing documents from the Commonwealth of Kentucky or
other licensing agency and allowed the Zoning Administrator to determine if
the facility is operating in compliance with the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   The zoning ordinance does not independently authorize any
sales of liquor or malt beverages or the production of the same. Any rights
pursuant to the zoning ordinance only exist if any statutorily required local
option election has lawfully authorized the sale or production and the owner
and/or operator of such facility has obtained all other necessary permits,
licenses, and approvals under all applicable law.



   (C)   Provisions in the zoning ordinance as to the sale or
production of liquor of malt beverages do not exempt the property owner or
operator from compliance with other provisions of the zoning ordinance unless
such exemption is expressly stated herein.



   (D)   Retail package liquor and/or malt beverage stores, taverns,
and table restaurants SA are prohibited from using flashing signs or
scrolling electronic message signs on the facility property. Such facilities
are also prohibited form using mobile trailers on the facility property for
advertising purposes.



   (E)   Owners and/or operators of retail package liquor and/or malt
beverage stores, taverns, and table restaurants SA are responsible for
keeping external noise levels at their facilities at a level which does not
constitute a nuisance or otherwise disturb the peace or health, safety, and
welfare of the neighbors of the facility or the city.



   (F)   Owners and/or operators of retail package liquor and malt
beverage stores, taverns, and table restaurants SA are responsible for
keeping their parking lots as places for persons to obtain egress and ingress
from the facilities rather than places for congregation of persons so as to
create safety issues in relation to vehicles entering and exiting the parking
lots.



   (G)   The Zoning Administrator shall prepare and make available to
the public forms for requesting any site plan or conditional use permit
required for operation of retail package liquor or malt beverage stores,
taverns, and table restaurants serving alcohol. Fees for any such
applications shall be the same as for similar applications unrelated to
alcohol sales. Any affidavits required to be submitted pursuant to the zoning
ordinance for facilities which sell liquor or malt beverages shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator in a notarized form to his reasonable
satisfaction.



   (H)   Provisions supplementary to district regulations (See §
155.060):



      (1)   Retail package liquor sales, retail malt beverage sales,
taverns, and table restaurants serving alcohol are not permitted in
residential zoning districts, including R-1, R-1 Agriculture, R-2, R-3, and
R-4, and any subsequently created residential zoning district where no
existing license for serving or retail sales of alcohol exists prior to
designation of a property in a residential zoning district.



      (2)   The location of retail package liquor sales, retail malt
beverage sales, taverns, and table restaurants serving alcohol in the
showcase area (more particularly described and/or depicted on Attachment A)
having tourism-related, historic, cultural, aesthetic, or other unique
features is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance,
economic development objectives; and the health, safety, and welfare of the
city and its residents and businesses, and so such businesses selling alcohol
are PROHIBITED from locating on property in the showcase area.



      (3)   Retail package liquor sales is permitted in the B-2,
B-3, and B-4 zones and retail malt beverage sales is permitted in the B-1,
B-2, B-3, and B-4 zones if not in a designated showcase area unless division
(4) below is applicable.



      (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a rational basis exists
for more permissive location of retail package liquor sales in the B-1 zone
or retail package liquor sales or retail malt beverage sales in a planned
unit development in any zone if conducted in a retail store exceeding 10,000
square feet in interior floor space and if the majority of such store’s
annual sales as documented by initial year quarterly and thereafter annual
affidavit from a property owner or authorized representative is from other
than retail package liquor and retail malt beverage sales. Accordingly,
retail package liquor sales in the B-1 zone classification as well as retail
package liquor sales and retail malt beverage sales in planned unit
developments are not prohibited if the above-referenced square footage and
sales standard are met for a retail store. The rational basis for the
distinction established in this paragraph includes that such 10,000 square
foot plus facilities such as drugstores, pharmacies, grocery stores, and
“big box” retailers selling wide ranges of products, are important to
health, safety, welfare, and economic well-being of the community, including
both adults and children, on a broader basis and are generally perceived
differently from stores/facilities which primarily sell liquor and/or malt
beverage products (the aforementioned square footage standard is measured by
the entire building even if divided in the interior and/or having separate
entrances.) No similar rational basis exists for location of taverns in B-1
zones or planned unit developments in B-1 or residential zones.



      (5)   Tavern sales of liquor and malt beverages shall be
permitted in the B-2, B-3, and B-4 zones as long as the tavern is not on a
parcel in a designated showcase area.



      (6)   Table restaurant sales of liquor and malt beverages is
permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 zones upon quarterly owner, officer,
or management affidavits in the first year of such table restaurants sale of
liquor and/or malt beverages, and annual affidavits thereafter, that at least
50% of monthly sales revenues of the table restaurant come from sources other
than the aggregate of liquor and malt beverages. Such table restaurant sales
shall not be in the showcase area.



      (7)   Manufacturing of liquor and/or malt beverages is
permitted in breweries, microbreweries, distilleries or wineries or small
farm wineries in the Light Industrial (I-1) and Heavy Industrial (I-2) zones
as long as not located in a showcase area.



      (8)   Souvenir package sales and retail drink sales associated
with a brewery, microbrewery, winery, small farm winery, or distillery in
compliance with KRS 241.010 and ICRS 243.0305 as recently amended by Senate
Bill 11 as effective July 15, 2016, are allowed in the I-2 and I-2 districts
subject to site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission or its
designee. Site plan review is to be based on adequate safety, parking, and
access considerations.



      (9)   Small farm wineries and microbreweries.



         (a)   Small farm wineries and microbreweries are
permitted in any Light Industrial (I-1) District and Heavy Industrial
District (I-2).



         (b)   Small farm wineries and microbreweries are
permitted on property not in a Showcase Area upon KRS 100.237 conditional use
permit (“CUP”) approval as to safety to persons and property, including
adjoining properties, in B-2, B-3, B-4, and R-1 agricultural districts in
compliance with the zoning ordinance (this applies to the R-1 Agricultural
District does not apply to the R-1 Low Density Residential District).



         (c)   CUP approval as established in this division (9)
is required even if a proposed small farm winery or microbrewery is accessory
to, attached to, or on the same parcel as an otherwise permitted tavern,
table restaurant SA, and/or retail package liquor or retail malt beverage
sales facility.



         (d)   Applicant requesting CUP approval per this
division (9) shall submit application on form provided by Zoning
Administrator and shall include a site plan prepared by Kentucky licensed
engineer, architect, or land surveyor showing compliance with zoning
ordinance, and illustrating parking and access to be used by proposed
facility. The application shall include a narrative signed on behalf of the
applicant as to compliance with applicable standards set forth above.
Wineries and microbreweries shall comply with parking and lot standards for a
table restaurant SA if the winery or microbrewery is open to the public for
tours and/or bottle or package sale of or serving of alcohol. If not open to
the public for such purpose, a winery or microbrewery shall comply with
parking and lot standards for a brewery, distillery, or winery.



      (10)   Special compatibility standards, with limited
exceptions, are established in this division for any alcohol sales property
with a protected residential classification property adjoining to the rear or
side of the alcohol sales property and not separated by a city street, county
road or state highway.



         (a)   Properties in the R-1, R-1 Agriculture District,
R-2, R-3, R-4 and in any subsequently created residential zoning
classifications are in the protected residential classification for purposes
of this section.



         (b)   A property on which a tavern, retail package
liquor sales, and/or malt beverage sales is to be located (“alcohol sales
property”) and which adjoins one or more properties in the protected
residential classifications shall comply with the special compatibility
standards of this section of the zoning ordinance; except that, for good
cause shown as to minimal impact on properties in protected residential
classifications, a motor vehicle service station or retail convenience store
of less than 10,000 square feet store size, which is also selling gasoline
and/or diesel fuel, may conduct malt beverage sales without full compliance
with the special compatibility standards upon obtaining a conditional use
permit ("CUP"). The Board of Adjustment may condition, grant of a CUP on
compliance with one or more of the special compatibility standards set forth
herein or other reasonable site specific conditions. Such facilities selling
gasoline and/or diesel fuel are treated differently herein because their
primary product is not generally malt beverages and because of the multiple
front and side vehicular entrance and exit points normally associated with
such businesses. Note: table restaurants SA (serving alcohol) as defined in
§ 155.003 are not subject to the adjoining property requirements found in
this division, except the music volume/hours requirements set forth below.



            1.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, an alcohol
sales property on which the sale of alcohol is in a strip center building
containing four or more premises for separate businesses or in a downtown
building in the B-3 (Central Business District) zone involving zero to less
than 20 foot spacing between side by side commercial, institutional, and/or
governmental buildings (“downtown building”), and in which the property
in a protected residential classification is more than 75 feet from the rear
of the strip center building or downtown building, is exempt from the within
special compatibility standards as long as:



               a.   There is not an outdoor patio, customer
service area, bar, dance area, smoking area, or other area where customers of
the business selling alcoholic beverages regularly assemble or enter or leave
the business from the rear of the strip center or downtown building; or



               b.   Customers do not access a drive through
window on the rear of the strip center or downtown building to purchase
alcoholic beverages.



            2.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, those retail
store buildings and sports recreational facilities buildings (including
bowling alleys) exceeding 10,000 square feet of interior floor space
(measured by the entire building even if divided in the interior and/or
having separate entrances) and meeting the criteria of § 155.093(H)(4) of
the zoning ordinance and hotels, motels, and country clubs are exempt from
the within special compatibility standards for so long as:



               a.   There is not an outdoor patio, customer
service area, bar, dance area, smoking area, or other area to the rear of the
business where customers of the business selling alcoholic beverages
regularly assemble;



               b.   Customers do not access a drive through
window on the rear of such facility to purchase alcoholic beverages;



         (c)   Alcohol sales properties shall comply with the
following special compatibility standards:



            1.   Alcohol sales properties, on their side and
rear property lines, shall be separated from properties adjoining properties
having a protected residential classification by a wall or fence within six
feet of the property line or edge of privately owned alley, private easement
or private road or any greater distance required by any recorded easement or
utility installation (this requirement does not apply to sections of property
where there is a city street, county road, or state highway between an
alcohol sale property and property with a protected residential
classification, but would apply where the properties adjoin or were separated
by only a privately owned alley, easement, or driveway). Any walls shall be
constructed of masonry and/or concrete products and faced with natural stone,
veneer, or brick. Fences shall be constructed of wood or other weatherproof,
durable materials generally used in the exterior construction of buildings
and shall be six feet to eight feet tall from ground level. Fence posts shall
be structurally stable based on the material used, and shall have a maximum
spacing of eight feet on center. If wood is used, the posts shall be
four-inch by four-inch minimum. Posts shall be set in or anchored or crowned
concrete footers at least six inches larger in each direction than the post
it supports. The base of the footer shall be at least 24 inches below
finished grade. If wood is used for any member, it shall be softwood treated
with water borne preservative to the American Wood Preservers Institute
standard LP-2 for above ground use or LP-22 for ground contact use, or all
heart redwood, or all heart cedar. All cut surfaces of pressure treated
lumber shall be water-proofed. If another material is used, it shall be
weatherproof. All hardware is to be galvanized or otherwise rustproof. Chain
link fencing may not be used to meet these requirements. Walls and fences
allowed to meet the foregoing requirements shall not be used for the erection
or display of any sign or other advertising device facing toward a property
in the protected residential classification. Any wall or fence constructed
hereunder shall be maintained in good condition in order to provide ongoing
compliance with this paragraph. Any wall or fence constructed hereunder shall
also comply with otherwise applicable provisions of the Kentucky Building
Code in effect at the time of construction, and the standards of such code
shall apply to walls or fences six feet tall or more, even if such code would
only otherwise apply to walls or fences of a greater height. If there is any
conflict between standards set forth herein and those of the Kentucky
Building Code at the time of construction, the more stringent requirements
shall apply.



            2.   The parking lot or driveway lighting or other
outdoor lighting on an alcohol sales property will be directional so as to
prevent lighting of adjoining properties having a protected residential
classification.



            3.   Any lighted or unlighted advertising signage
on the alcohol sales property shall not be facing adjoining property having a
protected residential classification which adjoins the rear property line of
such property.



            4.   The height of the buildings will not exceed
the height allowable for the alcohol sales property pursuant to the zoning
ordinance and any height variance requested for such property may be decided
by the Board of Adjustment on finding of adverse impact on adjoining property
having a protected residential classification;



            5.   Soft earth colors, such as brown, grey, tan,
dark green, white or flat black shall be used for the rear or side exterior
walls, gutters, exterior door and window frames, dumpsters, fixtures, and
appurtenances, and accessory structures of buildings on an alcohol sales
property which adjoins adjoining property having a protected residential
classification on the site or rear of the alcohol sales property.



            6.   There will be no outside storage on an
alcohol sales property, except that a dumpster with screening as otherwise
required by the zoning ordinance shall be permitted.



            7.   Any tavern or table restaurant SA may utilize
outside speakers or outdoor musicians for playing of music if it adjoins
property having a protected residential classification on its rear or side
property lines provided it does not unreasonably disturb neighbors and does
not occur other than between 10:00 a.m. and midnight local time. Interior
speakers or musicians in a tavern or table restaurant SA shall not play music
other than between 10:00 a.m. and midnight local time or at a volume so as to
disturb persons on adjoining properties in a protected residential
classification, or otherwise become a nuisance or violate other applicable
noise regulations of the zoning ordinance or of the city. Disturbance by loud
music is determined as a volume which would disturb a reasonable person
residing on property in a residential zoning classification (local time is
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time depending on the time of the
year).



            8.   These special compatibility standards are for
the benefit of the city as a whole and may not be waived by owners of
property in a protected residential classification.



            9.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, these special
compatibility standards are the minimum requirements to be applicable. Any
other requirements of the zoning ordinance applicable to an alcohol sales
property are not waived or superseded by the special compatibility standards.



(Ord. 16-09, passed 11-21-2016)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 155.105  ENFORCING OFFICER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
Building Inspector appointed by the City Council, who shall have the power to
make inspections of buildings, structures or premises necessary to carry out
his or her duties in the enforcement of this chapter.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 91)



§ 155.106  BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Building permit required. It shall be unlawful to commence the
excavation for or the construction of any building or structure, including
accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or alteration of any buildings
or structures, including accessory buildings, until the Building Inspector
has issued a building permit for the work.



   (B)   Issuance of building permits.



      (1)   In applying to the Building Inspector for a building
permit, the applicant shall submit a plot or plan, drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the shape, size, height
and location of all buildings or structures to be erected, altered or moved
and of any buildings or structures already on the lot, the existing and
intended use of all buildings and structures, the number of families or
dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, the yard depths and
widths on adjoining lots, and other information concerning the lot or
adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of
this chapter are being complied with.



      (2)   A record of the applications and plots or plans shall be
kept by the Building Inspector. If the proposed excavation or construction as
set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and other ordinances of the city then in force, the Building
Inspector shall issue a building permit for the excavation or construction.



      (3)   If a building permit is refused, the Building Inspector
shall state the refusal in writing, with the cause, and shall immediately
thereupon mail notice of the refusal to the applicant at the address
indicated in the application. The Building Inspector shall grant or deny the
permit within two weeks from the date the application is submitted.



         (a)   The issuance of a building permit shall in no case
be construed as waiving any provisions of this chapter.



         (b)   A building permit shall become void six months
from the date of issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that
date on the project described therein.



   (C)   Certificate of occupancy.



      (1)   A certificate of occupancy issued by the Building
Inspector is required in advance of occupancy or use of a building or
structure hereafter erected, a building or structure hereafter altered so as
to affect the front, side or rear yards thereof, or a change of occupancy or
use of any premises.



      (2)   No land, building, structure or part thereof hereafter
erected or altered in its use or structure shall be used until the Building
Inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that the land,
building, structure or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are bound to
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   A record of all certificates of occupancy issued shall
be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector, and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest
in the building, structure or land involved.



      (4)   Within three days after notification that a building,
structure or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall
be the duty of the Building Inspector to make a final inspection thereof and
to issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, building, structure or part
thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the provisions
of this chapter; or, if the certification is refused, to state refusal in
writing, with the cause, and immediately thereupon mail notice of the refusal
to the applicant at the address indicated in the application.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 92)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.107  DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR, BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT,
CITY COUNCIL AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL.



   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions arising in
connection with the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter, except as
otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, shall be first presented to the
Building Inspector, and that the questions shall be presented to the Board of
Zoning Adjustment only on appeal from the Building Inspector, and that from
the decisions of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, recourse shall be to the
courts as provided by law.



   (B)   It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of
the City Council in connection with this chapter shall not include hearing
and passing on disputed questions which might arise in connection with the
enforcement or interpretation of this chapter. The procedures for determining
the questions shall be as hereinbefore stated in this section, and the duties
of the City Council in connection with this chapter shall be only the duty of
holding a public hearing and voting upon any proposed amendment or repeal of
this chapter as provided by Kentucky Revised Statutes.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 93)



§ 155.108  REMEDIES.



   In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of
this chapter or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used
in violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector or any other appropriate
authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged
by the violation, in addition to other remedies may institute an injunction,
mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the work or
occupancy of the building, structure or land in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 95)



BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT



§ 155.120  CREATION AND APPOINTMENT.



   A Board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby established, in accordance with
KRS 100.217. The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall consist of five members,
not more than two of whom may be a member of the City Planning Commission.
They shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve terms of four
years, but the term of office of members first appointed shall be staggered
so that a proportionate number serve one, two, three and four years
respectively. Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 101)



§ 155.121  PROCEDURE.



   Meetings of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson, and at other times as the Board may determine. All meetings
of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall adopt rules of
procedure and shall keep records of applications and action thereon, which
shall be a public record. Upon appointment and annually, the Board of Zoning
Adjustment shall meet and organize and shall elect its Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and Secretary who will serve one year or until his or her
successor duly qualifies.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 102)



§ 155.122  APPEALS; HOW TAKEN.



   In accordance with KRS 100.261, an appeal to the Board of Zoning
Adjustment may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved, or by
any governmental office, department, board or bureau affected by any decision
of the Building Inspector based in whole or in part upon the provisions of
this chapter. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board of Zoning
Adjustment. A notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, shall be
filed within 30 days from the date upon which the notice of refusal of
building permit or notice of refusal of certificate of occupancy is mailed by
the Building Inspector; and failure to file notice of appeal within 30 days
shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. The Building Inspector
shall transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed was taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to
the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon
the hearing, any person or party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 103)



§ 155.123  STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.



   An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of action appealed
from unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board of Zoning
Adjustment, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him that, by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In that case, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment or by a competent court of
application, on notice to the Building Inspector, and provided due cause is
shown.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 104)



§ 155.124  POWERS.



   The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall have the following powers:



   (A)   Administrative review.



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellants that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision,
determination or refusal made by the Building Inspector or other
administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision
of this chapter; and to interpret the zoning map; and



      (2)   The concurring vote of a simple majority of those Board
members present shall be necessary to reverse, or modify any order or
decision of an administrative official. The appeal shall be taken within 60
days.



   (B)   Special exceptions. To hear and decide applications for
special exceptions as specified in this chapter and for decisions on any
special questions upon which the Board of Zoning Adjustment is specifically
authorized to pass; and



   (C)   Variance. To hear and decide on applications for a variance
from the terms of this chapter because of unnecessary hardship and to
authorize in specific cases the variance as will not be contrary to the
public interest where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of
the provisions of the ordinance will, in an individual case, result in a
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.



      (1)   Before any variance is granted, all of the following
conditions must be shown to be present:



         (a)   Conditions and circumstances are peculiar to the
land, structure or building and do not apply to neighboring lands, structures
or buildings in the same district;



         (b)   Strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of the land, structure
or building equivalent to the use permitted to be made of neighboring lands,
structures or buildings in the same district under the terms of this chapter;



         (c)   The peculiar conditions and circumstances are not
the result of actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of
this chapter; and



         (d)   Relief, if granted, will not cause substantial
detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this
chapter.



      (2)   Financial disadvantage to the property owner shall not
constitute conclusive proof of unnecessary hardship within the purpose of
zoning.



      (3)   The Board does not possess the power to grant a variance
to permit a use of land or building or structure that is specifically
prohibited by this chapter or to permit a use not generally or by special
exception permitted in the district involved.



      (4)   In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto any
conditions and safeguards it deems necessary or desirable in furthering the
purposes of this chapter. Violation of any of these conditions or safeguards
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



      (5)   In exercising the above powers, the Board, in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, may affirm, modify or revise, wholly or
in part, the order, requirement, decision or determination and to that end
shall have all the powers of the officer from which the appeal is taken and
may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 105)



AMENDMENT



§ 155.140  PROCEDURE.



   Such regulations, restrictions, and boundaries as are provided for in
this chapter may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed; the
restrictions on amendments made available to protesting property owners by
KRS 100.540 are made a part of this chapter.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 111)



§ 155.141  PUBLIC HEARING.



   A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before the adoption
of any proposed amendment, supplement or change to this chapter. The time and
place of the public hearing shall be published in the manner prescribed in
the state statutes for public hearings of this type.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 111.1)



§ 155.142  APPROVAL OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.



   No amendment, supplement or change to this chapter shall become
effective unless it is first submitted to and approved by the Planning
Commission, or if disapproved, shall receive a majority vote of the entire
membership of the City Council. The Planning Commission shall have 30 days in
which to submit its report. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a
report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the
proposed amendment.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 112)



§ 155.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $100 for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.



(2000 Code, App. B, § 94)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[RESERVED]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Kentucky Revised Statutes





References to 2000 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES



 

KRS Section
 
Code Section




Ch. 13B
 
112.031


15.410 - 15.510
 
32.03


18A.225(2)
 
110.03


39B.010 et seq.
 
31.02


Ch. 58
 
31.21


61.800 et seq.
 
150.08


61.805
 
153.04


61.810
 
33.43


61.870 et seq.
 
150.08


61.870 - 61.884
 
33.40, 33.46, 33.47


61.872 - 61.884
 
33.27


Ch. 65
 
33.21


66.660
 
94.06


68.197(2)
 
111.03


82.082
 
33.21, 52.16


82.700 et seq.
 
150.02, 150.08


82.700 - 82.725
 
150.06


83A.010(5)
 
10.02


83A.010(6)
 
10.02


83A.010(8)
 
10.02


83A.045
 
33.04


83A.050
 
33.04


83A.065
 
10.99


83A.080
 
33.22


83A.130
 
30.01


83A.165
 
33.04


83A.170
 
33.04


83A.175
 
33.04


91A.010(8)
 
10.02


91A.080(2)
 
110.02


91A.080(3)
 
110.03


91A.080(7)
 
110.05


91A.080(7), (8)
 
110.04


Ch. 92
 
34.02


94.010 et seq.
 
94.07


95.440
 
32.17


95.510
 
32.25


Ch. 100
 
152.01, 154.01, 155.012


100.201 - 100.347
 
154.99


100.217
 
155.120


100.237
 
155.093


100.261
 
155.122


100.329
 
154.09


100.540
 
155.140


100.987(2)
 
114.03


103.200 - 103.285
 
31.21


131.010(6)
 
110.04


136.120
 
111.03


141.190
 
111.01


Ch. 151
 
152.05


151.250
 
152.05, 152.06


154.50-316 - 154.50-340
 
31.15, 31.16, 31.23


154.50-330
 
31.18


174.100
 
94.15


174.100(1)
 
94.16


174.100(2)
 
94.17


174.100(3)
 
94.17


174.100(4)
 
94.18


174.100(5)
 
94.19


174.100(6)
 
94.20


174.100(7)
 
94.20


178.290
 
94.06


189.450
 
71.01


199.894
 
155.040


224.1-010(33)
 
54.004


Chs. 241 - 244
 
112.001 - 112.003, 112.030, 112.053, 112.110, 112.126


241.010
 
155.093


241.010(31)
 
112.016


241.100
 
112.030


241.160
 
112.030


241.170
 
112.030


241.200
 
112.056


Ch. 243
 
111.03, 112.016, 112.125


243.070
 
112.015


243.075
 
112.018


243.090
 
112.016


243.155
 
155.003


243.156
 
155.003


243.260
 
112.016


243.450
 
112.055


243.480
 
112.999


243.490
 
112.056


243.500
 
112.056


243.550
 
112.054


243.850
 
112.057


243.895
 
112.093


244.050
 
112.125


244.085
 
112.110


244.090
 
112.095


244.090(2)
 
112.095


244.130
 
112.170


244.150
 
112.030


244.500
 
112.088


Ch. 275
 
111.01


278.010(3)
 
114.02


Ch. 322
 
54.004


Ch. 342
 
110.03


Ch. 350
 
152.05


376.275
 
71.01


381.770
 
150.02


381.805 et seq.
 
155.044


416.540 - 416.680
 
31.16


Ch. 424
 
112.045


424.170
 
112.045


446.010(1)
 
10.02


446.010(2)
 
10.02


446.010(8)
 
10.02


446.010(9)
 
10.02


446.010(10)
 
10.02


446.010(12)
 
10.02


446.010(13)
 
10.02


446.010(14)
 
10.02


446.010(15)
 
10.02


446.010(17)
 
10.02


446.010(18)
 
10.02


446.010(23)
 
10.02


446.010(25)
 
10.02


446.010(26)
 
10.02


446.010(27)
 
10.02


446.010(28)
 
10.02


446.010(30)
 
10.02


446.010(31)
 
10.02


446.010(33)
 
10.02


446.010(36)
 
10.02


446.010(37)
 
10.02


446.010(39)
 
10.02


446.010(43)
 
10.02


446.010(44)
 
10.02


446.010(46)
 
10.02


446.010(47)
 
10.02


446.010(49)
 
10.02


446.010(55)
 
10.02


446.020(1)
 
10.03


446.020(2)
 
10.03


446.030
 
10.04


446.050
 
10.05


446.060
 
10.06


446.080(1)
 
10.03


446.080(3)
 
10.03


446.080(4)
 
10.03


446.090
 
10.07


446.100
 
10.08


446.110
 
10.09


446.140
 
10.01


511.080
 
112.126


534.040(2)(c)
 
10.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE



 

2000 Code Section
 
2010 Code Section




2-27
 
30.01


2-51
 
31.15


2-52
 
31.16


2-53
 
31.17


2-54
 
31.18


2-55
 
31.19


2-56
 
31.20


2-57
 
31.21


2-58
 
31.22


2-59
 
31.23


2-86
 
31.35


2-87
 
31.36


2-101
 
33.01


2-102
 
33.02


2-126
 
31.02


2-132
 
32.01


2-141
 
33.04


2-161
 
33.20


2-162
 
33.20


2-163
 
33.21


2-164
 
33.22


2-165
 
33.23


2-166
 
33.23


2-167
 
33.24


2-168
 
33.25


2-169
 
33.26


2-170
 
33.27


2-171
 
33.28


2-172
 
33.29


2-173
 
33.30


2-174
 
33.31


2-175
 
33.32


2-176
 
33.33


2-177
 
33.34


2-178
 
33.35


2-179
 
33.36


2-180
 
33.37


2-181
 
33.38


2-182
 
33.39


2-183
 
33.40


2-184
 
33.41


2-185
 
33.42


2-186
 
33.43


2-187
 
33.44


2-188
 
33.45


2-189
 
33.46


2-190
 
33.47


2-191
 
33.99


3-27
 
151.03


3-28
 
151.04


3-29
 
151.05


5-26
 
91.01


5-27
 
91.02


5-28
 
91.03


5-29
 
91.04


5-30
 
91.05


5-31
 
91.06


6-56
 
110.01


6-57
 
110.02


6-58
 
110.03


6-59
 
110.04


6-60
 
110.05


6-76
 
110.15


6-77
 
110.16


6-78
 
110.17


6-79
 
110.18


6-80
 
110.19


6-81
 
110.20


6-82
 
110.21


6-83
 
110.22


6-84
 
110.23


6-85
 
110.24


6-86
 
110.99


6-87
 
110.25


6-88
 
110.26


7-1
 
70.01, 70.99


7-2
 
70.02, 70.99


7-3
 
70.03, 70.99


7-51
 
71.01, 71.99


8-26
 
92.01, 92.99


8-27
 
92.02, 92.99


9-36
 
33.06


9-51
 
33.05


9-52
 
33.05


9-53
 
33.05


9-54
 
33.05


9-55
 
33.05


9-76
 
35.01


10-1
 
32.03


10-2
 
32.04


10-26
 
32.15


10-27
 
32.16


10-28
 
32.17


10-29
 
32.18


10-30
 
32.19


10-31
 
32.20


10-32
 
32.21


10-33
 
32.22


10-34
 
32.23


10-35
 
32.24


10-36
 
32.25


10-37
 
32.26


10-38
 
32.27


10-39
 
32.28


10-56
 
35.01


11-1
 
51.01


11-2
 
51.99


11-26
 
51.02


11-27
 
51.03


11-28
 
51.04


11-29
 
51.05


11-30
 
51.06


11-31
 
51.07


11-32
 
51.08


11-33
 
51.09


11-34
 
51.10


11-35
 
51.11


11-36
 
51.12


11-51
 
51.25


11-52
 
51.26


11-76
 
51.40


11-77
 
51.41


11-78
 
51.42


11-79
 
51.43


11-80
 
51.44


11-81
 
51.45


11-100
 
51.55


11-101
 
51.56


12-1
 
130.01, 130.99


12-2
 
93.09, 93.99


12-48
 
94.07


13-66
 
52.01


13-68
 
52.15


13-69
 
52.16


13-70
 
52.17


13-71
 
52.18


13-72
 
52.30


13-73
 
52.31


13-74
 
52.32


13-75
 
52.33


13-76
 
52.34


13-77
 
52.35


13-78
 
52.36


13-79
 
52.99


13-80
 
52.37


13-156
 
50.01


13-157
 
50.02


13-158
 
50.03


13-159
 
50.04


13-160
 
50.05


13-161
 
50.06


13-162
 
50.07


13-163
 
50.08


13-164
 
50.09


13-165
 
50.10


13-166
 
50.11


App. A, Art. I
 
154.01


App. A, Art. I
 
154.02


App. A, Art. II
 
154.03


App. A, Art. III
 
154.04


App. A, Art. IV
 
154.05


App. A, Art. V
 
154.06


App. A, Art. VI
 
154.07


App. A, Art. VII
 
154.08


App. A, Art. VIII
 
154.09


App. A, Art. VIII
 
154.99


App. B, Art. I
 
155.001


App. B, Art. II
 
155.002


App. B, § 31
 
155.003


App. B, § 32
 
155.004


App. B, § 33
 
155.005


App. B, § 34
 
155.006


App. B, § 35
 
155.007


App. B, § 36
 
155.008


App. B, § 37
 
155.009


App. B, § 38
 
155.010


App. B, § 39
 
155.011


App. B, § 41
 
155.025


App. B, § 42
 
155.026


App. B, § 51
 
155.040


App. B, § 52
 
155.041


App. B, § 53
 
155.042


App. B, § 54
 
155.043


App. B, § 55
 
155.044


App. B, § 56
 
155.045


App. B, § 57
 
155.046


App. B, § 61
 
155.060


App. B, § 62
 
155.061


App. B, § 63
 
155.062


App. B, § 64
 
155.063


App. B, § 71
 
155.075


App. B, § 72
 
155.076


App. B, § 81
 
155.090


App. B, § 82
 
155.091


App. B, § 83
 
155.092


App. B, § 91
 
155.105


App. B, § 92
 
155.106


App. B, § 93
 
155.107


App. B, § 94
 
155.999


App. B, § 95
 
155.108


App. B, § 101
 
155.120


App. B, § 102
 
155.121


App. B, § 103
 
155.122


App. B, § 104
 
155.123


App. B, § 105
 
155.124


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




01-02
 
3-5-2001
 
93.01 - 93.08, 93.99


02-07
 
4-1-2002
 
155.012


02-15
 
9-2-2002
 
31.01


02-18
 
10-7-2002
 
70.04


02-19
 
10-7-2002
 
30.02


03-03
 
7-7-2003
 
33.03


03-05
 
9-2-2003
 
95.01, 95.02, 95.99


03-06
 
10-6-2003
 
151.01


04-10
 
6-7-2004
 
90.01, 90.99


05-12
 
9-6-2005
 
153.01 - 153.09, 153.99


05-11
 
9-12-2005
 
34.02


05-08
 
9-19-2005
 
52.02


05-07
 
10-19-2005
 
34.01


05-14
 
11-7-2005
 
71.02 - 71.04, 71.99


06-06
 
8-21-2006
 
33.07


07-01
 
1-2-2007
 
96.01


07-06
 
5-29-2007
 
97.01 - 97.06


07-10
 
9-4-2007
 
151.02


08-01
 
3-10-2008
 
31.15, 31.17


08-07
 
8-4-2008
 
150.01 - 150.14, 150.99


09-01
 
6-1-2009
 
98.01 - 98.07, 98.99


09-03
 
6-13-2009
 
111.01 - 111.13, 111.99


09-04
 
8-3-2009
 
113.01 - 113.03, 113.99


09-10
 
12-9-2009
 
114.01 - 114.05


10-2
 
2-1-2010
 
32.02


10-17
 
12-29-2010
 
113.04


11-05
 
5-2-2011
 
152.01 - 152.12, 152.25 - 152.28, 152.40 - 152.46, 152.99


12-04
 
5-7-2012
 
155.025


13-08
 
11-4-2013
 
30.01, 30.02


13-09
 
11-4-2013
 
115.01, 115.99


14-01
 
2-3-2014
 
155.040


14-08
 
9-3-2014
 
54.001 - 54.005, 54.020 - 54.026, 54.040 - 54.046, 54.060 - 54.069, 54.080 -
54.086, 54.999


15-02
 
1-8-2015
 
153.07, 153.08


15-05
 
- -
 
51.40, 51.41


16-08
 
11-21-2016
 
112.001 - 112.003, 112.015 - 112.019, 112.030 - 112.031, 112.045 - 112.058,
112.070, 112.085 - 112.098, 112.110, 112.125, 112.126, 112.140 - 112.143,
112.155, 112.170, 112.185, 112.186, 112.998, 112.999


16-09
 
11-21-2016
 
155.002, 155.003, 155.046, 155.060, 155.061, 155.062, 155.063, 155.075,
155.076, 155.093


16-10
 
11-21-2016
 
53.001 - 53.003, 53.016 - 53.019, 53.030 - 53.031, 53.045 - 53.048, 53.060 -
53.067, 53.080 - 53.097, 53.110 - 53.111, 53.125 - 53.128, 53.140 - 53.147,
53.160 - 53.168


 
 
 
 
 




 


